Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the speech of Alcubierrez .
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, son children, I present to you this book, which is the last of medical science, to its completion, therefore, the end of it, and for the explanations, and declarations of it, I see that I fulfill that to you with this treatise, which is a beginning of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation on the body is set down in our land and in our time, all of which greatly dangers the science of it, and the traces of it remain; and except for a few small descriptions in books of the Ancients, they have changed the most and in those situations error and confusion arise, within that their sentences are closed and the force of it is elongated and the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I see that I fulfill that to you with this order of treatment in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and for it to come with forms of instruments of cautery and other tools of the work by addition of the statement, and for preparation of it, which necessary cause is.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason that no good artisan works on his body in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and that before him being exercised in the science of anatomy which discovers Guila within it; he knows the growth of members and their shapes, as well as their connection and separation, and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their numbers, and the shape of them; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their emission.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore I say that a certain name is necessary, in the work small, and more so in the art of the body.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	And we have already said that in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not aware that I told him about anatomy, it is not known to me that they fall into an error because so many people die, as I have seen with some of them, since they are formed from this science and get out of that one by experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a doctor who was a young man and an experienced one had hit an abscess of scrofula in the neck of a woman, and he hit some arteries of the neck, so that blood flowed out strongly from it, causing the woman to die among its people.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another doctor who thought that he would swallow a stone from a man in his state; and the stone was large, and he brought it to him and cut it with a piece of the bladder, so that this man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have called it to be removed and I have seen that because of the size of the stone, and the patient's state, I knew that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I have seen another doctor who took payment from a Duke of our country to perform an operation; and there he put his hand on the patient's hip, which was already broken, and prepared the doctor with his ignorance, removing the fracture from the hip, on top of sawdust and needles to make it tighter, and not leaving it at the hip's spi
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he followed his desires, and he followed prayer, and he left it at that for many days, and commanded us to remove the ligament; and thus, within that the hip was broken and the wound was open, it came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to do so, and I prepared myself to remove the ligament, and achieved peace and relief of its pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But corruption was already established in the member, so I could not restrain it, and I did not stop walking the corruption in the member until the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I have seen another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess and it became an ulcer within a few days, so that the malignancy of it grew up to its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason is because the cancerous cauterization is pure of melancholic humor; therefore, it does not cover that it comes to him by all means, but that it is in a member that you suffer from all of them.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	For thus, children, it is necessary for you that the operation on the body be divided into two operations; one is an operation that is associated with health, and another work in which there is danger to the greatest extent.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already presented in this book wherever there is a mistake and fear in it; so that it is necessary for you to keep it away from you and not allow it to turn to speaking and displease you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and your diseases with faith and with steadfastness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way with the grace of God, that you may arrive at salvation and blessedness; leave behind the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and hold your arms from which you are afraid, so that you may not hesitate in your faith and in your name, for it remains to your glory, and then go to heaven and before your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Guilac already said in some of his admonitions:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat a bad disease, so that you do not have to take care of a sick doctor."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered from the head, in the shapes of the instruments and the tools of the cauterizations, and from that which is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second section:
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter is ordered from the head in the forms of the operation by the art of medicine; and from that which it is necessary for the doctor to know his causes, and his consequences, and how to treat each one, and what he cannot do.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third section:
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter is ordered from the head in the forms of that art; and from that which it is necessary for the doctor to know his causes and consequences.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of fire and acute medicine and recollection of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With this, the treatise begins with the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will tell you the quality of the materials of cauterization and the substances that prevent it; and in which combination it should be used.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of cauterization and the prevention of it is long and elaborate, subtle in science, and hidden in meaning; and I have heard much wisdom from them, and they disagree with each other, and enough for me is a small part of their speeches, frightening in length.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cauterization confers on the whole combination universally the same substance; except for two combinations, which are combinations of fire and air.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the combination of fire and air, different opinions exist; some say that cauterization is beneficial to that, and others say the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for a disease by quality and dryness, since the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not suitable that a disease be cured by fire and dry, which are different from each other.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he who says that what is contrary to this is true, that the cauterization causes healing in all the illnesses of the body and dried out ones which occur in the members of men: for when you compare the man's body with the moisture of fire, you find his body dry.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say through the speech of that one, who has already experienced it several times at my expense.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But however I do not cover that it came upon this one already completely exhausted and exercised in the chapter of cauterizing by later exercise, and has known the difference of the complexes of men and the disposition of the illnesses in their bodies, and the causes of those, and the accidents of their, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in the other complexes, there is no fear for you, and more so in the wet and infectious illnesses because all doctors have agreed on those, and they have not disagreed about healing them by cauterizing them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that of the secret of healing by fire and the goodness of it, it is on the healing by burning, for the fire is simple, and its effect does not reach any member except the one that is cauterized, and causes no little harm to the other member with which it is placed except with a small touch.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the effect of the burning medicine reaches that in the members which it dries up, and it greatly hurts to make it come out in the member with difficult healing and strongly hurts when it is applied.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not hurt anyone but makes it flow out excessively; And this has already been known by experience and through the long service of study on the truth of causes, and by my own experience with fire in my body, and the quality of the operation of it in the members and the expelling of them through which it expels the illnesses, I would demonstrate it philosophically, which would be pointed out in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that the times do not agree when it is necessary to make a cauterization and pause the best time of the spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the harm by the accident of time is immersed in the healing of this one on which cauterization is applied, and more so if cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, which do not suffer delay because those which come with evil are greater than a little harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus you do not harm your own feet, or children, this one is considered only by the common people and foolish doctors, because it is not convenient to make a cauterization on that illness that is healed by cauterizing at all times, and pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not good to do so because cauterization is not a medicine that changes the complex of things and dries up the humors which are the causes for which pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But however cauterization in excess over medicine by virtue of its goodness, the usefulness of its operation, and the greatness of its Lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the illness which has been given to him returns in some hour of time, according to the complex of the patient and the location of his illness, and its goodness; and that which is prepared in his body from the addition of excesses to him, and that which has come to him through food and similar causes of those causes; but if the illness on which he was given cauterization is a subtle illness in some member with little excess and moisture, then cauterization for pain and similar things makes it possible that in him it does not return that pain, but it becomes smaller.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And however the popular speech is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a harsh speech, not towards him who understands it, for I believe that it does not heal anyone by medicine or by any other cause; but cauterization itself is healing.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is opposite to this; and I intend that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine when we administer the methods of healing in some illnesses, but those medicines do not cure them, and at the end of the illness we give a person cauterization, and it heals him at the end of the illness.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And I reply from here that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the speech which I understand from the common people and foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they say that fire is better to heal by than iron, and do not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cauterization does not hurt, unless it is absolutely true, because I have seen and felt that fire does not do that to some people except those who have other members, and cauterizing with iron is good for them as they say; but when you make cauterization with fire in gold, it is not declared to you, for it is unknown according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of gold, and because it prepares itself to receive heat; and if you apply a small piece of it over the gold, it makes gold melt by the fire, and case in the fire some sheets so that the artisan cuts himself with his occupation.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And to make cauterization with iron, it is necessary to put it gently and then more carefully on the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have ordered this chapter in the cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have ordered those of the chapter within the feet, so that I can answer anyone who asks about it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	About cauterizing a headache by cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers to moisture and cold on the servile accident of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of sodom and many flows of rheumatic, called cursing, from the head to the parts of the body and the ears flowing, and many sleeping, and toothache and the goyleiro, and generally of any illness that comes through coldness; but it also makes it paralytically, and is a cause of sodom and apoplexy, and similar things in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this: first, order the patient to be evacuated by lacative medicine on his head, for three or four nights, according to whether you require the goodness of the illness and its age and its usual habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then order him to shave his head with a razor, and then place the blade between your legs on a bank that has been raised up, and place your hands over the surface of it.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the motion of your hand close to the edge of your palm above the edge of his nose between his ears.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But however, when the patient says that his place is reached, mark that place with a probe, and then ignite cauterization from it by olive oil; for this one is the form of it:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that above the marked place with the probe in a way that it goes down little by little, and you turn that around.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then remove your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see any amount of hair from the head, as well as the amount of salt that has come out, then raise your hand, and if it does not go back to iron, then take another piece from that, if it is cold, until he sees bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place a piece of wood in the fire until it is burned up.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the wound with a fourfold medicine until it heals.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And already they say that when the Roman plague has broken out, so much better and more beneficial is it for healing and rejuvenating.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they also say that it is necessary to cauterize the bone within the cavity of the skull, and that the cautery should not touch any part of the brain.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then let water be applied that is close to the bone, and then let it be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach as far as possible into the bone, and this is how it is done to make it stronger:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they consider that the vapors from the head should be exhausted.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the plague should remain open for a long time, and then it should be cured within so that it hardens.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	Perhaps these two types of cautery are not as useful in all cases, but rather only sometimes, for the sake of saving life; because the head is a distinct part from the rest of the body, and more so when it belongs to an ill-fated patient.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better for saving life, in my opinion; and from that I infer that this process should be used to heal.
Capitol segon.	Second:
Del cauteri del cap.	The cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in total the head causes chronic and long-term pain and water is present in the patient for a prolonged period, and it employs the use of scalpel and scissors and poultices and plasters and gauze and cataplasms and poultices, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery that was not used again after applying to one of those causes, then consider that because the head is a strongly created thing in its nature; and it does not produce much fever or heat, then cauterize it again with another cautery.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then let him cauterize the top of his head with a cautery within so that the bone does not break.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and expose the quantity that we have mentioned, then cauterize it with a cautery in the back part of the head at the place called "vas", — which is the place where the wind blows.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And you will have less pain in doing so, for the water causes great pain that is different from the pain of all other types of head cauterization.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And this cautery should be performed in its place, for when the cautery with which the top of the head and the back are cauterized is subtler than the cautery applied to the front part of the head; and this is the way to do it.
Capitol ters.	Third:
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	The cauterization of the temporal lobe.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain is hard in the back of the head, or it is located within the ear, wash out the skull with medicine, and administer another treatment, which I have described in the various treatments for illnesses; and if it does not respond, then cauterize it using two methods: either with burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Perhaps cauterizing with burning medicine is better than taking a mixture of ale and pouring it over the head, and rubbing both ends with the hand.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then cut the place where the pain is located in the temporal lobe with a sharp object within so that it does not break, and hide the bone.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then tighten it around the head with a tight constriction, and leave it for three hours; then take off the cloth, and leave the plague submerged in water for two or three days, and let him rest on the edge of the bed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that person with cold medicine so that they are healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you wish, I can send you some of the burning medicines that I have written in the second medical treatise.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Perhaps cauterizing with iron according to this method is better:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called a nut, because the head of man is thus shaped like a nut and in its middle part there is a small depression.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place your hand over the painful part, and hold it so that the iron does not move; and turn the small iron slowly with a quick movement.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood that is absorbed through the skin of the skull reaches about half of what it usually does, then raise your hand so that the artery is not affected and the blood flow is stopped.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then dip the cloth in salt water and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then remove the cloth with care from the edge of the bed, and heal with cold medicine.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you wish, cauterize the end of the knife according to the cauterization method mentioned earlier; and be careful not to cut any arteries in this temporal lobe.
Capitol quart.	Fourth:
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	The cauterization of the ancient temporal lobe.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat the temporal lobe with water that has been mentioned in the previous treatment, and with water that has been mentioned in the various treatments for illnesses, and if the treatment does not respond, and often because of the illness for which the water was used as a treatment does not respond to it; then ignite the knife-like cauterization so that it whitenizes, since this indicates that it is applying to the place of pain with a long line that covers most of it, or with another line; and then pause your hand for a moment, and then tighten it around the head tightly so that it does not move.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is connected to mastication, and that the tongue does not move and get stuck; and that spasm does not occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if you are careful to avoid any bleeding from the artery that is being cut off, because in the process of cutting it there is danger, and more so if you do not know how to respond to water; then leave the operation at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I remember the reminder of the accident with the flow of blood that occurred during the iron's work according to your way, in its place.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If this illness does not respond to the treatment mentioned earlier and makes the patient's life difficult, then cauterize it in its middle part of the head as we have described, and heal the plague so that it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you wish, administer the cauterization mentioned in the second part of the text with two knives, and this is the best method; it will be more effective.
Capitol .v.	Fifth:
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	The cauterization of ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ears and it is treated with lancing and with the other treatment mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not go away; then burn the cauterization, and this is the one that has no specific name; its form is as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then place the iron on the aching part and turn it around quickly; or make a circle with it around the whole ear, or in the middle of it if the pain is located there.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with the iron along the edge of the earlobe slowly and carefully so as not to burn the skin.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cauterization of the points on all sides of the foot is necessary, then put it into place, and take care of the areas that need healing until they are cured.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the Cauterization of Burns.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Burn wounds, which are cured with cauterization, are not due to any substance that enters through the blood vessels, as we have stated in the division of hernia.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterizing with a substance that enters by way of drying or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat this kind of burn with jerks and purgatives and enemas, and your treatment does not work, then when you cauterize the hernia, do so with three cauterizations: the first on the side of the foot, the second on the top part of the foot, and the third on the union of two toes.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause the small cauterization on the opposite side of the hernia, for softening does not occur except in the part that is affected and healed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is that you cauterize it with a small piece of iron on the top side of the foot, above the tip of the big toe, and in the middle, another one the length of the foot, and pause your hand so that the amount of the substance of the hernia is burned;
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the method of cauterization, and it is special with the knife, the shape of which is placed before you.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, a little more carefully it is done that this may not be too much; and when the knife goes on, a little of the excess of gruel is removed.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of the areas that have been burned with water until they are healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the Cauterization of Old Apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it with water as we have said, and your treatment does not work on the hernia, and there is no fever, then cauterize it with four cauterizations: on all the corners of the head; and on the top part of the head, as we have said; and on the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cauterization is done according to what has been said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is then cauterized over the mouth of the stomach, and a little more; and then water is applied to it that has been burned.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the Cauterization of New Apoplexy and Obliation Done by Flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Then give the hernia in the beginning with large jerks and pills, telling them a story.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the patient's head completely, and place on his chest the plaster described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause a few moments, for this is a way of cauterizing.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And then apply water according to the order that we have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	So if it heals well, then do so; but if not, then make three cauterizations on the back part of the head, those being sending off from the top side of the head to the bottom side of the head.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And between each cauterization pause the thickness of the knife, and then take care of the cauterization with water that has been applied.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if the patient is drinking water, then do not apply cauterization in that place; and if you see a greater amount of water being drunk, then cauterize it on the top side of the foot.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then take care of those that are healed; and let the cauterization be olive-colored according to the shape that has been given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the Cauterization of Paralysis and Softening of the Whole Body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Then process in the softening of the head with jerks and water as we have said; and then shave the patient' s head, and then cauterize it in the middle of the head, and on all the corners, and on the back part, and on the two sides.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body of three people and the two serve who carry out the softening; and if the hernia is strong, then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the back, and lastly apply cauterization within the hernia itself, and hold your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then take care of those that are healed; and let the cauterization be olive-colored.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the Cauterization of Hernias.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized with epilepsy, but this kind of epilepsy is caused by a substance that enters through the blood vessels.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Then, in the beginning of treatment, the brain is softened with jerks and another treatment that we have mentioned when the hernia is large and tolerates the experience of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer to it enemas and purgatives before water by days for the benefit of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the patient' s head, and then cauterize it with one cauterization in the middle of the head as we have said before, and another on the top part of the head, and on all the corners; and let the head be cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the hernia is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize it with the methods that I have described, in softening of the body over the spines of the neck and the spine.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	Let the cauterization be olive-colored according to what has come before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the hernia is a child, then pause in cauterizing with this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the Cauterization and Softening near the Mint Article.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and gross flame, then cauterize it with the methods that we have said in the case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is too much exercise leading to melancholy, and the patient' s body is moist, then give a drink of water that softens the brain according to what has come before in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the patient' s head, and then make a small fire burning on the top part of the head, and pause it in the middle of the head;
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the hernia is four days old, and it has been held in all its parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then pause the liniment; and it is now suitable for a springtime shearing of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And scald that over the fire with moderate heat according to what has been said, and let it suffer when it is half done.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then return it in the middle of the head of the patient on the circle; and let it cool down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And then give water to the patient once a week in one case, and in another, treat with an enema; or, if you wish, cauterize it with small points according to what has been said before: this is a special kind of cauterization that softens the brain by equal amounts.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then pause that piece in between gray and yellow.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the Cauterization and Softening near the Mint Article.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When the patient begins to sweat through his hair, as I have described in the division, then begin and give him water that will clear his head, and guard against all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make a bath of cold water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And bring him to a mirror and cauterize his head at the base of his skull; and cauterize it twice with two cautery wands if it is the beginning of sweat in two sockets, or one line if it is the beginning of sweat in one socket.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut all the veins and arteries that remain with a cauterium; and place the cautery in length in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against bleeding when you cauterize; and if there is any bleeding from him, stop it with some medicine, which is possible for you to have.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I come with wisdom that is in the extraction of arteries and at their absence and guards against bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some veins are cauterized in his neck between two bones with two wands that move quickly.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the sockets are ancient and flow well through the veins and arteries that are in the manifest place of the head, and it is shown that they are superfluous phlegmatic tears, then cauterize it with a cautery that we have described in the beginning of water flowing into the sockets, and with a cautery at the base of the skull, and with two cauteries in the temples, and with two cauteries between two bones in the neck.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you feel pain, then cauterize it all the way across the cheek from the ear to the temple with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cauterization of a foul odor from the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat him with water that we have described in the division and do not continue your treatment, then return to your original treatment after three nights; and cut his hair, and cauterize it with a cauldron of olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And cauterize it with a clove wand on the two temples between the hair and a small wand.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard against bleeding that does not erupt.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the form of the clove cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cauterization to soften the eyelids of the sockets.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the socket is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize it with a lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you want to, then cauterize it between the two temples with a small wand that is long.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too hard on your hand with the cautery, more according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is softened.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of cauterization to the eyelid of the socket when the hair is turned inward and turns the patient's hand.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hair of the socket is turned inward in such a way that it can be pried up, then cauterize it with fire or burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you use fire for cauterization, bring the patient forward where it is not hot, and let the hair fall out on its own; but if he needs to have it pried up, then strengthen his eyebrows with a cloth so that they do not burn, until the hair falls out; and if he wants to stop sweating, then tie him up in a cloth.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then, when they are shaved and plucked, bring the patient to a table, and place his head in a certain position, and mark out the shape of an owl on his eyebrows, and this is the beginning of marking out according to the figure of an owl; and it is the beginning of marking.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then put a black cloth over his eyebrows or a wet sponge.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then light the cautery, and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize the mark according to its form, little by little, until it is burned through the surface of the hair; and this is done with an owl' shape, completely burnt.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of health for this work is that you see the eyelids of the socket already contracted, and that the hair is lifted up from the punch of the socket.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then raise your hand and leave it alone for three days, and then place it on a cloth to make the hair grow again.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that one with oil within so that it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hair falls out for some reason and the eyelid is softened, then do it again with a different cautery first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hair is in the eyelid, then cauterize it within so that it is lifted to its natural place and plucked, and may not pinch the socket.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But if the cautery is with burning medicine, this is what you should order for the patient to remove the hair within so that it is plucked, and may be done with a cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then take a clean cloth and a sharp knife. (I) Then mix those two things together, and make a paste of it so that it does not dry out; then spread the paste on the cloth according to the figure of an owl, and place it over one ear; and leave the patient in a certain position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Then put that paste on him and wait a little while, and do not press it too hard so that the patient feels the burning of the medicine; for the burning is in him.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then, when he feels the burning of the medicine, then let him lie down and leave the medicine alone; and when it stops burning, then wash his face with water; and if his eye has been cut, then do not worry, for it will be healed; but if it has not been cut, then do not worry.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then place that cloth on the edge to make the hair grow again; then treat that one with oil within, or with another thing, so that it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	You must be careful in your operation to keep the medicine from falling onto the socket, and if the eyelid is softened by any reason because of the hair, then repeat your treatment on that spot where the eyelid is softened, and at the beginning, put it where it is healed; and properly so.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of an owl' shape.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	The sockets of men are different according to their size and age. And now, according to this, your contracture must be made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the way of treatment from anyone who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal socket of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with water that we have described in the divisions of the face, and do not continue your treatment, then bring him to the table and make him lie down on his back; and hold his head between two pillows so that it does not move or be disturbed while he sleeps.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And place a sharp point in the humors of the person or in a muck of feathers over their chest.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then set fire to the cautery, which has this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is curved, then as it is in the shape of a cane or a staff, from one end make the point where the cautery will be made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, let it pierce into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, then put it out this way.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is curved is better for the job.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then squeeze the tube if it has opened, and drain and dry that person.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open it and remove the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place the cautery which has been well lit on their chest and at the root of the nose, so that your hand or the patient's does not shake, and then pause the cautery on the skin of the chest and burn it off.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then if at the beginning of the fire bone enters into the body, it is good; and if not, then go over the cautery once or twice, as needed, and leave it like that for three days, and then place it on the point with oil of rose and dry it off before applying it.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	However if they have been burning for eleven days and are not healed, then place acute corrosive medicine on them so that the bone is uncovered and trim it as needed in their chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And this is another way to cauterize a fistula, which the first two said: Go to the spot of the fistula and pour out and place a sharp point in the crack which is subtle in shape; and put in there one ounce of molten lead; and if your hand is firm and does not sweat, so that the lead does not come to the chest of the person; and cover that up on the chest of the patient with a muck of feathers or water, for lead clings to the spot of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by the water that I have spoken of in the cauterization and cure, then it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a drop from the nose and bring the fistula to its place in the nose according to where it will come out.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the Cauterization of a Fistula.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Faded spots may occur in the lips, and most commonly in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So if you cure those cracks with the water that we have spoken about in the divisions and do not profit from the cure, then set fire to a small blade according to this form which is made:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	and place it on the cavity of the person according to the subtlety of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that carefully in those cracks so that the fire comes into the base of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it with care, so that it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth, there is a swelling and it breaks out, and then it is broken and crusted over, and then it oozes, and then it forms a fistula, and then you cure that and do not profit from the cure, then cover that with oil of rose which has been well heated, and place on the fistula's root, so that the fire does not reach the base of it, and at the back of it make one or two go over; and then cure that with water which we have spoken about in the cure, until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the person has been healing and is healed, then it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the spot and heat the bone rotten as needed in their chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of Veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, then cure those with medicine and do not confer with me, then place the head of the patient on their chest, and set fire to the end of the blade which will come out, quickly, so that your hand does not burn the person' head; and place a little bit of oil on the mouth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift up your hand, and go over the fire a few times as you wish to do.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then place the person' mouth on a cup of salt water and hold it there for an hour, then swallow that water, because the loose tooth is firm and the softened gum is tight and the moistened thing is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the Cauterization of Toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is from cold or it oozes or bleeds, and do not profit from the cure with medicine, then cauterize that with fire or with cow's milk; or cauterize with fire or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with Cow's Milk is that you take cow' s milk and boil it, and then rub that on the end of the tooth, and wrap it up in cloth, and then pour the boiled milk over that quickly, so that it is warmed.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then go over that a few times until the power of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	Then if you see, dip wool or a cloth in the cow' s milk and place that on the tooth, and then place fire over that quickly so that it reaches the base of the tooth' s cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However the cauterization with fire is that you take care of the wax or iron, and it is in the middle of something fine and the power of fire does not reach the mouth of the person.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then set the fire according to its form, and place that on the tooth and if your hand is firm then dip some water a few times because the painful tooth may move or it will be in that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And when, by the power of that fire, the person' mouth is filled with cow' s milk and held for an hour, then swallow it; and this is the form of the fire.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Then cauterize according to what you see fit, as it is possible for you to do.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the tube:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the Cauterization of an Extrophusis.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When ekstrophy is caused by slimy and cold humors that do not respond to medicines, if you notice a slight improvement in digestion, then use cauterization with the shape of the following: Having two extremities open for the smoke to spread the cauterization on the other extremity, and place it on the area a few times, and if necessary, go deeper into the area until you reach the apex of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, then place the cauterization according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place it on the edge of the wound in order to allow the fire to burn completely.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then clean it with water and try to dress it and bandage it until it heals.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the canula or cauterizer is as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .xxiii.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization for rawiara, and for contraction of a hernia.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the moisture comes to the chest, and mostly when it is cold in nature, then at the beginning of using laxative medicines, and then cauterize that which causes pain in the navel in the buried place.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to reach the cauterization to the navel or burn with the cord of him, but a little bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Then cauterize that which is caused by another cauterization at the junction of the neck at the last vertebrae.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cauterization should be done with a pointed tool following the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then clean what is caused by water that came before it heals.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter.xxiiii.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cauterization for respiratory distress and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughing and respiratory distress are caused by slimy humors, and the patient does not have a fever or a cold, and it is an old infection, then cauterize that which is caused by two cauterizations on the furcula at the buried places between the ribs; and another cauterization in the middle place of the foot between two breasts; and let the cauterization be done with a sharp tool according to the previous method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, it is called "puncta" cauterization, the shape of which you use in the puncturing method for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	You should make points at those places; and then clean what is caused by water that came before it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And there are three ramps for cauterization, each one is done with a sharp tool according to the following method:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter.xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cauterization for titillation, which is the tip of the tongue.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the tip of the tongue is dislocated by lubricous moisture and does not stop in its usual movement of returning to its place, then at first reduce the dislocation, and then reverse the dislocation from inside out, starting from the base of the tongue; and then raise the cord that is connected to the base of the tongue at the back of the mouth using the fingers of your left hand. If the dislocation is on the side of the tongue, do it with the fingers of your right hand.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then place two peaks on it; and this is the shape of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the cord inside, so that it enters from one side to the other; and this is the figure of cauterization with two peaks:
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and then do it slightly according to the amount of smoke; and this is the shape of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	In some cases, it is adjusted according to the following count, and these are the counts for the cauterization:
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place a small amount of salt on the cauterized area, and then bind it firmly with a cloth, and do not allow any movement for a while until it feels comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is on the side of the tongue and it is not fixed yet, then cauterize over the muscle with a sharp tool or a pointed one, as the junction is confirmed and the moisture is sticky, and the hernia is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter.xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When the stomach has a lot of slimy and sticky moisture that comes out before it is fully digested, and if you continue with your methods of treatment and do not provide relief, then at first, the hernia should be lifted slightly using a cloth; extend its limbs and their movements; and place three peaks on it: one peak should be made by leaving one finger between two fingers, and another two peaks should be placed on either side of those two fingers, forming a triangular shape; and lengthen the areas that are not in place to create a tension.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cut is the same as the thickness of the cord, then
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And be this the shape of cauterization according to this method:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And then cauterize the stomach with a sharp tool according to the quantity that you wish to use, and then cauterize that which is caused by punctures; and then clean what is caused by previous treatments before it heals.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter.xxvii.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cauterization of the fretty feet.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the feet due to cold, moisture, or strong wind that exceeds their usual tolerance, and if this treatment does not provide relief, then at first, the hernia should be lifted slightly using a cloth; extend its limbs and their movements; and place three peaks on it: one peak should be made by leaving one finger between two fingers, and another two peaks should be placed on either side of those two fingers, forming a triangular shape; and lengthen the areas that are not in place to create a tension.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And be the space between each peak according to the thickness of the finger; and be the cut according to the length of the right hand.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not compress it with your hands after the cut.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of water that is added is more than half of the cord's length, and if it is not properly adjusted; and if the hernia is resting on the feet; and if it is not comfortable, then it should be raised: this will extend its movements, and raise its braces.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you are able to cauterize these cauteries with a cautery knife, when it is your skill and caution in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And you should be careful not to scorch too much in the cauterization, and that the skin of all the body is preserved so that it is preserved throughout the whole body, because the skin here is thin; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the piercing of an abscess with a needle, to cauterize.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When a boil erupts on the foot and you want to know if that boil is in the flesh of the foot or in the tunic, then know that if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will feel great pain and their fever will increase.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the foot, then the pain is acute and great enough to cause pain to the legs.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	So that the patient's neck is turned toward his/her back; then find the place of the boil with your finger, and immediately apply the cautery, which has been made into a thread-like shape, as it was described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that and cauterize within so that all the body is heated, within so that it reaches the hip, within so that it burns in the fire, within so that it heals in the skin.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with a cure of the other boils within so that they are healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And I do not know that of this form of cauterization has only been extended in the art of medicine, and with which many malignant diseases have been known; however, this one is more ardently applied to this operation, but it is better to leave that alone, and instead, the following is done, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter.xxix.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of plauresis.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	It was said that the small cauterization of the roots of the hair is done according to this way: take a thin, long thread from the hair of the leg, and it is of the thickness of the said thread.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and hold it over the fire, and then cauterize with a small cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the rib cage to the back; and two small cauteries are placed at a little distance from the edge that is left for the beard, and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the navel, declining a little at the edges behind; and one cautery on the stomach, and three cauteries at the edges behind; and one cautery in that place which is between the two ribs, and two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, leaving the cautery which is between the two spallas.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And I do not know that you can buy your hand with the cauterization, but rather to make it appear in the form of the body's disease.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they have also said that some men use a cautery of iron that looks like a ray and burns it; then place that in that place which is between the ribs, so that it reaches the hip, and so that it burns with fire, and in this way as we said in the boil of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	However, in this piercing with a cautery there is no fear, because death so soon happens to the patient in that place where the fistula develops; and it is not healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the tongue.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you heal the tongue's malignancy with water as we have said of the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize it with three ways, all of which are true: one is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the tongue according to the shape of the feet' cauteries, whose figure has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little less, and the shape of the cauterization is the same as we said in the foot's cauterization likewise.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not buy your hand with the cauterization; and the patient' head is turned toward his/her back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to cauterize, so that you ignite the cautery with two hands, which causes the patient' skin to rise; and lift up the patient' tongue, which is in the patient' mouth, causing it to move to the left or right.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And be your elevation with which you lift up the body according to its length, so that there are equal cauterizations according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then immerse both hands into water, lighting a fire in them, and place your hand on which the cauterization will be made according to that part of the body that is opposite it.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and so four cauterizations are done.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you want to do it with a single hand, then cauterize with three fingers.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And so you heal the cautery that is in the patient' mouth, because it is easier to heal than the other causes which precede in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter.XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of the droop.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	There is no cautery in the droop, but only in three things properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you heal the droop with the ways of healing that we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then know that he who cauterizes with four cauterizations around the navel and one on the stomach, one on the foot, one on the tongue, one on the back, and two between the ribs, and one on the right side of the body, and one over the navel, and one over the stomach, and one over the foot, and one over the tongue, and one over the right side of the body, and two between the ribs; and one cautery over the left side of the body, and one over the navel, and one over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization is proportionate to the thickness of the body.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery on for a long time that it does not grow cold.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And you do not evacuate the patient' cure with the cautery before it is made with water so that two sentences are added to it, and the third is moved forward with the help of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the stomach is cauterized is round according to that part' previous form, and that with which the back is cauterized is also round according to its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter.XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of the feet and of the knees.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are inflamed with the droop and are full of clear water, then cauterize the top part of the foot between the auricular and the ring finger, and raise your hand with the cauterization and do not twist it; and then raise your hand, and do not return it all, for the clear water will cause it to relax.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	And this is the form of the cautery: And then place two cauterizations on the knees, and in each knee one cautery at the end of the knife's point.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And be the cauterization according to the length of the knee: and on one side of the leg is left off, and on the other side below the middle place of the leg; and on each knee two cauterizations.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the plague open for a long time with your cure, so that no water comes out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then heal those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter.XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On abdominal cauterization.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal pain is caused by cold and moisture that affect the muscles, it is the digestive and retentive virtue that is present in the stomach and intestines, and this is cured with certain treatments, and sometimes when the patient suffers from a lack of appetite, they undergo abdominal cauterization; then cauterize according to the following: first, cauterize the entire circle of the abdomen, then four cauterizations around the small intestine, then cauterize the large intestine above the anus, or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the patient suffers from abundant moisture and bears it, then cauterize them over the spine and intestines, and firmly join two cauterizations on the stomach and near the hips, because this is a perfect cure for restoring health, of which there is no other.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxiii.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are ancient hemorrhoids or a mass of thick humor or corrupted moisture, and they are cured with water that we have said in the division and not given it its own treatment, then cauterize with three cauterizations on the top of the small bone at the bottom of the navel, and above the navel cut off two strings.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that the patient's stomach is cold and their food is not digested, and their face is sometimes swollen, then cauterize them on the stomach with a great cauterization according to what preceded; and one cauterization on the back, and another on the patient's hand with a pointed cauterization, and let the cauterization remain for a while, and then cure what is inside.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter  .xxiv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of aths near the abduction.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you abduct aths, then place the fire that is gathered on them.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then put that fire in those abducted aths, and finally place their hand within so that the fire reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make it one or two, because if they are three steps, then cauterize each according to what we have said, and then cure them with water that you give them from inside so that they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a great cauterization on the skin, then it is more beneficial for health.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter   .xxv.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the division of the patient' hands.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of water, then heal it with a cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when a fistula is formed in the patient' nature that is ancient and corrupt, and water cures it of lack of appetite, and then give what has been put on the surface with the mentioned tent, and empty the quantity of its depth with the front tent.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then place the fire that is like a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then put that fired cauterized in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it mixes with the tent.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat over that fire within so that they are burned by those corrupted bodies once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the intestine, then beware of all these places; and do not pass water except when the fistula is in a meat place, and consider that it does not go deeper.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that place so that it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed and separated from the patient's matter, and it has been a long time since it was cut, then you will know that it is completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the patient' matter is not taken from their body, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the edge of their flesh, and comes out through those causes from which there will be a recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter   .xxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of the nostrils.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the nostrils from cold or strong wind, and because of this the patient' nose bleeds, then cauterize them over the nostrils with a cauterization that causes a recurrence of the memory.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And firmly cauterize it with a small point on the second small bone, so that there will be three linear cauterizations, and then add more behind for good measure.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter    .xxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is pain and soft in the bladder because of cold and moisture, so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize them at the top of the small bone on the bladder, where the bones begin to separate, and cauterize with one cauterization on the right side and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And make the length of each cauterization according to the quantity of the patient' pee; and cauterize them with a cauterization at the bottom of the two bones, or with two cauterizations if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And do a pointed cauterization according to how it is done.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter    .xxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the large intestine.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is pain in the large intestine because of cold and moisture, and because of this, pregnancy is prevented, and the woman's periods are delayed, and then when that place causes a feeling of burning within, then cauterize that place with three cauterizations on the circuit of the navel, as we have said in the bladder cauterization; and one cauterization at the top of the two bones, or two cauterizations, and one pointed cauterization.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter    .x.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocation of the tongue.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When there is moist, slippery place on the tongue' side, and it causes a lack of speech from its place, and you notice that the noise is prolonged on the other side when compared to them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is attracted towards the sound.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then cauterize the patient' tongue at its edge with a ring-shaped cauterization, so that you will not hurt them with the tent in the division of that place when it is rolled over; and so that the edge falls into its normal place.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And do a cauterization according to the form that precedes in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cauterization is not to your liking, then cauterize them with three olive-sized cauterizations.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And do the cauterization according to the quantity of the patient' difficulty; and then heal that place within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter     .xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the tongue' side, and it is caused by cold and moisture, then the patient is cured with water that we have said and do not give it its own treatment, and if it is old, then you will know that it needs to be cauterized; then cauterize them.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the way of doing this cauterization is according to two ways: or cauterize with burning medicines, or cauterize by fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The second is to cauterize them on the edge of the tongue with three triangular-shaped cauterizations according to this form; and give each one a good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And be the space that there is between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of it and if the cautery is small or big.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some of the points are made on the head of the ankle bone so that there are four points.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize the circle that surrounds the shape in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle bone, so that it is a circle that encompasses and burns the sharpness of all the joint.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the way to cauterize in the case when pain adheres to the ankle and does not spread within the cavity.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended within the cavity, then cauterize that with two points on the cavity at the location where you place the mallet that causes the pain; and one point on the shin bone for four little ones at a time from the front.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is sharp, and be the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the sharpness of the joint.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the mallet causes that the pain extends to the foot, then cauterize that with three points or four or more if you wish from that point.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the mallet causes pain to be on the patient's side when you open the cavity, then cauterize that with a sharp cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in any cauterization so that you do not burn nerves or large arteries; and by this way the pain is on the mallet badly or contraily.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one of those which I cauterized on the shin bone and finished in the cauterization, and the fire inflates within so that the tumor accomplishes the foot, and pierces and corrupts all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then a great remedy of the stomach occurred, and death came quickly.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts then cauterize each one according to this way.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise said in the cauterization of the ankle: make a circle of iron, whose circuit is most of a palm; and be it according to the thickness of an apple tree or a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle is another third; and be the space between them the quantity of the knot of the foot; and let these circles be open from two sides; and let the length of those cays be one or two knots, and make in those margins of iron well-covered in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let it be lit in the fire within so that it burns and sends sparks, and place it on the joint of the ankle, the mallet placed under its sole.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize that with three curved points in one line.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then let it rest for three days; then apply paste to that with a pad and let the wound pour out for seven days; and then heal that with oil within so that it is cured.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: O, son, of this species of cauterization we have used little for the regard of it, and by this way we have found few that look at it from above.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Or some of the blood cauterizations that suffered it, and turn around to that place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cauterization with medicine that you make two circles of iron, pierced in the shape of a keyhole for the lock of it; and be the length of the parts in the thickness of their nails be two knots or three; and let these circles be open from both sides.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space that there is between each one is the quantity of the thickness of it; and be they open from bottom to top, and be they so as to contain themselves within according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place it on the joint of the ankle, the mallet placed under its sole, and compress your hand on the joint of the ankle; then take the water from the tail and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water be with the small fire little by little, and let it be for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the mallet the biting and the pain of it – for that water will cause a great pain in the same way as fire does – until the pain ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off the water from the tail of all the ankle with a wet cloth.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then let it rest for three days and pause over that border within so that the blackness of the pain remains new, then let it rest for some more days, and run from it the burning water; this is after healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that with oil within so that it is cured.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends within the cavity or the chest, make it so as to contain water according to how it is made in the ankle.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of water from the tail, and I have written that in the treatise of the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take the base of alkali and that of caustic, and separate them into two parts; then make a line between them so that the part of the left is pierced with a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Then pause the line of the other wave that is reversed, and let it rest on that alkali and active caustic water from two sources; and let those that are separated by a knot be joined by one knot, and then compress those with your hand well, and let the other wave send down from it the sharp water into the part of the left to the line.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and pour it on another active caustic and on another alkali renewed; because that water, then, makes the other strong, which is administered in small doses of medicine and in the cauterization of the other members, because operation performs fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And so from medicines that are used to cauterize the back, in order to remove it quickly and with a mallet, and a sharp caustic applied at the same time; and let those that are mixed be of different colors.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia related of a man from the country the operation and the cure with which he was healed from the pain of the ankle and the sciatica, and he praised it very much, saying that there is no need for another cure, and because it is cured by one line; as it is strong to make the thread in the bath, and already known from that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be taken from a certain plant, and if it is not found, then another plant; and one that has been dried recently; and let it be trissated with a little salt and placed on the ankle in which there is pain, or in the cavity, or in the chest, and let it rest.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	Then let it be left for three hours or for the quantity that the mallet causes pain to itself; and by this way, let it be cured.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then place it in the bath again, and when the body of the water is hot, put that in the sun, because the pain ceases and is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you know that there is no need for any use of cauterization with these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May Escorides also says that when the goat's vein tightens, it is better to use oil; and be the cauterization with this way: take wool and dip it in old oil, then place it between the feet of the foot and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take dry goat's skin and inflame that with fire within so that it is made of charcoal; then place it on the wool and let it rest until it is dried up.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Then repeat that water, and do not cease until the sensation of biting reaches the ankle from within; then let the pain rest.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this way of cauterizing is called cow's milk cauterization.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the Cauterization of Pain in Two Parts.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some kinds of pain in the two parts are due to three causes: by impingement or by injury or by excessive discharge; and for reasons similar to these, by the infusion of dry or rough matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization is performed only in this one kind of case, which is done through the diffusion of dry material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, in order to treat the two kinds of pain mentioned above, pills are to be made and placed according to their line of origin; for three lines are to be found, because there is a difference of temperature in each line, and cauterization or treatment must be done in each line according to its quantity, considering the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the substance used.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let there be made a cauterization with a pointed tool.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, cauterize three or four times with the hook-shaped cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xliv.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On Cauterization at the Beginning of Gilde.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	The following treatment is indicated for children who suffer from gilde: and the beginning of this disease can be recognized in children by the fact that their structure, when touched, becomes rigid and there is a rise in temperature.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And the pain begins in the last vertebra of the back and in the nerves that already begin to extend beyond the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so, when you see this and want to stop it, then treat it with cauterization in the form of a circle:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that the cautery takes hold on all sides of the vertebra.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a double line or even a triple line of cauterization.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	Let the points be placed close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then clean the area well with water, which I have previously mentioned.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	However, be careful that cauterization is not administered in gilde, which is caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter  .xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, when this gout of cold humors is treated with a specific treatment and the pains are not increased, then the following cauterization should be performed:
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	This is because you treat the evacuation of this joint pain in the circle around the foot with a small number of cauterizations.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let there be made an olive-shaped cautery, which has this shape:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains increase within the ankle or toward other joints, and this is persistent, then treat it with three or four times of this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if these cauterizations that I have mentioned are not enough for you, then treat it with this cautery and do not press too hard on the hand with the cautery before using it, only wrap it around the foot.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains are persistent within the ankle and in both legs, then treat it with the cauterization mentioned in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is very severe, which is called "gilde," then make points around the fire in this way, as it rotates: make a point on one side of the circle and another on the other side.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain persists in both legs, then make points around the fire on each nerve and on the edge of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain persists in the sides or muscles, then treat all sides with cauterization.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not treat the patient without using the right medicines and doing the right thing; because if you do so, there will be fire and no one will help you: God will help those who help themselves.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xliv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the Cauterization of Breaks.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a break in the armpits and the intestines come out in front of the arm, and it has just started to happen, then treat the patient with food in its own time and with mild treatment so that the break does not spread from the navel.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient between your two hands on his back, and order him to hold his breath in; or if the intestines appear or the bowels move, then treat them.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return the patient to the doctor and send him to bed; and if the break happens again, treat it at the top of the spine in the center, where it resembles a half-circle at the base of the neck.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then light the cauterization, which has this shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	So that it is lit and the fire is bright and shining.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already made points on the surface of the foot and left them for a while; also, serve those who attend to the patient with sheets and blankets, and others with bedding for the feet, which should be kept clean.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cauterization on that mark with your hand on the right side, and keep it lit while you hold it; and if you do not get a good grip on the spine at the top of the neck in its center, repeat this treatment on the other side as soon as you can.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the burning of the intestine during cauterization; do not burn it so much that it causes death or other great evil to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Be aware that if you do not have the bone in place, your operation will be fruitless.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And let the cauterization of children be subtle according to their age and measurement.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then clean the area of the cauterization for three days, keeping it free from debris so that the fire does not spread.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat those who are ill with water and let them be well.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie down on its back for 10 days, keeping its head still and its neck free from pain.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	Then pause the nutrition of the patient according to the length of time for which you treat it; and if the intestine does not burn outside due to the effort made to heal it, then do not give food until it has healed completely.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then, when you wish to remove the bandages after 10 days, then treat them with a good remedy and keep them for another 10 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let there be work and plenty of food and drink; and let the patient take this remedy with great enthusiasm, for when it is used in this way, there will be healing and no pain.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And show this treatment for breaks in other parts of the belly, and at the beginning, and if it does not work, then treat that break with a double cauterization according to the quantity of the patient; and if it is not adjusted, then treat it with water as mentioned above.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And many have said that the first break should be cauterized with a triangle-shaped cauterization, because it is marked in this way:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And the line that goes up by the height of a finger above the break, and another line downward from it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery above the first line, and the first cauterization is gentler and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xlvi.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On cauterization for twisting.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain in the limbs persists or is caused by impact and does not respond to usual medicine, then it is necessary to apply a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cauterization of each member should be according to its size and fragility, its virtue and depth, and the location of the twisting and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Then if it is healed by the first cauterization, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cauterization, for such pains usually arise from a twisted member at the base of that member near the body, so that with careful cauterization you can achieve healing before the patient dies.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xlvii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Leپرzy some are healed very well by cauterization, but with moderation if the species of leprosy is caused by decay of flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so, when you wish to cauterize that, consider whether the leprosy is severe or not, and apply the water as described in the division, and do not hesitate, nor does it matter, about the patient's head, which may be infected from the top of the skull, and the second place behind the ears, towards the front of the hairline; and both on two sides; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, your hand in the cauterization, a little inside the bone, to exert a slight pressure, and the scales are displaced, so that the exhale of thick vapors is eased; and cauterize on the skin according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the whole body and manifestly appears, then you should cauterize that with those cauterizations described in the head; and one on the tip of the nose, and two on the cheekbones, and two on the neck near the Adam's apple, and one at the base of the tongue, and two on the tonsils, and one on each tonsil, and two on the jawbones and one on each jaw, and two on the shoulder blades, and one on the breastbone, and two on the ribcage near the armpits, and one on the side of the ribs, and two on the hips, and two on the thighs, and one on the tip of each big toe, and two on the ends of the feet, and one under each foot.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful with the nerves that are above the skin, so you don't burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some are cauterized with one cautery on the bones of the hand and another on the mouth of the stomach, and one on the navel.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more careful you are with the cauterization, the better it will heal and the more beneficial it will be; and you should know that there is no pain in cauterizing the body, but only when there are small vessels, because the patient' body is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	Then the cauterizations should be large or small according to the members and joints, depending on whether it is preceded by the virtues of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a paste of ash with milk or mead for cauterization, or another cure within that it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is staggered or asleep and does not respond to medicine, oils, and plasters, then you should cauterize that members according to the size of the member or its fragility.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the small cauterization enter the depth of the wound a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then apply oil or balm within that it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Some are cauterized with the stupor that persists in the limbs and neck, and the nerves that move those limbs, and the stupor remains.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	You should not proceed with this unless you are aware of the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter .xlix.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterization for morphed bruises.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When an old bruise is resistant to usual medicine, then you should apply a small cauterization on it according to the depth of the bruise, so that the whiteness and color of it are changed, and the color of it is altered.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a paste of ash with mead and rye flour, rose leaves, and stinging nettle, or the water of a Columbine or Yellowwort, each in parts, mixed together, and return it to the wound after making a bandage over the area, so that it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter .1
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cauterization for cranky patients.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When the patient is getting angry and you want to calm them down, then apply a circular cauterization around their body as they turn, so that they are calmed.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The wise ones said that it should be cauterized in the same place, but I have not seen that, because I believe it is ulcerated, and I have seen that happen a few times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is better to cauterize in the order described above, or with many cauterizations.
Capitol .li.	Chapter .1
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterization for those who are fat.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When a fatty person is delayed in maturation, either because they are too young or old, and their fat is growing too fast, then apply a small number of cauterizations around their body. And leave it alone, as it will mature faster without intervention.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you wish to pierce them with a cauterization, then apply the cauterization in the form described above; and return it to the same place, so that it enters the wound.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cauterization in that place is left alone, so that the center of the arm is eased; then apply oil within that it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter  .2
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cauterization for those who are corrosive.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is walking corruption in the limbs, which corrupts them as if they were eating dry wood with fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Then if that corrosive person is in a place where cauterization with fire can help, then apply small clovers of cauterization, and large according to the place where it is corrosive.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then apply cauterization entirely, so that you eliminate all corruption and do not harm anything else.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then leave it alone for three days, and apply oil mixed with the ashes within that all scars are completely eradicated and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then apply oils or balms within that it generates flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if it is not corrupted, then apply cauterization again over the area that is still corrupt, within that it heals properly.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrodent can be treated some times with acute medicine, because that is half a treatment instead of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But applying cauterization with fire may heal much better.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	I have already described the cure for them with acute medicine in the division; and now take that when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter   .3
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On cauterization for clauds and other similar cases.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Some cases are caused by a large opening at the base of the neck, which dislocates the neck, and cauterization should be done with two methods, first with fire and second with water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Make the cauterization with fire that is ignited so it looks like a ball of smoke, which should be made of iron according to the quantity which holds the claw of all parts together and also have narrow margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place that ignite on the claw and roll your hand with the cauterization in the direction of the claw until the cauterization reaches the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Then let it rest for three days before you start to blister.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And apply that with dried herbs of thistle torn into three pieces soaked in salt, and let the paste stay on it for a night, because the herb will dry out its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the area with a ointment made of natural substances until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it doesn't turn silver or has a few spots of blood on it, and you notice that some of the hair has fallen out in the area, then apply an ointment made with water to that spot; but prepare a small amount of water from the herb and place it on the claw; then squeeze a little bit of the water onto the palm of your hand, and roll your hand with the compress to the base of the claw, pressing the margin of the canal into the root of the claw, and let the water drip away towards the knuckle of the root of the claw; and wait for the patient to feel a little pain from the water dripping for an hour, then apply that again, because the claw has its roots infected.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	Then do the same to the other one until you have covered all of them on the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then heal those pustules that the roots of the claws are eradicated with water from the ointments that the flesh produces.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On Trembling Cauterization.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a trembling due to friction in the nerves or from fever caused by rubbing or another similar cause, then you should cauterize that with four different cauterizations or five on each side, one cauterization between each spine on the feet, and one cauterization on the toes, and one on the navel, and one on the chest, and one olive-shaped.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	Then the trembling of the patient will subside, and the feverishness of the infection will decrease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On Cauterization for Accidental Wounds on the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there is a sudden outbreak of white rash on the body, and pus-filled blisters are formed from the thick corrupt matter; then at the beginning when it first appears, that should be cauterized thoroughly with a sharp blade of fire; or with a long hair; or with slow-moving cauterization.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some blisters should be broken at the beginning of their appearance according to this method; and they shouldn't be crusted over, and the excess fluid should be let out by breaking them, and that will heal from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, if water is made to flow onto it with bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On Cauterization of the Flow of Blood in an Accident Due to a Wound Caused by Iron.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Then if there is a flow of blood caused by an iron wound, and the wound quickly bleeds, you should cauterize that with water or fire or iron, and only for one hour; and if it keeps bleeding, you should do it again for another hour.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then when there is a little bit of blood, roll your hand over the wound with your thumb at the opening of it, and place that above the wound so that the blood drips away from the knuckle; and let that not stick to it.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place a few large and small olive-shaped cauterizations on it, and blow out over them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take one that is small or large according to the place and vessel in which the artery has broken, quickly before you stop bleeding, and cauterize that within the heart until it is sealed up; and do not let the blood run.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood leaves the opening of the artery as you continue to roll up your hand and blow out the cauterization, then take another cauterization with a blade carefully; and once the blood is stopped, do not let go of that cauterization.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful that you don't burn the nerve here, and that it doesn't spread to the patient's back or some other evil.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when the artery bleeds, it is not possible to stop the blood flow in such a case, and most importantly when the artery is large, if it isn' t stopped with one of these four methods: or cauterize it where it breaks, or extract it when you should extract it, because when you extract its ends, both extremities burn and the blood is stopped, or that it be held with a ligature very tightly, or that it be bound to the pulse with a bandage.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Then whoever performs the extraction should hold it tightly with his hand and bind it very tightly with a bandage or by its position or by causes burning and similar, but not much.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	And if there is a little bit of blood here and not the medicine or present remedy, then open the heart's opening with a blade where the blood has broken, and understand that the great constriction of the vessel in which the blood breaks, and over the artery the hand should not be stopped; and pour cold water on it from a high place so that the blood is congealed and thickened; and also apply cauterization or medicine as necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Chapter II.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On Wounds, Incisions, and Wind, Bloodletting, Plagues, and Their Similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Al-Buhlasi.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have spoken in the first chapter about all the diseases that are suitable for cauterization with fire and medicine, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary to them; and we have ordered the chapters of the subtitle of the head within the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in that order for them, so that it is useful to those who seek it; then on it that you have demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Before I begin here, know that in this chapter it is for the sake of those who fear; and before I start in the first chapter on cauterization, know that
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for the sake of those who are cautious, because in the operation described in this chapter there are sudden eruptions that are like blood flowing from a vessel or an incision on an abscess or the extraction of pus or the piercing of a wound or the incision of a stone; and their similarities.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And of all these there accompanied fear and trembling, and in the most of them death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I tell you that above you shall not fall this water, for some of the diseases that come upon men are bad and deadly.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them leave their disease and die quickly because of the violence of this water that finds its disease, and because of the length of their illness, and because of the meaning of their disease, which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those is one that gives you hope and promises you health, but your illness is destructive.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And do not consent that he who comes to you in this way should be the one; and your prudence be greater than your suspicion and your avarice; and do not suppose any reason for him except a certain knowledge which certifies that it is right for you, and to whom success is laudable.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And in the treatment of all your diseases use prediction and indication of him to whom salvation is given, for in him are helpers in obtaining fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O son, God inspires you with his understanding and does not leave your direction and protection, for he is in his might.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing according to chapters as it precedes in the chapter of cauterization, of the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be helpful for you from this and for which you needed it.
Capitol primier.	Chapter 1.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Do you know that this disease, which causes bad breath in children, appears during childbirth and when the newborn's head is lifted up.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some are caused by hidden cause, which is not recognized.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this disease except in children; and in all those that I saw die, it was because of them. And for this reason, I have seen the work of death in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head remained constantly increased in size until it could not fit into the fire that killed him.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is added between the nose and the ear, or it is added above the ear on top of the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in this case, if the moisture is between the nose and the ear, and the pus is little, then you should cut into your own place in the head with a scalpel on its edge, so that it runs out two points within, where the moisture flows, and this is the shape of the spike:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is increased more, and the pus is greater, then there are two fissures according to this way:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is above the ear, then the sign of it is that you open the corners of the head completely and squeeze the water out when you press them with your hand from within, and there is no water that comes out to the outside.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Then cut into the middle of the head according to this way:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And cut out all the moisture; and strengthen the fissures with gauze and plasters; and pour oil from above on it for five days, then remove the plaster and cure the plague with potions and poultices, and strengthen the head with equality; and eat dry food that has little moisture within so that the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another way of cutting, which you consider, is to take into account the size of the pus and the accumulation of water; for some are larger in the back of the head, or on the front, or on the right, or on the left; so take care when making the incision where the pus appears and the water collects, and cut as best you can.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood from the head because of the movement of water.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of cutting the arteries that are near the ears, called hilases.
Capitol segon.	Chapter 2.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When an animal has a cough or a fever in the chest or feet, and it does not respond to medicines, then the last cure is to cut into those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then, when you want to cut the arteries of the head, and rub the area with rough gauze so that the veins appear, and strengthen the neck of the animal with some gauze; and consider where the vein runs; and the places on each side of the ears are muffled, and are hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then try to strangle the animal, and cut each one with a spike on each side coming from above towards the ear, and it is as long as the skull's edge.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want to, insert the spike below the artery and cut it from above where the incision is made on each side.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision is two points apart, for when a vein is cut, the pulse stops beating suddenly and often.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the artery does not appear in the feeling, then you should measure the quantity of space between three fingers, and try it, and cut inside the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And this is the quantity that comes from a vein: one fifth. and is firm in the hand when it comes from a strong vein, and all of it is according to the quantity that appears from the goodness of the animal and from the accumulation of its artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the plague, and if there is any cause of the skull, cut it out to prevent the appearance of a pus.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the plague with gauze and plaster of Paris, and then cure it with poultices within so that it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of cutting the arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an animal has a headache, or a fever, or a bad smell due to the moisture of food and its quality in the temple, or because it is violent and similar to those, and you do not treat it with medicines, then we will turn our attention to these diseases by cutting the arteries in the temples, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the way of performing this operation and extraction is that the animal rubs the hair in the temple, for it is shown by its pulse, and it is hidden in a few people because of its speed.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the animal be strengthened with some gauze; and rub the area with rough gauze or evaporate it with water so that the vein appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then you take the spike, which is this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you open the nose with ease until you reach the artery; and cut it out separately from each side, cutting from above, and not cutting between them; and remove those of the nose, and discover those of the tunic, which are hidden there completely.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	And if the artery is small, wrap it at its end with a thread, and cut one of them from that side according to the quantity by which the two extremities are lengthened and shortened, and do not cut the flow of blood, for if they are not cut, then the blood does not come out.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove the blood from his hand. Enter three times.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the hernia is large, then place two strong cords of linen or rope around it before removing it from in front of the plaster so that there is no pus, and prevent the flow of blood by stopping up the hole with a plug until the plaster hardens and the wound heals over.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Then cut off the excess skin between the two ligaments, and do so at that time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize the skin with a cautery knife before cutting it off, and place it in the position where that work will be done.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or a cold complex; for cauterization helps to dry out the moisture, and so is better in this case.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then remove the hernias by cutting off the place where they are attached to the skin, and put a thin layer of powder on them, and apply dry medicines so that the flesh heals and the blood stops flowing into it as quickly as possible.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are operating another hernia opens up and there is a flow of blood from it, then you should stop the bleeding by tightening that place or by cauterizing it, or by putting pressure on the place where the hernia was, and strengthen your hand so that the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for some reason those things are not present with you, then stop the bleeding by putting pressure on the wound, and put the wound under cold water, and continue to apply pressure until the bleeding stops again, and then strengthen your hand.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that the pus comes out with the removal of the hernia is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery knife having two handles, because you have stretched the two places to each other, and stop for a moment, and light it up, so that it reaches to the bone and cuts it into two places, so that it can be elongated from between the extremities of it, since it is not yet consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And so the sharpness of the two blades is equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if there are less sharp edges that two blades, since if they are very sharp, then the flesh will be cut quickly by each of them, and will not be cut as much by both at once, so that it is better to use two sharp things.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So that if there is any thickness in it, the heat of the fire should be kept on it, and the flesh is separated from it easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better for all kinds of work and lighter operations.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two blades should be the quantity of the thickness of the knife.
Capitol quart.	I have understood.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment for acute and sour pains in the joints.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acute and sour pains are in the joints, and those veins that run along the top of the head give you no reason for medical treatment, and sometimes your face becomes red and you feel as if it is crawling with ants, and the patient's joints ache so much that their hair falls out, and the eyelids are burned by the sharpness of the tears, and the medicine for this operation gives them a refreshing sensation, and they do not want to take it again.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And that you order the servant to shave the hair from the patient' head, and make three incisions in the forehead, each one with a different distance according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is divided into two parts: the first incision should be at the same distance as the nose is from the middle of the forehead, and the second should be a little shorter than the length of the eyelids, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And keep away from the incisions for hernias that are in two places, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of the two jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is a third of a inch wide.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth ready to stop the bleeding quickly.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then put between two acute extremes, whose form this is the shape of the incision for him:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is the division of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Examine carefully the whole bone that is between two incisions to find the place where it is best to make the middle incision, and then make this incision just before the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then put this sponge into the first incision again and a knife from one side to the other is not sharp.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And put pressure on that place with the sponge as long as the flesh is attached to the bone, and use the knife to cut off the bone from one side to the other, and then use it to open up the middle incision, and cut all the vessels that go down from the head into the arms.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But if the incision continues beyond the bone, and then make it in the middle of the incision again before cutting to the other side.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And then take a little amount of blood from each place where the flesh has been cut off, and press it together.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then put a little piece of old linen or cloth in each incision, and press it down on the powder that is in there with the water and oil and vinegar, and see if any pus comes out without causing bleeding.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, cut off the ligature and administer a large infusion of cold water or vinegar, and then cure it with a strong ointment made with oil of roses and other drugs so that the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	I have understood.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment for headaches by catharsis and for the arms that descend from the inner parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When blood flows strongly and continually, and sometimes the patient' arms are very tired because of their small size, and his eyelids are swollen and irritated, and in the front of the head there is a sharp pain that feels like burning and an extrusion of matter, then you know for sure that these things do not come from the blood vessels, but from the inner parts of the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for this is: order the servant to shave the forehead, and make a incision in the middle of the forehead, a little shorter than the width of an inch (and start the incision at the same place as the temple incisions, and then cut through the bone, and lengthen your hand from the jawbones), and open up the bone that is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood completely with sponge or cloth, and then put pressure on it between the two lips of the incision with old linen or cloth, and then close up the incision with a strong ointment.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then clean carefully above it with powder that is in there with water and oil so that no pus comes out without causing bleeding.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when the blood has stopped flowing and you can see that the pus is decreasing, then you know for sure that the bone is beginning to form new flesh, and then cure it with a strong ointment made of two parts of flour and four parts of colophony, and make a paste of it, and administer it to these wounds so that the new flesh grows.
Capitol .vi.	I have understood.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment for water in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause of water in the ears is one of four things: either it is mineral water or similar to it, which causes a feeling like pain, or it is due to plants, which are similar to mustard and fava beans, or it is a fluid-like thing, such as water and vinegar, and their similar things, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then place some cloth or wool around the patient's ear, and spread their ear open at the tip as much as possible, for it is often due to a wax build-up.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If not, then administer an extract with the instrument called gentle sublingual epiceratic which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is due to a wax build-up with the epiceratic, it is fine; but if not, then administer the extract with a little bit of water in a double-boiled mixture.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not due to water, then make a tube out of wire and insert the tip into the ear canal and pack it with wax and soft oil so that it doesn't leak out through the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then extract it with strong suction, for three times as much water has been reported to come out with it.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not due to a wax build-up in this manner, then take some alum or fine dust and put a little quantity on the tip of a tweezers, and pause it against the ear canal, and gently wrap it around the tip.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert it into the ear canal with ease, then dry the ear with a cloth.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not due to any of the usual causes that we have mentioned, then you shall cut and clean out the ear from in front that might be causing a plug or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting out that is that you shall start by sealing off the vein with your finger and then extract it in the second manner, according to the virtue of water, and pause the ear open at its tip, and apply the blood of the patient onto the opening, and then make a small cut in the ear rim, pouring water into the ear.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the opening takes on the shape of a moon, and pain results from it, then stop that with an appropriate instrument; and sew up the opening in a hurry, and cure what is inside so that it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause enters into the ear is one of the fats that are created and puffs up, then administer cure and extract it. But if you do not obey my orders and instead take a little bit of the fluid, then take some fine alum according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	Then administer the extraction of that fat that has entered into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not give water when you think that the ear is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause it in some cloth or wool, and extract it with a little bit of water or with gentle subduction, or cut it open as described above, for it is a relief to extract it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered into the ear, there is such a thing as using sneezing as a remedy at the beginning, and filling their own ear with a little bit of wool, and shaking it over that ear, and if it is due to a sneezing attack, then it is fine; but if not, then take three small peals of pepper and place them in the fire a little, and place those in the fire a little, and when they are hot, have the patient insert one into their own ear canal, and jump over that ear with another peal of pepper.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then stop water from entering until all the water is gone.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And then the water has been completely removed, you may take some paper or a thin cloth. and place one end into the ear and spread the other end towards the fire until it is burned up.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then place another thin cloth and pour water over it until all the water has been removed, and then insert the tube with wax as mentioned above.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But if the cause of entering into that ear is an animal (such as a fly or worm) which has entered into the ear, then extract it with gentle subduction and a small incision, and the cause of it is easier to deal with than all the other causes that enter into the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But if the cause of entering into that ear is an animal which has been born in the ear, and you do not follow my instructions to clean out the ear with water, then pause it towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is any cause of the worms, then extract it with gentle subduction or a small incision, but if there is no cause, then take a thin tube from which this is the form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Then insert the thin end into the ear according to the quantity that it suffers, and then suck it out strongly, and make water appear as drops, until all the worms are gone.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey my instructions regarding cleaning, then twist and wrap the tube around the ear according to what has been said above; then administer the distillation that has already been prepared for the cure of worms, and observe water in the distillation treatment.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And be your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, whose form is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Then make it of silver or brass, thin, and in its tip, a small opening, and on top of it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it is used as a plug to stop up the cavity of the tube where necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the end and wrap it around with a cloth, and pour some oil into the cavity of the ear, or some extract from a herb, or water that you wish to be extracted in the cavity—and this is in the ear—, and then insert the end and squeeze your hand gently onto it so that the oil goes inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And water which has been put into the ear is already scorched by the fire a little bit.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause you are distilling in the ear is not too sharp, for ear medicines do not suffer water.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On Ear Diseases Caused by Opilities
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children are born with an opility in the ear due to a birth defect or meat that has not been properly cooked before eating, and this causes pain in the ear; and sometimes this opility occurs at the tip of the ear, which does not separate the ear from the head, and sometimes it occurs on the sides.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	That which occurs in the tip of the ear, which does not separate the ear from the head, is in difficult cases of treatment.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which occurs on the sides, pause the ear of the patient towards the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if there is an abundant substance, open it with a fine spatula whose form is like this:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of the foot in which the width is small, and one side is acute and the other not; and the spatula is of two lengths so that it does not hurt the auricle.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And so if the opulence is hidden by flesh in the ear or meat of the foot, then you should cut with a sharp and gentle incision within which all the flesh is exposed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if there is an opulence in the preon of the ear, then you should take with a sharp spatula and scratch it lightly; then put that on the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so if you smell an abundance of liquid that the patient is attracted to with ease, due to gravity; try this with ease and do not hurt the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And so pause the ear with a second quantity of the thick liquid that you wrapped in egg yolk from Egypt; and do this for several days until you are sure that the abscess is healed; or take some and put it into a cup and spray it on three sides, and use it; and if the ear has already become pustular, then you should change the water and put the liquid onto another part which you will wrap in cerosides, which are made from egg yolks, so that the abscess will drain; and properly care for that until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is a flow of blood, then you should soak a sponge or cloth in water and place it on the ear; and use another cure which constricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment for an aching ear that has been pricked with an awl and is bleeding.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Aches from pokes with an awl into the eyelids have some small drops of water on them; some drops are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then cover those that have thick or sharp edges, and scratch them with a fine spatula, and place them on three sides of the area.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain from blood flowing out, then you should cauterize those with a fine, pointed cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to return the scalp and leave it in place when there is any cause for the razor's teeth; and when they are cauterized with fire, those teeth are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for a large sore on the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Small sores in the eyelids of the eyes have some cause which is gathered together with great strength and toughness, and thus it grows larger; and this type of sore is called "gout".
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	It is an addition of thick moisture on the lower eyelid and a drying out on the upper lid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Then the operation should be that you consider if the larger part is done by itself in that which is apart from the eyelid, and it is applied entirely; and the cause of this is removed easily.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then begin by making a small incision along the width, and carefully remove it with a pointed instrument within which all the excess is removed; then put that back together with a little glue and apply pressure to it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared for the incision, but instead you have to pierce the eyelid with a small incision little by little, then it does not matter if there is any cause for that.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the shape is large, you should adjust it with sutures; and properly care for it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is little, you will not be able to do much for that sore, but the blood from it will restore and heal itself.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the larger one is declining into the inner part of the eyelid, then remove the eyelid and put that larger part back together with a little glue, so as not to make an incision; and press it down completely; and if the eyelid needs to be cut in order to open it wider, then do not matter if there is any cause for that.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision, wash the eye with salty water; and properly care for the area until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment for a sore on the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	It is a condition which develops in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and most often it affects children, making them cry because their tears run down; and they cannot see clearly because of the tears.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you have to work constantly on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their eyes open; and the eyebrows that are moistened by their tears, which have already covered a swelling, and the proximity of an ache seems to be in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel an ache within it.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is no way to operate on the eye itself while it is still attached to the socket; and then pause the eye with a cloth and press it down; and cut out some of its circle according to the quantity that contains arnica in all parts, and then place it back onto the eye; and press it down completely so that an ache is felt within half of its circle, and then open it halfway with a sharp spatula inserted into a small incision along the width; and do not let the incision be larger than this.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the preon, cover that you make a small incision completely within which you can reach an ache, for it is through a tiny opening that you feel an ache according to the shape of white grit;
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then remove that with a cloth which you have wrapped between the fingers of your left and right hands, moving it from side to side until it is torn.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And make sure not to press on the incision in order that the spatula does not reach the eye and it does not hurt.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not feel an ache at the beginning of the incision, rather than pressing on it a small instrument within which arnica is contained; then remove that with ease as described above; and then wash it with water and sand; and place the cloth back onto the area and cover it with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then if they grind salt and pour it on the incision, so that the water from that is removed;
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then properly care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess develops in the area, then treat that with poultices of white of egg until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of ways to touch the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the eyes are natural and old, then remove those with a sharp instrument from their natural roots; and make ways to cause harm as follows: by cauterizing with fire; or with acute medicine as described in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done by cutting with an incision and suturing; or by using canes according to what has been said above.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so if you pause the top of the eye with your left hand; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your right hand, and if it is turned, then let it be; and if not, insert a needle into that which is attached to the eyelid, and make the needle go through that part close to the eyelid, and pull the thread back onto the eyelid, and turn it with your left hand.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then put the thread into the inner part of the eyelid; let the hair be adjusted with a sharp scissor on the edge of the lacrimal major, into the lacrimal minor; and then extract the thread; pause for a moment, and then apply a small cotton or cloth bandage to the eyelid, and then cut off the excess, so that it does not become tangled. And then, put a little figure of a sheet of mint on the edge of the lid.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But may I say that the figure is according to the quantity of protraction of the eyelid; for it is different in men, because those who are inclined to have a large amount of protraction of the eyelid, and this makes them uncomfortable, that the edge is cut with a sharp scissor, but not much.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then put the thread on the two lines you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major to the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your edge is near the natural hair, as it is with the thickness of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then put a thread in one of the two angles of the eye; and then scrape all of it, and then adjust the cut with the thread between the two lips or fine yarn, and rinse it off, and then attach what is superfluous to the eyebrows on both sides for some vague reasons, if you want to do so, and otherwise, do not worry about it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Then leave the suture of the yarn inside for three days or four, and then take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want to, leave the suture of the edge alone, and take care of it with water that dries up and tightens, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the edge and the addition of it; but the suture is better done so I say the ancient methods of taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But may I say that it is solicited on the patient's leg; and this is a good operation, and not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And this is another way to do so, and it is that you place on the eyelid a figure like a sheet of mint, and then raise the eyelid with three small nails separated and grouped according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If this is not possible there, have nails, and if it does not close properly, then take a needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and then introduce another yarn next to the lacrimal major, and the yarn according to the position of the lacrimal minor, and adjust the threads between the teeth with equality, and then raise your hand over it with elevation of the edge, lift all the eyelid up on which is marked this way as well as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two edges of the lid with suture, and take care inside that it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an inflammation occurs due to your cutting or edge, let this inflammation be with wax and similar, and wet it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases, the hair of the eyelid are converted, so it is good to use wax for that, which we have mentioned for cutting; but the suture is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Taxanir with canes is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you convert the eyelid and cut the figure inside according to what I have described; then, with art, make two thin canes or two thin rods of the length of the eyelid and the width of them is less than the thickness of the edge.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already cut the ends of some parts, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add some of the thin canes to those parts that are too big; and tighten them very well, and then leave them for a few days, because the edge will die and rot if it does not close properly.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break it with a sharp tool, and then take care of the edge inside that it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is fixed, the eyelid is raised, and the hair do not poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is the form of two canes that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of raising hair on the edge with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hair is not natural, hard and sharp, the operation in the eye is that you take a very thin needle and pause it on the edge of the hair, and then place the tip of a very fine silk thread or leather on it, and then adjust the ends well so that no one notices it.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	The length of the yarn should be about a palm's length.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then you will make another very thin thread from it, and then cut the ends of it if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient' s head in the middle of the needle, and be close to the hairline so that your work is noticed, because it is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the root of the hair, pushing it well, and then make it enter quickly into the eyelid through that from which it has come out from the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the hair inwards and insert it into the thread, and the hair should be one or two or three or more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then pull your hand over that from which the hair has come out into the thread, and then place it on the eyelid with the hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is pulled out of the thread and not from the hair, then you will pull out the thread from the edges with the nail that you have placed on it, within which the hair has come out.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Then break it with the vision of the hair, because you will pull out the thread and the nail, and then cut each part with a sharp scissor and leave them for two or three days, so that the hair sticks to its place and grows on it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the hair is too long, then you adjust a very long hair from the natural hair, and it is raised with it, or that you place it within which is to be expanded; then raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of inflammation in the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When inflammation appears in the edge, and it is drawn up on the eyelid, or to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of the edge or section or cauterization, and this is called leporine, and that is either natural or accidental, and is done by bad consolidation of the edge or section or cauterization, or by similar things.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The way of the operation in the eye is that you separate that consolidation and open those lips with a cloth, and then put it inside which are cured.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And I do not say that you use of the treatment of the eye for those causes that dry up and tighten it; because if you make it return to inflammation, there is more harm than good while it is wet.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use on the eye for those causes that soften it with fenugrec, and dip in water in which are eggs of olive oil and a few drops of lemon juice, or dip in that oil made from some oils, and then apply to the eye; take care to make it wet, and then take care.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your treatment is that you perform all the things that do not consolidate according to the form that begins with an "e".
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have described is not other than a correction of inflammation that does not return to the form of the place according to what it begins.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	From the cure of people who suffer from a sore on their eyelids.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This "remedy" that is made on the eyelid, which is called in truth a remedy; and it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental is made by plague or by wound or by cautery or by other appearances.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle and make it double threaded, and stick it in the flesh, and let it pass from the lacrimal of the left within to the lacrimal of the right, so that the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then remove the meat from its connection by the needle and cut it off with a sharp knife.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should, it is good; and if not, take the thread and tie it to the divided part, and at that turn the eyelid, and make the two wounds in the lid of the left.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the two extremities of the two wounds are made at two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and may be made in a figure with those two angles.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This shape is a Greek letter: Lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then remove the flesh there by the amount that is the width of it taken from the left side of it, which cuts the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then join the separated parts and sew them with woolen thread; and then treat those with water that I have said of the medicinal substances and with heat so that it is cured.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the "remedy" in this place is by a wound or suture or cauterization, then you should make a flat wound on the skin of the eyelid according to what comes before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate by the heat between two lips according to what I have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech of the cure of  "remedies" when it is above or below, which runs in its operation, according to what is prepared in the form of  "remedy", and that is in a shape of diverse colors.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artisan knows at all times how to prepare in any way that is possible for him so that it returns the figure to its natural form, or similar to it, and that patient according to what he wants from the operation and of the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many men that it is fixed the eyelid pus above the album of the eye, and is forbidden by the ease of movement and of its natural works, then you should stick the end of the needle in the left eyelid, and lift it up, or extend it with oil.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you should cut the adhesion with a sharp knife, which is not on the sharpness of the wounds, having obtuse a little so that the patient does not disturb the operation, and leave the knife that does not hurt the eye in its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And may be your incision that it is taken away this adhesion with ease so that it is returned the eyelid according to its natural form and that it is cured all the adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then you should put in the eye salty water with which you wash; or distill in it of Zuny dissolving in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then join between the eyelid and the eye with a calga of it, and place on the eye wool infused in the album of wine, and then third day use causes of consolidation so that it is cured.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of the eyelid and of eminence of flesh of the lacrimal.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that the eyelid is according to two ways: either it is nervous, and is similar to hard cyphers subtle; or it is not nervous, similar to frozen white moisture, which when it touches the touch, or it is forced to take on a thread, is separated, and the thread does not stick to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not begin except from the lacrimal major that goes little by little so that it covers the sight and prevents the light and movement of flesh.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	And the way of the work in the incision is that the patient stops his head in the left side, and then opens the eyelids, and raises the eyelid to your hand, and then collect the eyelid with a thread of few double threads, and extend it to the divisions on the right.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and stick it in that one hair of horse or cow or of water, or of appearances, or of faith strong, or double the end of the needle little by little and let it remain in the middle of the eyelid, and then push that hair with the needle, and cut it off at the base of the eyelid; and then extend it to the divisions on the right, and cut them off.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	Then you should follow that hair in that place within the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you should cut the root of the eyelid with a sharp knife or with small scissors, and let the flesh of the natural eyelid flow so that by cutting it does not run continuously.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some times the eyelid is stretched on the stone oil or on faith strong, according to what I have said, and then is cut with a sharp knife of lion's hair, of which this is the form.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And take care that at the knife do not touch the corneal layer and that it does not break in its opening, and that the pupil is pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then incision goes into the eye a little salt of Zuny or strong water, and leave it within another day; and then treat that with water so that it is cured.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot stick the needle, or it does not remain in that hair, then this kind of eyelid is cured with medicine, and is healed so that it is cut by eye and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to cut that hair, then open the eye of the patient and take a sharp knife of lion' hair according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if times that hair is rarefied and is fixed and stuck in the root of it, then distill from it water strong enough or salt of Zuny, and leave the eye within another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation on that so that all what is of it returns to him, but if not, then stop that hair, for you leave that in place, and at the beginning treat the aphorism with medicine so that it is cured.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation on that according to what is needed so that it is cured.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The eminence of the eyelid, if it is seen in the eye by great harm, should be suspended with a thread, and cut that hair from one side, and do not finish the incision so that the flow of tears does not stop.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distill in the lacrimal strong water within another day so that it is cured.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of incision of algaziolic and of water that is born from flesh joined in the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some times in the eye whites is born flesh of prayer, and it is overlaid within that covers the pupil, or approaches or recedes on the eyelids so that they meet together and are joined to each other at the base of the eyes like a pillar.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	And the operation in it is that the patient stops his head in the left side, and then opens the eyelids so that all of it returns to him, but if not, then stop that hair, for you leave that in place, and at the beginning treat the whole with medicine so that it is cured. And take care from the eye of what is needed for it to be finished according to the incision, and hold fast to the hair of that eye that does not hurt.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And be your incisions the one which you will inscribe those or at the spetum that we have recalled in the incision of the fingernail, or to small pincers that it is gathered ascebel according to which will come the form of him near this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is finished and all that flesh is removed, then fill the wound with salt water trended or distilled in him powder similar to the medicine of the corrosive, and place over the wound a little cloth white within that it is secured from an apoplexy cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause of an apoplexy and he is torn out cauterization, and you fear an apoplexy cautery, then leave the wound and cure that apoplexy with the water that it gives that apoplexy, and then repeat over that with an operation within that it is healed, and similar to make in the adjusted flesh which occurs in the wound of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But however you cover that you remove all cure of the finger by way natural or by way accidental, or by fire, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member is sufficient for that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the Collocation of Sable on the Wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sable so veins that are tanned over the wound and forbid the dressing of its operation, and dry up the wound by length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which is Sable is strong and in him there is not another disease than Sable, then you collect that Sable.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient that he stops his head in the table, and suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your prudence; and be that ounce of subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Or so two ounces gradually in a cos according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then collect those veins with sublimate forces, with subtility, and absterges the blood hour by hour, within that you consider those veins to be re-made of the wound and to be stirred up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And guard that you do not lead the wound to the extremities of the spetum; and if your operation is in front of the sun, and hold fast in your operation so that you do not incise except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then you distill in the wound green or corrosive water so that by its acidity it is re-made of Sable.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if that water is not in your power to collect all in that hour, and then you fill all with the water that it gives pain, and leave it for several days within that it is soothed that pain and is secured from an apoplexy cautery.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat over him according to which it will come the same manner within that it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the form of the pincers:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of Reduction of Arryzation to the Nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure Arryzation with cautery or acute medicine according to which it is preceded the narrative of him and he is not healed, then do not engender in him but cut over the apoplexy towards the maturity of him, and that you extract all humidity that is in him and fire within that it is uncovered the bone.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore, when it is uncovered this bone and becomes black or corrupted, then you cut him with a instrument by which this form is:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	Is named of a sharp point, and is made of iron, and be the round head so that it can hit with the point of a lime or refined by the point of subtility (so as it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupt place of the bone, and then turn it between the fingers, and press your hand little by little within that you know that corruption is smooth.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And water be made some dry spots, and then restore the place with acute and stypy causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the place is consolidated and it is in him good hidden flesh and it separates the chest from the sania and he remains for ten days, and is not renewed and does not apoplexy and does not occur in him accident, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if not, then it is not in him to be engender but reduce the fracture to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: And it is that you discover of second bone with fire or acute medicine, and when it is uncovered the bone, then you cut him according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The extremity of the iron triangle-shaped, and be the base of him first weakened within that it is at the extremity so as it occurs:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that over the bone, and be that prop of the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little of the wound, and then turn your hand to the tribe within that it penetrates all the bone, and that one feels the patient by touch that it is shaken so as it is being shaken when you place your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the place with acute medicines, drying them out so as to be dried up:
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then if the flesh and the place are not hardened, then the matter that drains to the parts from behind returns to the nose, so water is put on the patient's foot.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of Reduction of the Eminence of the Wound.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the wound projects to its totality and does not occur in the movement or decrease, then you relax the patient, and then that which follows, and then pause the wind in the throat by good sacrifice and suck with a little oil of rose and salt and vinegar and honey, and then place the bandage over the wound with a little powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powder is that you take sheets of linen, and each sheet be doubled four times; and make these sheets of linen.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place those on one another according to the quantity by which the wound needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then place those over those with a firm and tight closure; and then change the wind by good sacrifice; and then stop the wind and leave the wound open to the air and the sun.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if between times the limb is softened, then you consider that it is stiff.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then stop the limb in front of the sun as well:
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound has been reduced already, then so it is, and if no, then repeat the bandage with the powder and the closure and the wind within that it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the Incision of the Eminence of the Uveal Membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal membrane, and then it is eminent and it appears outside the eyelids with a point of needle, and is represented the figure of man by water, and you want to incise that water, then perform the operation under which I have recalled, that you introduce the needle into the roots of the eyelids on the part of the lacrimal, and then make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the place of the double thread and lift up with that the part of the uveal membrane in the circuit of the needle, and tighten it.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then extract the needle and place that over the wound by infusing milk in album of hoove, and leave within that it comes down the thread to the uva.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then heal the wound with water that it comforts him within that the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some eyelids gather all the part by a circle of linen within the wound's eminence, and then be pierced with a subtle spike that it passes through the eye of the wound, and run the aqueous humors, and descend the wound and enter so much.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And bring in someone strong to heal it.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .xxii.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of eye diseases.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This malady, which is called alcolism, is not anything other than an inflammation which is adjusted like descending water and is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of working on it is that you make the patient lie on a slanted board and straightened up his legs and hold them with two hands; then, between his thighs, place a cushion, and another under his knees, and another under his feet, which have their hands held tightly. Look at the roots of the disease and dry them up so that they do not spread, and stop the light, and the patient looks into the causes as if he saw them.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down, you shall know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If it is not prepared for the descent of the disease as I have said, then make the patient lie down on his side and place a thin blade carefully over the area between his legs, touching a little the corner of the conjunctiva at the edge (at the root) of the cornea in the crown, so that the disease may be expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, when it is expelled, take some water and dilute it with honey or add honey to the water in which you have already boiled fenugrec and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal all the other causes so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22. On the treatment of eye diseases.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water that descends from the stomach.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	I have already said about the spices of water in the division and which convents to pierce with the thread showing, then do so for healing.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you shall know that it is water. Make the patient lie down on a board and place his legs on a pillow, and hold his chest with one hand, and tighten his throat with the other.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your hand over the eyelid of his left eye if the water is in the left eye; or over the right eyelid if the water is in the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then take some alum, if the water is on the left side; or take some salt, if the water is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then place the end of the alum over the edge near the crown by the thickness of the eyelid's flesh on the patient's left side; or place it over the right eye, and roll it up with your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then pierce into the eyelid' flesh and feel that alum has already reached the root of the eye.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Then, if the measure of the path of alum to the eye is less than the distance from the pupil to the edge of the blackness, it is the crown of the eyelid; for you shall see at that pupilla with the clarity of the corneal layer.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then place alum in the hole where the water flows out; then, if the water goes down soon, then heal that patient with water in his veins.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then wait a little if the water is slow to go down; then, if it does not come out soon, stop up that hole before the alum comes out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	Then, when it is dried up and does not go down, take some alum with ease, and roll it in a little rosewater and almond milk; then hold the patient's throat with one hand and pour it into his throat. Then stop up his throat or tie it up with a knot, or press it with a bandage.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Perhaps we are not of that time that puts alum on the ear when it is infected.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then, if you do not obey your alum in the ear because of its hardness -- for it is some of those people whose ear is hard as stone -- then, when you take the blade which is called albarello (alberid), and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Then pierce that conjunctiva with it, and do not stop until you have reached the end of it, and do not stop until you have let out a little alum.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then put the alum as I said before.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You must prepare for the patient a quiet sleeping place, and he should lie on his back in a dark room, and all movements be prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Then put on the patient' head a soft cloth, and do not move his head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And then take this remedy in the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then lead that patient out of that dark room and show him some causes; then return the remedy to him in the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	Then you shall not take water for healing at any time, or soon after taking it.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	While you are waiting to heal with water only because the water is taken from the body by perspiration.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	Then if it happens that the patient's temperature goes up after taking the remedy in the seventh day, then wait and take his temperature again, and make him take water to cool down his fever.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you shall absolve the patient' breath and place it over his mouth for him to breathe there from; then he should remain in a dark room for a few days, it is present in the middle of the darkness.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Then lead that patient out of the house gradually and talk to him about his causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	You shall know that it is not an excuse for a doctor to lose his sight for some time, and then you shall be careful in your practice.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	It has already been sent to us from the arts of alchemy, and some say that it does make a fire in the air, and pierce with alum, which draws out water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But perhaps there is no such thing as perfect water in our country, nor does it come from some of the roots of herbs; and perhaps this water is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of magic remedies that we have on that one who does not know those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are made from iron or iron itself, and they are the extremes of those by this triangular subtlety, the sharp end also as that one is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24. On the properties of water.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of nasal diseases.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are some hidden diseases in the nose, which are put together like a cluster of stones or a polyp; and this disease is called a polyposis because it seems like that one represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if the nose is full of cancerous flesh, and if its color is not like that of a lion, then it is a lion's flesh.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then in that one which is not fraudulent or cancerous, make the patient lie down between his legs and place him in the sun, and pluck the hair from those noses.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then take that one from the front part away, and cut off a little piece of it with a sharp blade easily so that you shall know that all the flesh has been taken; and if there is any reason why it should be kept apart, then take water and put it in a little container which can be separated from it.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Then if the patient' temperature goes up after taking the remedy, then wait and take it again; or if there is an attack of a malady from which fever results, then stop taking water; or if the fevers are caused by bad remedies, then cut off the nose completely so that it may be kept apart.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And it shall be done in the nose near the incision, oil or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Now if the nose is opened and moisture is brought out of the palate, then you will know that it has been cured.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	Now if the moisture does not penetrate as far as it covers, then you will know that inside it is flesh on the upper bones of the nose where there has been no incision.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then cover it with a thin layer of manure and place one of the nuts on top of it, and another between each nut, and make a hole in the nose to let it out, or for any other reason that may be possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then if it is necessary that the smell come out through the nose, so that it can reach the nostrils and be thrown onto the person's face, because it is like this that children are taught in school, and a bad habit for anyone who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two extremities of the string, one that comes out over the nose and the other that hangs in the nose, and then bind the meat to the nuts that are on the string, and let it come out so that you know that the meat is already on the nuts of the string.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then take the string out, and place it in the nose near the incision for three days or more until the meat has completely腐烂
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for some days until it is cured.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Now if you see that the cure has failed, use the following:
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the form of the instrument that purifies and makes medicine in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it from silver or brass, which is like a small lamp that is opened up, with a small needle, and the medicine like this.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like this with a needle, and the tube of the instrument that purifies is flat, open; which should be held in your hand on the back of it, from which you can pour oil or water that you want from the sucks and causes that are to be treated.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these are the prices of these instruments: of castor, white wine, ginger, licorice, long pepper, calamus, and saffron, of aniseed, and onion. The water of blood and bile is to be made into pills, and one pill to be taken with warm water, and it is to be placed in the patient's nose facing up.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Nose plugs
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Nose plugs should be used in the two extremities of the nose, and they are improved and relieved in a few days' time.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And by pouring water over it that you have made to appear at the beginning of its appearance, and wash it all out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place a hot cautery or burning medicine on the area.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	Now if the incision has taken a long time to heal, then consider it hard, dry, of bad color and poor feeling, then do not touch that part with iron for fear that the wound will get infected through the great malignity of that part on the person who has that injury.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound is a sharp injury and not of bad color, and sometimes if an incision can be made in all of it, then empty the patient and make an incision with great care, and cure the area with water that removes and presses it within until it is cured.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of nose and mouth sutures and of the ear when the continuity is broken by plague or by similitude.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that if a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it is given little to no benefit except in certain cases.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then if any of those causes occur, you should consider it to be a fresh plague with the person's face, and then join the two lips together with a suture, and then cure that area within until it is cured.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated, and each is healed separately, then you should know that any separation of the hair from its root is also cured.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then join the two lips together with a strong suture and strengthen them, and sprinkle over those trissat seeds of dragon'e egg and mustard, and place on the powder a piece of plaster of Paris, or of any other of the consolidating plasters, and leave it like that for two days or three, then take off that plaster and replace it with another one and leave it like that until the wounds are healed, and then cure them with water within until they are cured.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	Now the way of the suture is that you add to the solution of continuity or with needles as has been mentioned above in the suture of the abdomen, or add to the solution of continuity with thread.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the causes that cause the separation of those two lips from within.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	There are various causes that cause the separation of those two lips from within: some are due to minor issues such as dry skin or poor diet, while others may be due to more serious conditions like oral cancer or facial trauma. Some separations occur gradually over time, while others can happen suddenly and require immediate medical attention.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then know that you should join those lips together and fill the gap with a strong material, and then remove any scabs that form within until the wound is healed, and then wash it with vinegar and stir it, and cure that area with water that stiffens it, until it is cured.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of incision of the meat that is adjusted in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Then remove the flesh that is attached to the gums and which the old people call albugineous; then, when you have suspended that piece or if you hold it in your fist, and have cut off its base and sides, let it run out or wash it away with water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place over that spot three times of wise powder or other astringent or extenuating powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that meat comes back, then cut it again and cauterize it a second time, for the cautery will not return again.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of reason of teeth being made.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in their splits and of the roots and between the gums are harsh, rough, and some whiteness is made there by the gum's corruption, and some of the teeth become yellow.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Then, when you have opened the mouth between your teeth and placed the upper jaw over it, and raked the teeth in which those roughnesses appear like sand within that they do not cause any trouble, then make of them whiteness or yellowness or other color than that they may be cleaned.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if it is left that it is in those of the beginning of the reason, it is good; and if not, then you must repeat the reason over them on another day and the second and third until you come to the last statement in which you want to.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth need different shapes and forms of relief according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And because the reason that the tooth is split between the teeth is different from the reason by which it is cut between roots according to other forms, and these forms of reasons are always prepared by you, which you will see soon enough.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth root extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Then you must extract the tooth of its pain completely and delay a total extraction of it, because there is no excuse for extracting that tooth when it is not painful, because it is a substance that rises up within it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	More, when the jaw is forced to extract that tooth, you must firmly make sure which tooth is painful, because a pain of that tooth dispels the jaw and makes it so that it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and this pain does not cease until the unhealthy tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this by operation of the barbaries.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then you must make sure which tooth is painful and that you know it well; then, when you have scraped in the course of the tooth with a scalpel where there is any virtue, from the beginning completely within the gum, and little by little at first cut it off with scissors or other fine cutting tools until that part comes out.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then you place in his strong grasp large by good talk or loud noise, and place the upper jaw between the teeth of that side that is not painful to you, and this tooth cut according to the shape it had before; then take care not to break it apart, nor to give pain to the upper jaw.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then if it is not broken, take one of those instruments, and remove it easily from the patient's foot with a gentle effort as though it were made at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	More, if the tooth is loose or corroded, then you must make sure that you keep away from that part of the thread with its sharp end at a small distance so as not to cut it in your constriction on it with those handles.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Then you must open it exactly with a scalpel in the course of all that part of the gum and keep your strength so as not to break it apart, and return to the upper jaw for its malice is less than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Then you must not make a mistake as did those bad and audacious barbers in their final moment of their practice on the extraction of their teeth, for we have heard that they bring about men's bad teeth, all of whose roots are broken, or some of them, or extract it with such bones of the jaw; thus have witnessed with regard to these.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then let the extraction of it be washed out with water or salt water or vinegar.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is bleeding of blood with water, as it happens sometimes, then cut a little quantity of zege and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and the fine handles are made by which the tooth is worked at the beginning with a long handle, a small grasp, and a thick one, that they may not be doubled up when working with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	So then as the shape of those large handles so that when you begin to work with them they do not double up, but small ones.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	They are made of iron of Indian descent, which is a very hard iron, and on the extremities of them some of those teeth are larger than others and break through by constriction that is strong, and some of the extremities of those teeth are shaped like the beak of a crow, as it were, and they are of very hard constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter.xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of tooth extraction and breaking the bones of the jaw that is broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	Then when you want to extract the tooth that is broken for some reason, then place it in the area with a cloth or bandage for a day or two until the area is softened; and then place the extremities of those teeth with which it is broken together with the forceps, as it were:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of them are made within like a lime or an alfil.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	Then if you do not obey these instruments or the handles, then cut off the meat from the root and take this instrument which is called an awl, as it were, its shape is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	It has a large end and a small one, and is not buried so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Then if by chance the root is broken, it is good; and if not, help yourself to these other instruments, whose shapes are as follows: The shape of the first instrument is triangular at its extremities and some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it has a triangular shape and a small end:
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you are helped with these instruments without having two ramps, whose this one is the shape of the ramp:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments for shaving teeth, because it is quickly done with this instrument which is made like an alfiler; and its shape is as follows:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of a triangular end that is twisted or short, which has some thickness, and is not buried so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know that the teeth' instruments are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	Then the wise and skillful craftsman in the art, by his own means does what the others cannot do or pause for it is the operation of the bad ones due to the shapes of different species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth are broken, then cut it carefully with the knife that is convenient to you from among the instruments and forceps which we have spoken about in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help yourself with the handles of which this one is the shape:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And is it necessary to bring the patient closer gradually, and bind or press him at the mouth so that he does not escape or flee before the bone is completely broken; and then restore the place with suitable medicines for water.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then cut it from that side and from the blackness of that side and cure it from within so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the Treatment of Excellent Teeth over Other Teeth.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are excellent and do not follow the natural course of the jaw by their shape, and more so when they involve the females and especially the elderly ladies; then consider this: if one tooth is separate from another, and cannot be joined or treated with linament, then cut it off; but if it is not attached to any other tooth, then you should mark it with this instrument whose shape it is; and it is similar to a pig's death and is made of Indian steel with an acute end.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be on the tool that you mark off that tooth in three days because of the hardness of the tooth and so that it is not attached to any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if an excellent tooth is expanded to the file, then file it with a file of Indian steel of the same shape.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And all of it is made of Indian steel and the point is very fine; and make needles with this file whose teeth are few and made slowly in three days by ease because any other tooth will not be attached and will not stick together.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then cut it off with a thin knife, and cut it with an extremely sharp razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if there is a tooth that has one part broken and the tongue is affected, then consider this: you should file off that part of the tooth whose sharp edge is sticking out and which is pushed in, and make it flat so that the tongue does not hurt or the word be corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter.XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the Restoration of Broken Teeth with Gold or Silver Wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When a tooth is broken or removed by blow or impact, and the patient cannot bear it more than what wire of gold can carry, and you have treated that with stinging medicines, and your treatment has not helped, then so that it does not hurt in those teeth that are bound with gold wire, and not with silver wire, because silver becomes yellow and hardens quickly, whereas gold does not change or alter;
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the wire be of such thinness and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the cut is that you take the wire and double it between two healthy teeth, and then stretch it twice by twisting it between two bound teeth, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then repeat this process to the opposite side of that part from which you began, and bind it more tightly with ease and simplicity so that it does not hurt or be bound.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your tightening should be on the tool with which you tighten the wire to the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And you should cut off the excess ends of the wire with forceps or tongs, and place them in any way you want, and cover them up between the healthy tooth and the bound tooth, so that they do not damage the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Then leave it like this for three days with rope.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it falls or is twisted, then tighten it or them with the other wire at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two bound teeth, thus tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one tooth or two returns to its original position in their places, and are healing properly, and remain so.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	It does not do this except with skilled and wise people.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some are apt for some cause of cow bones, and it is made from them in the shape of a tooth, and placed in its place where the tooth fails, and is tightened as we have said, and remains there and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter.XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the Incision of the Ligament which is seen in the tongue and prevents speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament, which leaves the tongue on some occasions or is natural to the person, or happens accidentally and occurs due to a plague that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in it is that you work on the patient's mouth, the lower jaw existing in the upper jaw; and raises its tongue, and cut this ligament according to the width so that the tongue is freed from its root.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or swelling in it, and water has stood because of the plague's consolidation, then cut off that ligament from its width so that it does not split the ligament and dissolve the inflammation.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is no crack made in the bone's front part, and do not cut here the marrow and let the blood flow from there; and it is dangerous to split the skull bone.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then let it be washed with warm water or cold water or a damp cloth; and let it rest from the tongue so that it does not become consolidated again; and this is the way in which the patient leaves his tongue in any new thing so that it does not become swollen again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is a flow of blood, then place it above the affected area; but if the blood flows, then cauterize that place with dry-burning iron, which is used for water.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat this one differently from other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter.XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the Extraction of a Ruminant from the Tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some are left on the tongue, like a small swelling that prevents speaking, and naturally occurs to it; and there is a strong one that is difficult to put up with, and it disturbs the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in it is that you open the patient' mouth on both sides of the sun, and examine the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if it changes its color from white or black, which is hard, then do not touch that because it is sharp.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it changes from white color, which means moisture, then put oil on it, and cut off that part with a sharp knife, and cut it all off; and if blood flows in the hour of your operation, then pause wearing loose clothes, so is corrosive, until it stops bleeding.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have finished it with praise for him, within the context of being washed with cold water and salt, and cure it with another treatment for water until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter.XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the Extraction of a Swelling from Two Ears and from that which is Nothing in the Ear, and Other Swellings.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When the ear is swollen and hot, so are glands that are gathered, which occur before two ears, when you treat them with water that we have said in the division, and if they do not heal, then consider whether the swelling is hard and of different colors, and does not feel good; then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron due to the flow of blood; instead, let it dry until it heals, and then cut off that part, or let someone rip it off.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, which means weakness, and the shape of its root is fine, then that part should be cut off, so that it does not remain;
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	Here is the translation of the text:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It shall be made of silver or iron, and it shall be sharp with a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	And when you press on him the tongue and it is shown to you the inflammation, and catch on him the third veil, then take onci and hold him in the armhole, and pull him at the edges outside as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Also that you pull some cause of the veils, and then cut it with that instrument in which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is assembled with forceps, but the extremities of them are curved, so that the orifice of each of them is on the end of the other, very sharp, which is of iron in a shell covered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not to you present, then cut it with a blade in which this is the form of it: And it is sharp on one side, and not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And then that you have cut one hole, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and immediately cut the hernia with sharp water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, clean water from the decoction of wormwood or of mulberry leaves and similar to those of the stinging nettle within that the flow of blood is restricted, then cure him within that it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some veiled in the collar other inflammations those two ears, and cut them according to what I have said in the cutting of two holes even.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already cured a woman of an inflammation which was born in her collar of him, which inflammation tended to a dark color, of little feeling, the woman had already closed her collar, and she breathed with a clear breath, and had prohibited him eating and drinking water, and it had come close to death if he had stayed one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the inflammation had already fought so much that it had opened two holes within that it comes out by two passages.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I hid myself with a knife and I cut him in one of his oncis, and I pulled it out, and I threw away a lot of it, and then I cut it again with that same knife, and I held his tongue, and I put the onci in that inflammation.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I took away a lot of him, and there was not blood flowing from him except a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then I cured her completely of that inflammation, and she began to drink water again, and soon afterwards an inflammation came in its place, which I cut within that it does not last long.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I hid myself and cauterized his collar, then I went around, and I did not know what to do with that one next to me, and I knew what to do with that one next to him, and I came back.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter. 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the cutting of a hernia when it is inflamed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When there is a discharge of pus in the hernia and it is long, then it is called a boil; and if it is in the edge fine and round, then it is called a carbuncle.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with water which I have said in the division, and do not trust your cure, and this inflammation has already gone away from him and it is thin, then know that you cut off what is round; and if it is long, and it is bloody, of dark or black color, and does not hurt him, then know that you have cut off his hernia, for in that there is a fear about the hernia.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that one according to the method which I have said of its whiteness and longitudin, then cut off the hernia and press his tongue against the instrument with which it is made this form, and put onci in the new, and pull that down and cut it with a knife or scalpel.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And know that you do not cut off that one except with water which comes out naturally to the addition, because if you cut it further, then you will lose your speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And immediately the cutting, use water which I have said in the cutting of two holes, and cure that within that it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the hernia was frightened by the cutting of him, know that you use ingen in the cauterization of it is afraid, and the method of cauterizing in it is only water which I have said, and it is because you hold the top of the hernia between your hands, and immediately the water will be ready. And when the instrument has come to a hole or hollow, fill it with water; and if it does not fill with water, then take off a little blood. And from that water come out naturally, and then cut it with a blade or scalpel.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	May the length of it be concave within which the medicine is put as with the concavity of a spoon, and hold the instrument to the medicine on the tongue, and let the hernia fall from him on his neck so that it does not drop by a little blood. And let the instrument come to the hole or hollow, fill it with water; and if it does not fill with water, then take off a little blood. And from that water come out naturally, and then cut it with a blade or scalpel.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then take your hand away from the medicine, and press it on the tongue for an hour or so that it does not become blackened and softened by the chewing of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take hold of it and wrap it on the end of a ray, and dip the crotch in the medicine, and push the ray into the crotch until the crotch sticks to it, and make water with that one so many times as you can obtain water for the cauterization of the uvula, and then let it lie. For it will dry up and fall off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not know that the medicine will return, return it, and then the cauterization wash away in the circuit of the uvula with the crotch stuck on it, and moisten him with the water which comes out from the circuit of him with the medicine, and clean him thoroughly with the embrocation, and apply to himself within that he is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is more secure than cutting and less dangerous from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some are cured with water which is more subtle than cauterization and less dangerous from fear, because it is cured with the submergence in this way: Take dry herbs such as camphor, tobacco, oregano, mint, and similar to them, and place them all in a dish, and cover them with vinegar, and boil; and let the herb-dish be placed on the edge of the bowl, and hold an instrument which is sharp of iron according to this method; it shall be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then put the end on him in his mouth within that the vapour comes to the uvula from the water, and the uvula is dimmed with it.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat over that many times as it is dry, and remember not to make this cure with the coming of an inflammation, for it will fit too well in the inflammation, and do not do water, but rather keep the declaration of the inflammation of him.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	May you not be at this time with the instrument, take a cane and place on the end a cup of fur, so that the mouth of the patient is closed, because the cup of the fur prevents the vapors to burn the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On Extracts of Thorns and Water That Adheres to the Jaw and Other Causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Moothe seen in the jaw or thorns of paynes or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then know that you extract water that appears there, above which the sight is directed, since you press the tongue against the instrument in front of the sun, so that to you may be revealed the water that is in the jaw.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And the water that does not appear to you in the jaw is hidden, know that you force the patient to vomit before food is digested in the stomach, because the attached cause causes the jaw to be foraged by vomiting; or if the patient swallows a stone of naphtha or of radish of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a dry sponge of sea-leather and dip it strongly in wine, and put it on the patient's tongue, because it is then foraged;
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And you take a worm and dip it strongly in wine, and put it on the table and extract it; or you take a pig' foot and place it above and below the table and extract it;
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	May you not be foraged by those causes that I have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it is rounder than a little finger, and in the end there is a cavity which you enter into the patient' jaw with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And place the hand of the patient on his head, and keep that touch of the jaw bone or thorn, or that he eats with his mouth what is stuck in the bone, or that he swallows the medicine with his mouth.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, the patient who enters it is worse, because his knowledge of the site of the attached cause and the blockage in the jaw, and he pulls his hand towards the instrument on his head, all according to the quantity that is prepared for him so that he may be foraged.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter.xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On Extracting Blood That Is Attached to the Jaw.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the medicine is blood mixed with water that I have mentioned in the division of the treatment with medicines and it does not agree with you, then consider in the jaw of the patient towards the sun, since your tongue has been pressed against the instrument which I have told you about.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you wish to extract the blood, extract it with a small needle or with subtle gestures carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that, then take a concave tube and insert it into the jaw of the patient, and place a burning iron in the concave part of the tube, and make as many holes (as long as the blood has stopped being in the jaw) and stop up the patient' jaw all day with water.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a full jar of water and operate the patient' mouth with it, and wash his mouth with that; and do not swallow any cause or taste water for an hour after, because blood is soon felt.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	May you not be foraged by water that I have mentioned, then fumigate the patient with cinnamon or asafoetida using the instrument which I have told you about in the sufligation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Make water, so as to quench thirst.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And this is another way of operating by suffumigation with water, that you take a cup in which there are carbonized fires and the cup is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a truc (a kind of tube), and connect the end of the instrument to that truc; then remove the suffumigated; and place the patient' mouth on the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the suffumigation does not escape until you know that the suffumigation has reached the blood, because the blood soon feels when it is quenched.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then repeat the suffumigation several times, and stop up the patient from drinking, and eat salty foods and drinks, and do not drink water, and likewise, if necessary, you are to be foraged by this regimen.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument with which blood from the jaw is extracted when it is seen; and it is similar to tweezers sometimes, but because it is in any curve.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	and the end of it is similar to an elephant' tusk, which is sharp, but because when you press any cause, that does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter.xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of speech in apperception of aphasias and section of laringe.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The aphasias are special words, in various ways, according to the remembrance of them, of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are so different in piercing and sectioning them by two methods, one of which is due to the species of aphasias in itself; and the other because they press on the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is due to the places in which things happen in the body, because the accidental aphasias in the head are other than those that occur in the neck; and the accidental aphasias in the flesh are other than those that occur in the joints; and each of them is a problem in operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some aphasias are such that, instead of being pierced, they are properly cured by the maturation of the matter in those or completion of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other aphasias are such that when they are pierced it is because they have been properly cured by the maturation of the matter in those or completion of them; so also with aphasias that are prop to joints, because an aphasias when it appears prop to a joint, the essence of that part is prolonged until it comes into contact with blood that has been properly cured; and strong corruption occurs in the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it causes contraction of that member; or it is an aphasias prop to a main member, and if you delay piercing it, proper maturation does not occur to the main member; or it is prop to the rear parts, therefore it is pierced properly; and not being pierced by the proper time, from the non-completion of digestion, but that which is prop to the rear parts, so that it cannot reach the forward part of the rectum, and a fistula is formed, or that it is formed in the term of that part that it does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May you know the time for piercing the aphasias, and then it is when they are properly cured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is cured when there is a cessation of pain and a diminution of fever, and a decrease of pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the aphasias, and the other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And since you know the piercing is done in the proper place, far from the aphasias, and far removed from the cure of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the piercing should be done at a certain time, whether it is far from the head or the body, if the aphasias are in the joints of the members or in the feet, and in the places that are not reflections; because in those that are reflections, use the piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	May you know that when the aphasias are in carnous places, then pierce them within proper maturation of the matter in them according to completion of digestion; for if you pierce those before water, it is prolonged the course of the pus from the part and a strong corruption occurs on the lips of that part and the depth of that part.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May the piercing of the hernias be made according to the length of the flesh or of the body, depending on necessity, or according to the part where the member is indignant.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you administer a small piercing, in the hernias make a large and wide or several cuts according to the variation of the size of the hernias.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in the hernias where it is necessary to cut and burn, when you do so, use a knife and make a cut in terms that it has already stopped, as if it were done in pairs of cuts and bumps.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are cut on the section having three angles; and of those that are cut in the shape of a leaf, in the hernias of the arms.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those where the round or lunar section is administered, and similar to them.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May he who has lions' hernias be pierced with a shallow piercing, or a flat one only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the hernia is large and has already collected some dirt, pierce it and do not cauterize it in that moment; take out a part of it, and on the next day take out another part, and take out more, according to the gradient until you have removed all of it.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And mainly if the patient is a man of valor, or a woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit that moves the pus is resolved to escape from the hernia, and the hernia hurts the patient heavily, and you close it up.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Keep this chapter with great care, and when you pierce these hernias, remember not to cause any disease; but if the hernia is large, and the cuts of the piercing are deep, then remember that you stop the flow in some place where it can join together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a part of the hernia is cut off or broken in half, then remember to gather it with old cloth or a piece of drape, so that when you have applied heat or sharp tools, there is moisture; and strengthen it after three days, and treat what remains with water until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If blood flows during the operation, then you administer warm water and vinegar in which a piece of cloth is soaked, and place it over the area of bleeding.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, remember to administer medicine and powder that I have recommended in many places of this book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is wintertime, and the place of the hernia is a place of cold nerves, then remember to dip the powder in wine or oil, and place it on the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, and the areas are fleshy, then remember to place powder in water or oil, or in wine or oil, and all of this should be applied after three days, as we have said, and when you open the hernia and stop the flow of blood and administer its treatment with water until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And finally is the water that is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of hernias in general; but each hernia has its own way of being cured, as we have already said, and each chapter will speak about the cure of a specific type of hernia.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter L.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of hernias that come in the head of the patient.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the head, there are small hernias, and they contain membranes that are part of them; and the types of hernias that are in the head.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of those is the pus, and of those contains moisture resembling lemon juice.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain moisture resembling milk, and similar to them; and of those that are hard, and dry.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those that do not cause pain, you should not fear causing trouble for the body.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you apply them with an instrument that is called an entomes, so that you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Because if the water contained is moisture, then cut them with a section according to length, with a shallow section according to this shape:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And start in the section of line B within the line G; therefore, when you remove the moisture, scrape that part where the moisture was contained, and do not leave any trace of it, because some residue remains if you do not.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And dip it in Egyptian ointment, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with the pus and leave it for another day, because with water you remove all that is on the skin's surface.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And repeat on that piece of cloth with Egyptian ointment twice and third time if you feel it necessary to do so, within the next day, in order that you are sure that there is no residue left of that film; then treat the pus with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the hernia contains fatty nodules, then you cut them according to this shape:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	With a round section, and get two knuckles between the two sides of the section; and cut all of it, and with your strength try to remove the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your operation causes trouble, then first ask me for help.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	In the hernia that is lapified, and of the treatment according to what you have said; section over the lapified hernia is light pus, because it is a little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times these hernias are the same in men and women who have little moisture; and because they can cut them with a sharp knife on the top of the patient's head, but if you press hard, it will make a loud noise and hurt the patient.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	May the other hernias be discussed in another chapter, because they do not belong to this book; and all types of hernias that come on children's heads, and how to cut them, because their section is shallow.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And do not pierce those hernias with the first hole made low; in order that the body is relieved from the pus by the second hole that you make low.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat them with water until they are healed.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	And these hernias can occur in the neck, and on the shoulders, and on the arms; and some times they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and some of them are born there; and all types of scrofulas are treated in the same way as we have recommended for nodules and hernias on the head.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The types of these scrofulas are pustules, because some of them are hard, and some contain moisture; and the malicious ones that do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	And in the color of water that is evident, which corresponds to the color of the hernia cord, and it is not attached to any nerves or blood vessels, and it does not cause pain, then cut it with a shallow section from top to bottom on either side of the line G; then scrape that piece of cloth with scissored knuckles twice, if necessary; and if you have them, use two knuckles.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve should not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the scalpel should not be hot, that it does not hurt you with your hand while cutting, or that it annoys the patient, and you do not cut where it is not necessary; for if you cut a vein or an artery and stop your operation from continuing, pause in the plague of three-fold vinegar or other powders which flow blood, and then take off the wound, and leave that within which the acuteness of the pustule is soothed and the skin is softened and begins to rot.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the pus is cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation where you have not finished it yet.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then ask him if there is any cause of the other little scrofula, then cut them and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the great scrofula, cover that you do not cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	In advance, cover that you do not cut it and let that which falls down by itself if it is no harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with a wet cotton wool which you have already dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut the whole scrofula, then cover that you adjust the two lips of the wound and leave it for a moment so that there is no excess pus.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	More if you think that there is excess pus because of the size of the scrofula, then cut the root of it, and then wash it and apply ointment.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those scrofulas that contain moisture, pierce that with a superficial puncture here where you see the place of maturation of it, and pause the puncture so that the pus from the body comes out, then let it dry as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer the puncture, with ointment and poultice as to those, so that it corrodes what is new of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	Then when you see that the wound has been cleaned, then you cure it with ointment made from meat, so that it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter. LXXII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the section of the scrofula of the accident from a guolayro.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They said that this section in the epidemic is not seen by anyone on our land that it has been done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	More in men there are differences, then the extract of the epidemic is avoided by water, which does not quickly heal all because all veins and the main one of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	More in those who have pustules on the lips or on two ears, when the malady is not in the mouth, then avoid the section of the epidemic to escape the ruin that is made by puncture.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then when we want to cut water, let us make the section of the epidemic with three circles of the epidemic, or four to a small section by its width between two circles for quantity, so that the section is made in the skin, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for cutting, because it lacks meat and the vessels of blood from it are easily cut.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is a little bit, then let him extend the guolayro with nine inches, and then cut that cord so that it reaches the duct, more avoid the vessels of blood if they do not cut anything of a cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then administer the second cinch as we have recalled; and it is signified on the section of the duct with the flame, which is of that eye that does not hurt him but stops it.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for a while.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then when the hour is renewed in which the puncture is painful, add two lips to the cord of the wound, and cut that one alone, it is cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then administer medicines that make the flesh heal quickly so that it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis said that the summary of the sermon we have recalled, exposition is not but to see that some of these scrofulas have already come out by themselves, and the patient has come within death, and his life-string is cut, and some will cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes through that place for a little breathing, and he is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by water I command that the wound be left open so that the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil of it is for three days; and then I command to do so with the wound, and heal that which has been healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And that which I have seen in my own eyes, is that a servant brings a knife and cuts it into the guolayro and cuts a little of the cana of the lung, and I was called to the cure of it, and I heard the roar of the sick man, and I discovered the wound and stopped the blood which was flowing from it.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then you confessed that she had not cut a vein or a nerve, and the wind of the wound came out, and I healed that which was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And did not happen to the servant if he did not break his teeth, and then some days later returned to the improvement of his dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Then say you that in the section of the epidemic there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter. XLI.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section of the scrofula which occurs in the guolayro outside, and it is called a hernia from the guolayro.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This scrofula named a hernia of the guolayro is a great second scrofula according to the color of the body, and it is more in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	It has two ways because it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one does not heal.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is according to two ways, and one is similar to green knots, and another way is similar to scrofula which is done by knotting an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not say that it is done on purpose because it seems like a small thing.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then you put that and investigate that with the said thing, and if you find it similar to a green knot, and not cut it from any vein, then cut that there where the knot is, and extract it with water which counts it from the peel and bursecle; and otherwise, then examine all his being, and then heal the place with water which heals quickly so that it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter. XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of knots there are many kinds, and I have already said all the kinds of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you remind me that it is difficult to make the difference between a knot and an exit because of its shape.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Then you say that it is the quality of a fever and pain which is intense within so that the pus of the wound is dried up because the heat of the pus is not cooled down, and that is complete corruption which stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	More a knot is not quality or fever or pain, and it counts the skin over it, and the lion which is white inside.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is with a knot and is done by puncture, which is more or less, and it is according to two kinds because it is either grass-like and contains moisture, and the colors of the moisture are different, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And so, when you come to the cure of joints, which is called the infiltrations, ask at the beginning for the instrument that is called the introducer, according to whether its form will be in the chapter that is closest to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the way to inquire about blisters and all joints, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place that you wet with your finger until it hurts; then you will move your fingers a little by a little, so that you know that the instrument has already penetrated the joint.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then return your hand according to the measure of the size of the blister, and take out the introducer and consider whether it is sitting in the wound.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current moisture has been forgotten, of any color it is, then you shall cut it on the superficial section according to what I have said in the other blisters.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture in the trace of the introducer, then you know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	Then dry it on top of the section without a shape of a crust according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus as I have taught you, and hold it with your knuckles, and wipe the joint of all parts easily, and save the pelle or sack, if you can, on top of it, and extract that fluid to the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	Maybe if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that fluid, and you will see small drops on top of it, and then you shall extract them in pieces so that it does not rupture for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If, however, it ruptures for any reason, little or too much, the node returns according to what I have said.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish that it does not rupture for any small part, then make the whole area of some corrosive and sharp powders, and strengthen the area, and place it on that blister that sits, and cure that with another cure within that is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then you shall cut the two lips of it and cure that with the fluid that enters.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	Maybe if it is pulsatile blood coming out to the opposite side, or not-pulsatile, then you shall cover and bandage the area with three layers of wool that are acrid and leave it there for two days or three within which the wound can heal and the blister can be removed from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter. XLVII
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are three species of introducers; one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introducer is:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium introducer is:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small introducer is:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	If it is made of iron, of lead, and of sharp ends that are properly trimmed, so that the instrument enters into blisters.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the instruments, and they are named only by their shapes; one of them is called biridi.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	Of three species, because one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large instrument, shape of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium instrument, shape of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small instrument, shape of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient that they are made for blisters and sores and fistulas and boils in order that they may enter those of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are round, large and sharp, with needles sewed on them, and they are made of lemon resin, or of iron or silver; and the thousands are made when they are made of lemon resin.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the instruments are made of black plums, which it is convenient that they be opened for those fistulas in the concavity of which they reflect themselves to their own levitation, to those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	Of three species; because one is long, and another is medium, and another is short; according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the narrowness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the large instrument of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the medium instrument of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Shape of the small instrument of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the introducers are of different species; because one is simple, having only a single curve, and there are three species of them: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they are instruments with sharp ends, and there are three species of them.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And these introducers have two curves, and there are three species of them.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And these instruments have three curves, and they are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of them are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of the simple large introducer, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of the simple medium introducer:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of the simple small introducer, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of the sharp-ended large introducer, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of the sharp-ended medium introducer, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of the sharp-ended small introducer, shape of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of the large introducer with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of the medium introducer with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of the small introducer with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of the large introducer with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of the medium introducer with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of the small introducer with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the shapes of the scalpel with which nodes and blisters are cut and scraped; they are of three species, because one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of the large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the others are not-sharp, and they are not stopped in such a way, but so that it is quickly made in the incision of blood or nerves, and because of this it heals the patient and relaxes the anxiety of the incision of a vein or nerve, and for this reason it heals the blister and brings peace.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of the cauterizers, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, thus: with wands.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of the large cauterizer:
Forma de magda migier:	The shape of the medium cauterizer:
Forma de magda pauc:	The shape of the small cauterizer:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	If it is made of iron, and seems like fire to it, so that it makes alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the extreme part of punctured with hidden salt and in that course within and without, if you wish, thus: with veils.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the spices, which are mixed between the two layers to make the piercing of blisters and not feel the bad flavors; they are of three species: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of the ventilators with which the flow of air is stopped, and they are of three species; large, medium, and small; shape of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	If it is made of lemon resin, round in shape with some length, and it is subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these species of ventilators should be large, medium, and small; so that by their stopping the flow of air in need, and then when you first try them, they are not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to stop the air in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy places, such as those on the arms and legs, and those under clothes, and similar ones; seemingly to their own flesh's.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some needles are made of those instruments, smaller in size, resembling scalpel blades according to this form; for which the cut is done when made by phlebotomy, or by incising a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some needles are round according to this shape:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xliii.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the care of male breasts, which are assembled from female breasts.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some breasts become inflamed in the breasts of certain men when they are covered with hair and then Inflated breasts and assembled from female breasts, and Roman aposto-suces, far away.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who eat this, it is necessary that you cut them into a lunar section according to this form, from the line B to the line G, and then remove all the crudity, and then fill in the plague with medicated ointment, and then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and heal the inner part that should be san-
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to the splits and is softened by its size, then let it be cut in two pieces on top of each other, in two sections resembling a lunar shape, each of which is contained in the other according to this form from line B to line G. And then remove the crudity, and then cut the string that connects between the two lips of the wound, and stop the bleeding, and administer what has been said about the suture and the powders, there being necessary in the cure within that it should be healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not please the cutting of what has been said that it is necessary to cut by the inquietude of the patient, and for the flow of blood, then let it be filled with a cure of oil submerged in a corrosive solution and leave that inner part which is corroded by it to turn gray, and then heal that inner part that should be healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter.xliv.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of pustules that come from the inside out.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These pustules that come from the inside out are of the species of scrofulas and dure, which have a skin covered with a hair.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture are cut according to this lunar section: from line G to line B. And when it is all emptied out there being no more moisture in the pustule, then you remove the crust with a knife and leave the inner part open for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Then let the crust remain and be healed by the oil that is convenient to it, within that it should be healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the pustule of the joints is, and of the scrofulas, then you divide them above that inner part as has been said in the section about scrofulas on all sides.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the plague is extended in a way that it causes the decay of the flesh, then administer to it the cauterization according to what has been said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter.xlix.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the perforation of pustules that happens through an artery or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured, and the knot is consolidated which is above it, then motes of pustules appear that are accumulated at the root of the body; and when you hear a sound from them by touching them with your fingers, you feel a strid-ing sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And the one that is through a vein is round towards the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section on this pustule is a mistake, and mostly in those that are from the inner sides of the arms, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is great, so that its cure with iron is avoided, and that which is at the extremities or the top, is to be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But above that which is caused by the inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut it in half; and then open the section to the needle, and release the tourniquet within that it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then place the needle on that one and let it enter into the other, and tighten the artery with a double knot in two places; which causes you to lose your sight in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then punch the place between the two threads with a spike within that it causes the entire pain to go away, and let the pustule be dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer a cure that generates poison within that it causes the threads to fall; and then heal that with oil convenient for the healing of water within that it should be healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is a pustule from the section of a vein, then let you have on your hand what you can reach to the pustule with your thread, and then let the needle enter; and make a double knot in that place where you have taken the thread from the other one, and then tighten the pustule with the two threads according to what I have said before about the section of the thread of the two parts at the extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear to break the thread, then let you place the needle on the tip of the thread before cutting it, and strengthen the threads with four knots.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the pustule in its place within that when it is wet, then cut off the excess of the knot, and leave that which is under it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place over it the pulse that you have submerged in water and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with water and oil within that it should be healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the pustule that happens from the twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	As has been said before, when a pustule happens through an artery or a vein, and seems to happen due to excessive work or similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is most likely in the places of the helpers or the trunk, or in any place where joints are massaged.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And this pustule is hard, and it resembles the color of the other body, and when it is hot with its temperature, you feel a kind of stupor in it.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And this pustule is not accumulated at the root of the body, and for this reason the knot is left behind, and it is most likely to be found in advance or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So that from those that are in the joints, it does not seem to be iron-bound, because it is very likely to be broken by force.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But the one that is at the top of the head or the forehead is left with a knot.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small pustule, then you cut it between the fingers and cut off its roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is big, then you suspend it with a needle, and cut off that one, and then stop up that one; and heal that inner part that should be healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter L.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the perforation of a pustule that happens from the mouth and reaches to the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	There are certain kinds of mold-like fungi that resemble the hair and are found in the insides of the belly and other parts of the body; their roots are thin and their heads are thick; and those fungi are among those that are small, and they grow larger.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	I have already seen one, and in its belly there were two things that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between those that were white, with very thin roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already those lips were turned inward and were bleeding, and moisture ran from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then I turned them upside down and tied them in eight places with twelve knots. and the other six.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation for cutting them is that you consider first if the hunchback is moist, and the color of the skin is white, moist, with subtle furrows; then do the incision with a sharp knife, and are in your presence cauterize them with fire, because drops of blood can be expelled by cutting; and if you get blood, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the hunchback is a little bit scared and frightened, do not cut it with iron; but rather take the lead from a recent plaster, and strengthen it on that skin, the way that we have told; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the tightness of the lead wire; so, do not continue to strengthen the lead as it will be cut and fall by itself after three labors.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the lead is thick skin, there is no cause for fear and anxiety in cutting it, and more so in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But perhaps you could cut most of it off, and then cauterize it so that it does not come back.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then treat it there so that the plague is cured.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be sure to do not cut lead that has a dark color, little feeling, and less regard; for such is absolute cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I came back to my memory of the craniocerebral injury.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the Cure of Eminence in the Umbilicus.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The eminence of the umbilical is caused by some things; or by tears in the cord that hangs over the belly, and has a bag or intestine depending on it according to whether it ruptures in front or behind; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery according to whether it comes from the front or back; or by constriction of wind in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to tears in the cord and depending on the bag of intestine, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the body; and it has seven pains, and appears in different places.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the escape of the intestine, then the place where this happens to you is that which we have described, and very different from the other; and when you press it with your fingers, it is hidden, and returns strongly to its place, and there is a great noise as if it were broken and the sound is more violent.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to moisture, then it is sharp and does not remain hidden when you press your hand on it, nor is it constrained or broken.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then these signs appear: the swelling becomes black and declines towards the lower part.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to flesh, then the swelling is heavy, thick, and hard; and it remains depending on its quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to constriction of wind, then the touch of it is sharp.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider first if the eminence of the umbilical is due to blood flowing from an artery or vein, or due to constriction of wind; then keep back from cutting it, because in this there is fear and danger as it has been taught to you in the chapter where it has been said about swelling due to arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the eminence of the umbilical is due to the intestine or the bag, then command the hunchback to hold his belly button, and let it stand extended; and go around the whole of the umbilical, and order him to turn his belly towards your feet, and tie a strong knot in the middle part with a rope or leather, and cut off most of the swelling with a sharp knife, and cut off the bottom part of the swelling on both sides. Then turn the hunchback upside down and tie him securely; and cut off the tail of the swelling while he is hanging upside down.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then cut off the middle of the swelling that is extended over the navel and insert your finger into the opening; and if you do not find any intestine there, then tear it from within the belly with your hand.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have caught the bag, then take it with a sharp knife; and cut off any excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is opposite to your artery or vein, then go around that, and return to your operation; and take two needles, and put them in those two strings firmly, and insert the needles into the swelling in the same way as you have cut it; and tie the swelling tightly with a knot on both sides of the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to do so, then take away the needles and leave the place; so that the flesh may spread out and fall of itself; or cut it off when it is thin, and cure it with water that has been boiled.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the eminence of the umbilical is due to flesh or moisture, then you have cut off the swelling as we have said, and destroy blood or moisture that is in it; and cure it with water that has been boiled.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter III.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Cure of Craniocerebral Injury.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have said, in the division, of the kind of cranium and how to cure it with medicines, and that it is dangerous to cure it with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that a craniocerebral injury is generated in the greatest care for its cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And they said that some small craniums are in the place where the eradication of it is possible, so as to remove all of it, and mainly when it is just beginning.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But if it is old and large, do not approach it, because you will not be able to heal it with any medicine nor have I seen anything like it, nor has it come to water.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is as we have said, that you go ahead and leave the hunchback and make him drink black cholera from time to time, and cure him if he becomes constipated in a very obvious way.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the hunchback with a preparation in which he is located for the operation, and prophesy in the trancel of those who are called to him; then go around all parts with the scythe so that it does not disturb any cause of his skin.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Then let the blood run out of it, and do not wash away the body; express the places, and rinse with water the whole body or the instrument with which you have been able to.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you have a contrary nature of large blood flowing from an artery or vein, then cauterize that within which the flow of blood has ceased, and cure it with another treatment while it is still healing.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter IV.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the Cure of Hydropic.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already described, in the division, of the kinds of hydropic water and the signs of each kind, and how to cure it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the species of algae, and it does not approach the species of tympanists or the species of hyposarcous water, because water is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already cured this species of hyposarcous water with medicines and do not continue your medication, then consider, for if the hunchback has already been cured or is affected by another hydropic illness, similar to that of coughs or abdominal pain; then be sure to do not cure it with iron, because there is danger about it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If the patient's abdomen is of exuberant virtue, and there is only ydropici there, not child nor old, then the way to operate on him is that you raise his abdomen between your hands, and the minister squeeze his stomach with his hand, pushing water out of the opening of the penis, and then place a thorn in this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be two-pointed in length, of acute point at the tip with a thorn; however, it must be made small by little and little, so that during the operation he does not enter into the abdomen, and so that his hand is not cut.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And if the generation of ydropici is from the intestines, because when you are going to make the incision at the navel for three times the distance between the openings, in the right side over the penis:
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of ydropici is from the abdomen, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel for three times the distance between the openings:
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation is from the hernia, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not make your incision over the ribcage where you want to operate, so that the excess fluid does not run into that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the instrument all the way through, and then insert it into that incision, and raise your hand with the thorn between the line and the syringe, and you squeeze that out; and if the quantity is one finger or less.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the syringe into the place where the thorn comes out, and that is a place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it, and insert an instrument which has this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	is made of thin silver, or of brass or of ivory, which has in the end a small hole, and on the sides three holes: two from one opening and one from the other; and it is sharp at the tip as a feather, so that sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it is a ring, because when the instrument comes out into water, then that momentary amount must be evacuated, because if you evacuate less than that, then to a great degree your patient will suffer from the resolution of his animal spirit, or five things will happen which are approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	However, if you evacuate that second amount of the virtue of the water and according to what your dispositions are about the virtue of the pulse of the patient and the goodness of his hands:
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and keep the water which causes this because it is as much kept by the knot as the hole that is over the syringe from which it comes out, and tell me how you make this come out according to this way:
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument to the other day if your patient will take water, and extract from the water a small amount, and pour it over the hand with care, and keep away from making mistakes until the water is used up completely.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are afraid of the patient, and pour out a large quantity of water, then do not worry about it sinking in the sand, and moving it with soap in the bath, and waiting for a long time; and be careful that it is healed with drying medicines.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the intestines and the abdomen are extracted from the water according to what I have told you before.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LVI.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the treatment of children who are born with the places of urine not piercing.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children are born from their mother's belly and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it is a straight hole or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So then cut with piercing as soon as they are born with a small sharp knife according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then tie one of the small copper nails in the hole and bind it with string for three days or for four months:
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate, let them stand up and urinate; and then return them.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the copper, it is possible that the urine which goes on its way should not stay in this lock.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But the hole of the child who was born with a straight needle is to be treated with a copper nail, as we have said, for several days until it grows larger.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the hole is not in its place, then cut it as we have said, for some days until it grows larger. For if this hole is straight and narrow, then the sperm cannot come to the mother according to its shape, and it is a disease that does not last long.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the way to operate on him is that the patient be laid on his back, and then raise the head of the penis with your left hand for its extraction, and cut the tip of it with a sharp scalpel, or cut some from one side, so that the top of the penis looks like the hole, and the hole falls into its place according to what is covered.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation of the flow of blood, for as much water comes out; and stop it with water that stops the bleeding, and heal the wound within.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the treatment of the foreskin on the head of the penis and its corruption, darkness, and black color and adhesion of the foreskin to the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	This condition occurs in the foreskin on the head of the penis and is a thick spot of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of this there are two types: a malignant and a non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not-malignant, then suspend with a small amount of oil and stop it up completely; and then put it under a bandage wet with Egyptian ointment; and then wash it with soap every day until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the condition is malignant, its color is black, then prepare a cauldron for the operation and cut it, as well as its roots.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the condition is in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and one part of it is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then prepare to cut off this foreskin, for at the beginning it may be soft; and when you cut that off, do not worry about whether it has been cut or not.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	This condition also occurs in the genitals and in the foreskin and its corruption, so prepare to cut off all that is already blackened and is beginning to corrode or has already been corrupted; and then line it up with water, which is mixed with flour from a bread cracker, and three times boiled, and sieved.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then heal that with other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is a flow of blood, then prepare to administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Because the healing of an old wound is at two places together, so it is with a flow of blood and a plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the penis is corrupted and completely destroyed at that moment, then prepare to insert a copper tube into its meat so that the urine passes through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those who have a foreskin, and all around it; and when adhesion occurs because of plague or pus) then extract with a sharp scalpel so that its tissue is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to cut them neatly, then cover that you cut any cause of the head of the penis and the prepuce, and so is when it is thin, very weak is pierced by its subtlety slightly.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a dry hand so that it does not stick to anything else.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then it is cleansed with vinegar and salt, where it has hardened.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the Purification of Children and on the Cure for Water That Occurs in Circumcised Individuals.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not sufficient for continence; it is also not useful if we do not use our will and if the people for whom it is done cannot carry out this operation easily, we should prefer another solution that does not endanger them, since their salvation is more important.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the young people do not circumcise themselves in any of the free countries, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experiment that most artisans and barbers use circumcision and purification with the scalpel and the scissor; and they use the ligature with fidelity and incision with the ungul.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have seen all these methods; and I find no better purification than with the scalpel, with the ligature that is used in the purification with the ungul, because the thread of the prepuce goes away from above, since it is tied to two tunics, and the ring remains above, and it is easily forced into another incision, and certainly causes pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the purification that is done with the alpece, which is done with a scalpel and is done digitally, of which the barbers use, it is not secure to cut off the end of the male member, because it easily enters into its tunnel.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the ungul, very carefully, you may damage or corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the thread of the child is short by nature, and it has not been seen in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this one.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But of the purification that is done with a scalpel and a ligature that is used, the goodness, experiment shows me that, because the sharpness of the scalpel is so sharp that it is like the sharpness that is left; and therefore, when you press your hand in proportion to two sharpnesses, and then cut according to a comparison at a time; and it is made by compression of the ligature on the shape containing the thread of the penis from all sides, and with which there is no mistake for all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you hold the child upright, if it is one of those who understand a little, so as not to have to put your hand on the ungul at all, and let it go inside the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then let him rejoice in all this method that is possible for you, so as not to receive his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then let him stand between your legs, prepared to cut, and not be standing; and hide the scissors in your hand or on the other foot, so that the child does not see those or any of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then put your hand on the penis of the child and blow into the thread, and pull it in until it is out of the head of the penis, then purify him from the filth that has accumulated there.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then tie the thread that is doubled up, and then bind a small ligature again, then cut off between two ligatures, and place this one with good retention, and cut between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then lift up the thread slightly and cut off the head of the penis; and then let it go a little at a time, because it is better to do so; and then pour a little dust on it and over the dust place a bit of honey with rose water that has been freshly cooked, and leave him until the next day; and then cure him with purification until he is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the scalpel for purification, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the two extremities are not sharp and the other two are, so that there is no gap in the claw, and the length of the two sharpnesses is like the length of two handles joined together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in purification is that it easily escapes the thread completely, or part of it; so you should cut it off.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then extend that from your hour with your ungul in front of the place where the thread is attached, and cut it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your ungul, then take it out with a needle and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if they have passed three days, and leave that the penis is swollen up from outside the place where the thread is attached, then let him go inside that it is released with caution, and extract it with ease, and cut it according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Then keep the head of the penis because it will not be good for him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then cure that child with water, so that the plague of the dusts is removed from him, which we have mentioned in the treatise of the dusts.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is cut from the thread according to measure, and it is cut from above; then water does not enter into him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But also cure that child with water, which we have said is good for healing.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the Cure of Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to fear or cold, or due to poison or food, and similar to those we have mentioned in the methods of purification in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and the bladder is retened due to fear, which has already reached the neck of the bladder, then let the patient lie on his back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of the patient on his two legs and stretch his abdomen above his knees as much as it is possible; then let him strain himself.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then let the neck of the bladder be constricted with straining from behind, so that the urine is completely discharged.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the urine is not dissolved with water which we have said is effective on the patient, then let instruments be prepared to extract it, of which this is the shape: It should be of silver and very thin, so that the tube of a pen be like it in shape, and the canal of an goose feather be like it at its end; and the canula should be thin.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of introducing the urine into the instrument is that you tie the ligature in a loop and hold it in the end of the tube by a good knot; then introduce the extremities of the ligature into the hole of the ring, and cut with scissors if there is any superfluous thread in the tube, but first introduce it into the pipe with force. E aprop fa le siringuam sub la pelle del malacot e lahoras se le furca per l’apertura del sed de la malauta e lo lagrima i solucita la urina en le furo o en le boder de la canula, e lahoras es liberta.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Then place the bladder over the back and the penis in the water with oil; and oil it with olive oil, and wash it off.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then introduce the syringe with ease into the opening of the penis, and double it up above; then push that down to where the bladder is; and if it reaches the empty cause, and does not reach further according to this order, but goes to the one in which the pain is felt, and no further according to this order, but stops at the edge.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the sack slowly by the small furrow, since urine makes the furrow wet.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then bring out that one with the help of a bladder and use a syringe to stop urine from flowing and use a syringe inside until the bladder is emptied and the patient also feels relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .lxxxx
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	About the quality of bladder emptying with a clyster and similar instruments that agree to water.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When a bladder ulcer or abscess develops, or there is an injury that affects the urine flow, and you want to distil water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clyster, and this is how to do it:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but on the outside it is silent, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that one there are three passages: two of a size and the third smaller.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a tight place, in which water is gathered and kept there depending on how much fluid is accumulated; when, however, some cause makes it flow out, let it be driven away, and when it is expelled far away, according to the clyster used, naphtha is applied to its folds from the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So then, when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clyster into the moisture, and drive away from it the water that is gathered in the folds; because moisture is driven into the cavity of the clyster.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clyster into the vein according to what we have described in the syringe; and then drive away the moisture with the water you force out, because that moisture goes back into the bladder and into the patient's leg.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of the subtle clyster for the bladder to be emptied, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	It is made of silver or lead, which has the shape of a small feather, and place a smooth cup inside it.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then prepare the bladder for emptying and pause in it the moisture you want to dry out in the bladder, and then place that one between two tightly bound sacks of wool, and heat up that moisture on fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the clyster into the vein.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand on top of the bladder with the moisture to be stretched downward, so that the patient does not notice that moisture has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	Maybe you do not have a bladder present, then take a rope and make a circle of it; and pierce that one completely around its whole circumference; and then insert the double sack tightly into those passages, so that, if you want to introduce moisture or medicines, you can pause them in that water that you want to deliver, and then pour out and urinate.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie that one onto the instrument and make it empty into the bladder, and express your hand inside until moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter .lxxx
De extraccio de peyra.	About extraction of pee.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the division of urine and its cure with medicines, and the difference between urine generated in the lungs and urine generated in the bladder, as well as the signs of each one.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have also mentioned the urine from which surgery is performed, and its section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The urine generated in the bladder itself is that which remains in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I have described that one with evident and concise explanation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So then I say that urine generated in the bladder mostly passes to children; and the signs of it are that the urine excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient's leg rubs against it, and sometimes it is seen as a stream; and at times it is seen as drops.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it cures the children of that bladder in about twelve years; but it is difficult to treat in old age.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	Maybe in young people it is half-cured by water because it belongs to them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And from that one, of which the urine is greater and treatment is more difficult; and if it is little, then it is opposite to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So then, when we come to the treatment of that bladder, cover at first the beginning of that bladder with a clyster, because that fold contains some veins; for that fold sometimes prevents the introduction of urine into the bladder due to the investigation of it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient' leg in the clyster and tighten it, and move it up or down sometimes; or let it jump from one place to another.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then insert the end of the clyster between your legs, and place the feet apart from each other so that the bladder is emptied at the ends;
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then turn it completely inside out.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So then, if you feel the urine in that space, stop for a moment with your section on top of it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if the urine does not pass from that space with your treatment, then stop and rub a little olive oil on your left side; if the patient is a child, then half of it goes in; and insert that one into his buttocks.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And turn over the urine until it stops from the side.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And turn that one little by little up to the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press that one with your hand on top of it, and expel it out to the sides after stopping it with your section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and order another minister to extend his genitals to the sides with his right hand, and to hold the cord that is left of the genitals, from the side where the section is performed.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the spit that is held in a place where this one has been cut; and here is the shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And then cut between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, but at the back of the left side; and make the section over the urine that comes out of it, and hold the cord that is on the right side of the genitals, and make the transverse section; so that the section outside is wide and smooth inside according to the amount of urine that comes out, not more, because the pressure of the cord in the middle of the genitals stops the flow of urine.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you know that there is no end to urine from which it comes; because the excretion of it makes it difficult by water.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And that urine is like a lion's roar and round, and its excretion is less.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So then, if it is the one from which it comes, adjust it to the cut.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not that one, then stop for a moment when you touch that one, or tighten it with a gentle gesture, and make the end of it wide enough; or insert the other end of the instrument from its curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	Maybe you cannot touch that one; then increase the pressure slightly, and if you see a flow of urine, cut it with vinegar that is three parts water.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	Maybe if the urine is more than one, at first you drive your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then cut it over that one; and then drive a small amount of water; and seemingly cut it if there are more than two drops.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the urine is very thick, then you do not know how to cut it with a large section, because it causes pain; or because the location does not allow you to cut it properly.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Once you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe juice and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that bandage soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rosin oil and rubbing water, so that it may fall off quickly.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then return the patient to their bed, and do not remove the bandage before the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when he has removed it, apply water and oil to the area, and treat with oil of rhubarb and oil of stinging nettle within three days that it may be healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If however there occurs a blister which is hot and painful, and if it resembles the appearance of the stone in the bladder, and if (for) it is known that it is a stone by its passing urine, then insert a small needle into the blister and extract the stone, since if it remains in the body it may cause the bladder to corrode and putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and in opposition to any sort of medicine, water that may bring about healing within.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during the hours of treatment, you have both cushions and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the pain is slight and is in the middle of the foot, and if it is stuck, and there is no urine passing, then heal it with water that I have recommended before you cut it open, since three times tried to cut it open has resulted in a section; and if you pour water on it, and if you push it with an iron needle quickly, this is the way:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	Of a triangular shape, sharp, stuck to the foot.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then pull firmly, and leave it at the foot of the bed so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the foot, piercing easily so that the piercer comes with the pain.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Then turn the piercer in your hand a little at a time in that small pain, and you will pierce the piercing of it from within so as not to pierce it on the other side, since the urine is soon absorbed.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then place your hand on that which is painful from the side of the foot, since it is twisted, and if it is not out, but urine passes, then the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Then if this treatment is not suited to you for any reason which prevents it from being used, then leave the pain, and another pain on top of it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then cut over the pain in that foot between two bandages.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then remove the bandage and rub the stone which is in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to leave the pain, but to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage on top, since when the bandage is removed, the pain leaves the body, and the heat returns to its place and hurts.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And with water you need to raise the bandage on top, or to return it to its place from which it was taken, and rub in this way when you have removed the bandage.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXVI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of the extraction of the stone from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Pain in women is rare.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Then if you have any of those pains, then the treatment is difficult, and three times tried is prohibited.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The first is that the strong woman should be cared for.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a good woman who reveals if she has eaten when she is a virgin, or if she is married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	And the third is that you do not have good women who know this skill, mostly the operation with your hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of section over pain in women is far from the place of the pain, so that you do not fear a large section, and in that it is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	Then if necessity compels you to it, then cover yourself with a good woman, and few are found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Then if you are deprived of that, then seek a good and subtle woman, or present an old woman who is good at this art, or a woman who in this art has a good beginning.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then present that, and order her to do all that you will send her by inquiry about the pain at the beginning; which is the cause that she regards if the woman is a virgin, then cover herself with her dress and desires the pain.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if she is taken, then remove that from her by inquiry, and then order her to inscribe on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	Then if she is not a virgin, then order the old woman to insert her dress in the cavity of the foot and rub it over the pain, since she places her left hand on the bladder, and rubs it with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if she is taken, then cover her with gentle care from the opening of the bladder to the side of the foot, and rub it gently until it reaches its end.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then inscribe on that position of the cavity above the heel at the end of the foot which touches and rubs it gently until it reaches its edge, and the saying from him is not taken back from the pain with a sharp knife in hand.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section is little at the beginning; and then insert a needle into that section, and if you feel the pain, then adjust the section according to the quantity which I know that the pain will stop.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the kinds of pain are many: for some is little and big, and sharp and dull, and long and round, and have thorns.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Then you know how many spices there are in it so that you can mean what you want on it.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to see a stone, then adjust the bitter spice in the third place, and return to your operation before the pain is out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Then prepare yourself with the instruments which he mentions in the extraction of pain in men, so that you are helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	Then if you want to see a stone, and you know that the expulsion of the stone is by means of oil which is applied to the cavity, then do not repeat it; leave the pain and do not extract the stone, for the bladder will die strongly.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Then when the sharpness of the pain has passed, then return to your operation before the pain is out.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXVI.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of section over hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia that is moist is only an addition of moisture to the skin, which is left with the membrane containing the four, and it is called the ciphac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some are in the proper pannicol which is natural preparation for the separation of the four, so that it may be different from another four, and it is the membrane of the gene between the ciphac. It has been said to be water, but it is not water.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is by means of the removal which happens to the genes, so that it is poured out at them, and some times it is caused by impact made on the genes.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture is without spots, for the color of it is either declining to yellow or bloody, or ropy, or black fermentative, or watery white, and this is the best water.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the roots from which this addition of water comes are these: for if it is in white cypress, as we have said, then the effusion is gradually declining a little towards length also with a cow's head figure, and appears the genitals, for the moisture contains that of all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper pannicle, then the effusion is gradually parted from the cow' s head and so one man estimates that it is another cow' s head.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the genitals and white cypress, then let him measure by degrees.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And as you wish to know the color of the moisture in the effusion that is gradually parted from the middle of the genitals, then judge from this that which emerges on the outside of it; and according to what comes out within it, judge from that which is within it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the cure of it by means of fire, then let us command the patient that he be poulticed if possible, and cover his body completely.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then let him be raised on both feet a little higher, and place some linen cloth under him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then place yourself on the left side of him, and command your minister to extend his staff to one of the two sides of the genitals and to the part of the miracle of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a knife and cut the genitals from top to bottom near the place of the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Then the section should be made according to a rectangle distance from the line that you should follow from the genitals, until it comes to white cypress all inclusive.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Then cut it out, and observe, and keep for yourself that you do not cut into it; and your cutting out from the middle, if it is the greater part, should be suspended to the cow' s head most commonly, and carefully examine the cutting out according to the quantity as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce the white cypress completely with a wide piercing, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the two parts of the section with your fingers, and extend the white cypress to its extremities; and do not touch the genitals all inclusive, and cut the white cypress in that way that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Then cut it with all its parts or in pieces, and mainly its middle part, for if you do not scrutinize carefully the cutting out of it, the water does not return safely.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	And if you prepare the cow' s head from that place outside of its genitals at the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the white cypress, return it inside, and then adjust the two parts of the genitals by suturing them together, and then treat those as well as other illnesses until they are healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you suspect the cow' s head is corrupted by some other illness, then let us know if any vessels are missing from what is suspended, and extract the cow' s head, and then treat that with the water that we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is gathered into two parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part according to what you have done on the other side; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then let us wash the wound and put it into linen immersed in oil or rose oil; and place another linen the which you have dipped in vinegar and oil, and spread that over the genitals and the miracle of the belly; and place folded linen cloth and powder on it, and tie this linen by two knots.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then let there be placed two linen cloth and be pressed by a carmine according to this shape; and let the extremities be tied with twine or wet wool, and be added to the stitching in the breeches of the trousers, and one extremity take from the buttocks between the other, and another extremity take at the part of the crotch, and two extremities over two pillows that are left and two extremities over two sides, and let all the stitching be adjusted in the breeches of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some hernias are treated by means of cauterization in place of section to make it; and this is because you take cauterization with a sharp knife and cut into the genitals, and ignite according to what we have counted. Then let us take cauterization according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is arranged in the Greek letter shape.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce the white cypress completely, and let it be ignited until all moisture is exhausted.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the white cypress with your fingers, and cut it with your fingers, and cut it by means of ignited cauterization; and cut it according to what is possible for you until you remove all of it; and keep away from fire that the cauterization does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from the flow of blood than the operation by section; and better than operation by section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	And if, at the hour of section or cauterization, or at the hour of blood flow, you feel opposition, then let us know that you cure any opposition by means of that cure which is said to be used for it.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	And if the patient is a little bit afraid, and does not hope for the second operation because of its horror, then let us administer piercing according to what I have said here; and it is when it is certain that the hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then let the patient lie on a high table, and pierce the effusion in the lower part of it with a wide piercing, and pause the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let that opening be broad so that all the water comes out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place the cow' s head on the part where the pain is felt and leave it there for a while so that the water comes out completely.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat that part where the illness has been healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	And if opposition is made to the effusion of water at that hour when you pierce: and if it is not done by this means that the white pannicle in the orifice of the disease causes opposition and prevents the entrance of water, then let us know that you introduce into the illness a small or instrument with which to extract the water from the drops; or adjust in the contrition of the disease a tiny one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns and is collected in a vessel over a period of time or after certain events; and when it is added to, then pierce it according to that method which we have said; for the patient will experience its days then.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On Section on Hernial and Treatment of It.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section on this hernia is feared to become worse in the most important cases; therefore, I see the dismissal of it and being saved by the better one.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation when you were young and the specific properties of effusions.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it is said that the effusion rises in the parts where the genitals are joined and is caused by certain causes: either because of acute excess of fluid or because of impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the abcess according to the color of the body, and does not turn red in pain, and it is a hard abcess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And a very heavy abcess is the one with a dark color, which is not hot to touch.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some swellings are caused by the inflammation of the arteries, and by the swelling of certain veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	May be that which is caused by the swelling of the arteries is recognized when we squeeze it with our fingers, and does not hurt when touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	And that which is caused by the swelling of a vein does not disappear when touched with our fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that this kind of wound be cured by incising the genitals and opening the veins, drawing out the white puss, freeing the vessels from their attachments, cutting off the suspensions, and removing them; cut off all parts of the genitalia.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if the flesh is already hardened on the injured part, remove the puss and cut off that part.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion for some reason of the puss, or between the vessels, then remove all such adhesions and cut them out with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	May be if there is birth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind, then cut off all that flesh and remove the puss from it as well, as I have said before.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then, when your operation is finished, fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and cover it with a wet dressing; and apply another cure as soon as possible until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of hernia, which is with vinegar.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an abcess wrapped in a wrapper resembling the softening of the testes, and it makes difficult exercise and walking on the patient's back.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, fear is felt for the cause of which there is a recollection.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it should be remembered that I have spoken above about operation.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should place the patient on a high table; and fasten the suspensions of the testes to the hips with cords; and tighten those other servants that you have, and spread them out vigorously.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And cut through the vein with a sharp knife in a transverse direction across the vessels where they are visible.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then remove all parts as I have said above in the removal of arterial blood vessels which are in the temple.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then fix one of these needles in such a way that the thread is doubled, and tie it at the first place where the wound occurs, and tie another at the back end.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And cut those in the middle place by a transverse incision according to the length of the body, and remove what is corrupted and putrid.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wounds with a different cure from those which you want to heal, in order that they may not become infected by another cause; for it is not good to have them infected.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	May be if all the veins are cut, then the testes are removed or cut off from them by means of the incision of the veins, so that they lack nourishment because of the cutting of the veins, and wither away; or cut off so that there is no reproduction to them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXVI.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the treatment of inguinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The arrival of this hernia is by means of an incision which is in the navel extended over the belly from one side to the other, so that the intestines escape through it; and when they break out at either end, they pass into one of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This break is either from the navel or from the exit; and these two things occur for various reasons: either by impact, or by noise, or by movement, or by a sudden elevation of some kind, or by resemblance.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this is that it occurs little by little in the course of time, and not suddenly; and it is an abcess inside the navel because it compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is that it occurs when there is an incision in the navel; for at the beginning there is a violent pain suddenly; and it is an abcess with various appearances near the navel, and the body bends itself away from the navel.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some swellings are caused by the navel rope being pulled out; this is called inguinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some swellings are caused by the navel rope being pulled out; and some become tight within the navel, and cause great pain, especially when it is pressed upon.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these kinds of illnesses, fear should be felt because it may cause pain.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of operation for this illness is that you should return the navel rope to its cavity if it comes out; and place your hand under his belly, and raise the feet high.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tie the rope which binds the testes to its ends, and cut it all over longwise; and place two sharp knives on either side of the incision as you would like to cut open the navel.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If the incision according to the quantity which is possible for you, that the puss of the hernia should come out.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove all the puss that is left from the binding of the testes; and cut off the white, hard part of the navel.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you should cut off the testicles, and cut away the white navel between them; and cut off all adhesions which are on the back of the navel.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then tie the testicles to their ends and stretch them out; and extend the white navel in its place with the help of a servant, and raise the testes on either side of the incision; and command the servant that he should hold them steady while you remove all adhesions which are behind.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And try to find out if there is any cause of the navel being wrapped in the hard navel.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	May be that you do not understand it; then cut off that navel from below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle that is strong and sharp, cut through the navel in the middle between the testes, and cut off what is left from the navel; and tie those two ends together tightly with four threads, and twist them several times round each other; and tie them to something hard above; and cut off all those threads one by one.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the threads tightly together with a strong thread and tie them; and fasten those to something hard on either side of the navel, in order that they may not become infected by any cause because of which an abcess may form.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then make another strong thread according to the length of the first one, long enough to reach; and then tie those two threads tightly together at a distance from the navel which is equal to half the size of the navel itself; and cut off all that part.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And let one of you go to the back of the testicles and make a section so that blood will flow out, as we have said before in what we have spoken about.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And let one of you bring a soaked wool and put it on the wound; then apply the thread that we have mentioned (and some white threads are cauterized, which we said should be cut from the wound to prevent bleeding, because such threads might occur) and let the thread inside so that it falls in itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	May the bedding be delayed, then water is boiled and placed over it, and let it be placed on that area so that it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And let one of you treat the wound with the other treatment for wounds before healing.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	About Hernias with Wind.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, there is nothing that has been cooked for the treatment of it as well as fire.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it should be done as we have mentioned in the hernia that is with wind; which is to say that you take the vessels and place them over the area gently; and let them dry in their place while applying water to the apoplexium gently, so that the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound as we have said, so that it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About the dropy that happens in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some break in the ankles as we have said, and let go of the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not seek any cause of hernias at the pubis; and if you do, it is little; and return to it in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	May the time be extended with it, then a small crack occurs in the hernia through which the intestine is pushed into the hernia; and such occurs because the hernia is stretched, and let go of the place; and it becomes soft and there is an apoplexium, and let go of it.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is as follows, so that it is preceded by the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some are treated with fire according to this way: and that is when the patient's buttocks rest on your lap, and let go of the place where the apoplexium breaks out with a section according to the amount of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And tighten the white hernia that is under the testicles so that it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And let one of you put your hand on the prominent place of the navel, and let another put his hand on your belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And let one of you cut the two prominent places at the end of the hernia on the navel, and tighten one to the other with a stitch.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And let go of the end of the hernia thread, and do not cut it from the navel, nor do you extend the string, nor any other cause as we have said in the treatment of an enterstinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And let that be treated with the treatment of wounds, and when you cut the threads, clean it and restore the wound before it is healed; because the hernia contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	About the Softening of Testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men, the testicles are softened by water because the flesh between them is softened, and it is not advisable to pay attention to it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for him who is treated that he lie down according to his back, and tighten all the hernia that is softened over the navel; and let two lips be adjusted to the stitch.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened hernia with three or four cuts and with a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And let one go between the stitches; and let it be treated by the treatment of other wounds before healing, and let the threads fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	About Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration in our law is prohibited, except for a cause that is considered legitimate by me; I remind you of it in this book, and it is not necessary to remember it unless there are two ways. The first is that it should be done because it is in the interest of medicine when it is asked about the treatment of that person upon whom it occurs; and the other way is that we have a need for castration of other animals for our benefit from them, as well as from donkeys, and horses, and pigs, and creatures similar to them.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting off or by cutting open and making a section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	And in that which is done by cutting off, the way of the operation is that you cut off the animal's tail between the legs while its genitals are softened and made to hang down; and let them fall.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And let those who are near your hand hold them so that they are relaxed and do not appear to be loose when touched.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	And in castration that is done by cutting and making a section, let the animal be held so that you can press the hernia of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And let go of the suspenders, and cut over any two threads with a section so that four are cut.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And let those be cut who are ahead of the others.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not place any cause on the hernia, but put a subtle hernia over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of castration is better because it is done by cutting off, which strengthens the hernia so that there is no desire for the beast to mate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And let one of you treat the wound as we have said before it heals.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	About the Treatment of Hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is due to two ways: the one is because the space becomes narrow in the hernia of the testicles; and this is the figure of a woman between two testicles, which is a man's body with two genitalia.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some of those who have it pass urine from the hernia of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	And in women there is one kind: and that is when the woman's space is between two testicles, which is a man's body with two genitalia.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: of the two men and one kind of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And let those muscles be adjusted so that they do not give off an unpleasant smell, and let them be treated by the treatment of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men, from which urine passes from the hernia of the testicles, there is no treatment or operation.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	About Lancing and Muscle Emerging due to Women's Causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A strong lancing is adjusted to natural causes before it becomes strained, and it is not advisable to pay attention to it; and some women are enlarged in some way so that they become strained as men, and others are not aware of it until intercourse occurs.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	And let those who have too much lancing be held with your hand or a towel and cut it off with a sharp knife.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not end in the section, primarily on the head, so that it does not cause bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And so care for those with plague until they are healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	And so care for those with plague until they are healed. May meat that is born in the abominable place inside them, and it is strong enough to emerge from the openings according to its shape as a cow (and therefore we should not eat it even if it appears to be tender), and so let us avoid eating it when we cook, and let us cure those with plague until they are healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter .lxxii.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of plague.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Plague is that a woman's hymen not be pierced, or it is a small tear.
E es o natural o accidental.	And whether it is natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is by a plague that preceded it, and such is caused either by raw meat or by a subtle poison or spice.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the womb of a mother, or in her breasts, or in the pus above her, or in the pus below her, and you forbid intercourse and taking on a wife and childbirth, and strongly prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the moon's phases, if the opposition is obvious, then let it be done; but if it is not obvious, then do so with an eye chart or a mirror.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if opposition is by subtle poison, and it is between the two lips, then let you cut and break them.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And let you place on the two lips powder, and place the eye chart or mirror in front of both eyes simultaneously.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	Let the woman be on her back with her legs spread, and let you stretch the two lips with force until that subtle poison is broken and opposition is overcome.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And let you take wool and send it in oil and place that on the spot, and rub it with a man every day so that the spot does not become hardened.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the poison is thick and spicy, then let you rub it with a spice of laurel or a leaf of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if opposition is by meat, then let you suspend that with oil, and rub it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And if those medicines do not stop the flow of blood from a wound, then apply them with honey and an egg yolk, and clean it, and adjust it to white wine.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And let you administer a wide, thin, and cold drink so that the plague does not become hardened.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Keep it for seven days and then administer warm water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And so is cured by another means of hardening before it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the womb during the birth of other animals, and then you should rub according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is by a cold apoplexy and that which is in the womb does not oppose itself to being turned into an animal in some way, then rub it with a cold compress.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter .lxxiii.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and a red boil that occurs in the vagina of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are those of the openings of small veins that cause pain constantly; and if they are old, then they are painful.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division about the spices of those and their properties, and so those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So say that hemorrhoids and boils when they are in the womb and do not appear to be a problem, then do not apply cure to them.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the opening of the womb over which there is no feeling, these are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And let you put the woman into a wrap of garlic and stretch her with force, or with a sharp razor, and rub those areas with razor blades.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And let you sprinkle on those devils the powder of a spice that stops the flow of blood from one of them, and so with mint and similar to these.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And let you weigh her body for an hour, and then let her lie in hot water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then let you boil her in a soup of mustard and peppercorns and similes.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And let you take flour of almond and make an paste with honey and vinegar, and apply it to the two breasts.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the wound is healing, then let it be so; but if not, then let there be an attachment to the two windows, and make incisions on the breasts.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And let you take wool and dip that in the juice of coriander or the juice of hawthorn or the juice of grape, and apply it to the spot; and so heal the spot.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if that is not harsh, then let you rub it with oil that appears to be of that which has been mentioned in the attachment of the flesh.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And so heal that which needs to be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter .lxxiv.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the accidental piercing of the skin in the womb.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Small boils occur in the womb, sometimes causing pain and a lapping-like motion, ulcers, itching, eczema, and other small boils.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said about these malignities and the spices of those and their properties, and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I will tell you in this treatise about the piercing of those things that occur in the womb when they are piercing, and if you wish to know how the operation is performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain of the boil in its beginning is acute with inflammation and fever, and sometimes it becomes hard, and if it opposes itself to that which pierces it, then do not pierce it, but heal it with oil that soothes during the maturating process until the acuteness of the accident passes.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then let the woman lie on a slab that has two slabs; and support her with her back to the edge of the bed, and stretch her legs away from her body, and open her knees apart from each other, and lie down on a sheet next to her.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And the midwife should go from behind and administer the instrument with which she will pierce the opening of the womb, the form of which will be determined in those cases that it is appropriate to do so.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer that instrument, let you stand behind the woman and insert it into her womb, and let the tool enter the womb only through the womb opening, and not through any other part of the body.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the tool is larger than the womb opening, then let you place powder on the texture of the womb opening so that it prohibits the entry of any instrument into the womb opening.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And let you place the instrument on edge and turn it upside down, and let the minister hold the instrument, and let him pour out what is inside until he pierces the opening of the womb.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when it begins to emerge, and it is touched with the hand, and it is hot and damp, then let you dry that part of her with a sponge.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pain of the piercing subsides, then let you rub that part with a wet sponge dipped in rosin or green oil, and so stop the bleeding.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place the womb above on clean wool dampened with water, and let it be bathed in hot water until it becomes calm.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated with a hot liquid that softens it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Here is the translation of the text:
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the pus is inside the swollen mother, then cover it so that you are forbidden from the cure of it, maintaining care of what I have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives how to treat a pregnant woman who has a fever according to the figure that is not natural.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwifery woman learns in the beginning of the natural childbearing process by the signs of it, and that when you see the woman express herself at the openings and desire to smell the air, and above it is enveloped by what is on her during the part, and quickly realizes the pregnancy of it, then know that this part is according to a natural figure, and that is the odor of it over her head, and the second one is suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, then cover that the woman's belly is shaken so that the embryo does not move heavily because when it moves over her head, it sends the second one down, and it is rid of those superfluities with good preparation.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	May that which is the other of this part is not natural or useful, because when the embryo is expelled over its feet and the back of it is expelled in front of its head and its feet, and the mother one, or on its chest, that is to say, Or is expelled the head of it and the mother one, or over its belly, and strongly it is turned on its chest, and resembling the figures of it are not useful.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is that the midwifery woman is wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you should show all these figures, and what is the meaning of them by this, that it stands on it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the birth is expelled over its head by natural force, and that is violent over the woman and difficult to give birth to, and sometimes the virtue of it is already debilitated, then do this: or that the women have it, and vaporize the conh of it with fenugrec oil and with odorous humors.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And the midwifery woman enters between its legs and cuts it with a small instrument, or sews it with her finger before that moisture comes out of it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly in until she expels the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	May if it does not expel, then know that the woman is choked by mucilage of dill and mucilage of fenugrec with a bandage.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And order it, and command that it be choked, that is to say, that it coughs; and put the mouth of it and its nose for an hour, because the fetus often comes out then.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two more of the fetus are choked at the beginning, then know that you decrease those with small force.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	May if it does not obey the instrument, then the woman is placed on a table and her feet are lifted up, and the table is moved down on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall because of the shock.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the two more are not turned in and killed the fetus, then separate those and extract the fetus or tie the neck of it with a thread and extract it with equality, because that often comes out.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the expulsion of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus falls on its feet, then you push it in, and turn it around, and draw it, and take hold of one of its feet and stretch those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	May if it is expelled within the thighs, then you command that it be squeezed, and make it cough with a bandage, because often comes out if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not choked with the water that I have told you, then return the small fetus little by little until you make the second natural figure, because that often comes out if you press it lightly.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden with all the water that I have told you, then take of the oil of mint and of dissolved gum, and pound all of it in a mortar with good pounding, and pour that over the belly's conh, and the pus of the woman' s lower abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make a cut in it in teuz water, until you achieve the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the openings of it are lengthened, then make it sub-fumection of mint and sub-pause to it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you make it sub-fumection for an hour, then place it on a table, and then make it cough and extract the mouth from it, and remove that, and press the lower opening of the belly with light compression because the fetus often comes out then.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The expulsion of the fetus on its feet and its legs.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus is expelled according to this form, then you put all of its legs little by little; and the woman sits on her chest, and those are laid on the ground, and its hands join together.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press the woman' s belly little by little, and extract it that is of its feet from the ears until it is ready for the opening of the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not choked, then take its feet and move them violently, and then press that which is over the hypochondria little by little until it can get to the openings of it.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then put its legs in and extract the small fetus little by little, and order the woman to be squeezed until the fetus is choked.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The expulsion of the fetus from side to side with one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Be prepared to reduce the mother's head, but if you cannot do that, then lift up the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the ground, and hit those with a violent shock, and administer to her with the help of oil and water that I have told you.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbearing has come, then make it lie on a table, and study the reduction of the mother, and extract the fetus according to the figure that is natural, and make the woman cough and command her to squeeze herself until she is choked.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The expulsion of the fetus on the chest, with the legs opened wide, and the belly of it is above the mother' s two arms.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Know that the midwifery woman has the fetus, and then turn it little by little, and do so easily.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and often comes out, then stop over the conh of it with oil and water that I have told you.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command that it be squeezed little by little, and when you see that the fetus is coming out, then make a cut on a table with your head inclined to the right, and order it to be choked; and make the woman cough with a bandage.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the foetus was prepared on the left side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the delivery of the mother has begun in this manner, consider it, and immediately insert your finger into her to expel the moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended above its neck, immediately insert your finger into its mouth to prevent it from being held and dying.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then deliver the fetus into its cavity before pausing for a moment, and order the woman to squeeze her legs, and the man outside will remove it with ease, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or a multiple birth.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Do you know that twins are born with closed eyes, and sometimes three or four, some are five, but only one is alive, by nature, not alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And consider that if they are multiplied, there is one second, and they are separated by a cut, distinguishing between those entering into the navel of each one; some vaginas are also naturally opened, and some are not closed, just like this one when a fetus is delivered naturally. And sometimes the vagina is closed in this manner, as if it were a wound.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver and come into being in the way we have spoken of natural figures, then you should take care of them in this manner as well.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and causes water to break in a subtle and late manner, and is ingenious according to all figures according to which it is prepared by God, leading to salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that it is formed in the mother's womb from embryos, and some are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some have been formed in the mother one, two, three and four times, five and six; and I have already seen that a woman gets six abortive children, while another does not get any at all. This is due to the measures of the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this is covered up, that which is in the science of the midwife, for how light it is to a small child, and then stops at water, and then stops again, until it comes out.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you take care of the dead fetus by means of water, which we have spoken of in the division of medicine, and does not come out without force, then consider whether the woman is of sound virtue or not, for it is a loss to her through accidents for which she is responsible.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be placed on her back, and her head should be inclined toward the ground, and the cushions under her legs should be raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should hold her by the two parts, or tie it to the ground, so that its head does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then moisten the mouth of the mother with a cold water, with a mixture of mint and fennel seed, and with a soothing balm.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife should massage her feet with the oils and balms, and then sit her comfortably, and then find the place where the fetus' nails are located.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Then find a convenient place: then consider whether the fetus is prepared to be placed on its head, and immediately fix its nails in its holes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or leave it with its beard, or in its collarbone, or in places close to its ribs, or leave it with its hair.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if the delivery is on her feet, then in the penile, or in the midriff of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Then she should hold the nail with her right hand, and place it in the middle of her back, and move it to one side, or to another, and then fix it in a convenient place, until it reaches the reason for doing so.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place and fix another nail in it, or the third one if necessary, so that it is not extended, and only to follow its order, and not to be broken, except for the purpose of fixing it properly.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let the delivery take place in this manner, so that the relief of the woman is provided for, and the reason for doing so is given, and not to be broken. And if it is necessary to remove anything, do so with ease when it begins to come out, as if it were a tooth coming out.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Then in the water between them that the extension is softened; and if any part of her is held back, then consider that the midwife should massage it with oil, and then move it slightly and turn it over with ease, and not to be broken.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	And if the exit of the fetus is delayed, then the nails should be exchanged between places where it is not extended; and do so within that time when all the fetus has been delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	And if the woman's back is turned to the other, and it cannot be reduced by means of a girdle around her; then consider that she should be wrapped in cloth, and then extract it within that time when all of it has been delivered, and cut it off at its joint.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so you can deliver the other side, and the two feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the fetus is large, or comes out with the girdle during delivery, or it is in the mouth, then consider that you should enter between the spines with your fingers, and cut off its head, or use an instrument called "lunate", the shape of which will be like the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter where this is mentioned.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And it seems as if the fetus is of a large head by nature: and then consider that you should cut it with a knife, or take it with a lunate, as we have spoken of; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head has come out and is tied with a girdle to the neck, then consider that it should be cut within that time when the moisture that is in the feet is flowing.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if it is not complicated, or if it comes out without difficulty during delivery, then you should cut the head as soon as possible for yourself.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the child in the womb is aborted or is in the uterine wall, then consider that you should pierce it within that time when the moisture that is in it begins to flow.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the fetus is on its feet, then the attraction of it is light, and the direction in which it points to the mouth of the mother is also light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if it is tied to the belly, then consider that you should extract it with a cloth, which you have wrapped around your body, and cut the belly within that time when the water that is in it begins to flow.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other members are held back and turned the head, then the midwife should move her left hand; and if the mouth of the mother is open, then consider that you should place your right hand in it, and fix the nail in its hole, or in its neck, or in its palate, or leave it with its hair.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an apoplexy that occurs as a result of water, then consider that it should not be broken open; and before that, consider that you should administer a good amount of moist, hot water.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient with water that softens and moistens.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if it is done on his side, then if possible let it be cut open: and let the water that we mentioned when doing the incision be administered to him.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this water is not possible, then let it be incised in the feet, and let it be removed.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	So that you do not leave any cause inside for the second time.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer the water that we mentioned for the cure in the toes of the feet that happened from the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a discharge of blood, then let it be washed with sterile water and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	You have already seen a woman in her womb who had a dead fetus, and on that spot another pregnant woman was delivered, and on that spot another dead fetus was made.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him after a long time an apostema on his belly; it swelled inside so much that he began to have fever.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	You were called to treat him, and you treated him for a long time, and the plague did not become fixed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you stopped for a while because of some causes of strong attraction, and he passed urine, and it passed after a few days, and he passed another urine; and I was very amazed, for in the womb there is no urine.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then you began to think that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then you cured the plague, and I extracted from him some bones, the existing one in their middle, and I have lived in such a way for a long time, correct his little arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not consider it strange, but because in water there is science and aid to the sick that you administer by means of medicine.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of the turn that is opened on the mother's belly:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of strength in which the wings are joined, with two turns at the two ends of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this turn, however, should be less sharp than the previous one, and it should be made of wood or of boy's foot.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the length of each foot should be a palm and half, and the width of each is one palm and a little more; and in the place of two feet there are two adjustments of that metal' s feet which are already closed, the length of which is less than a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two ditz or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened by those two prescribed turns.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another shape, similar to the previous one but less sharp and more light:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Made of wood or boy' s foot according to its appearance of strength.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But in the end of it there are two additions, and their length is a palm, and the width of each is two ditz.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to close the mother's belly, then make her lie on her side with her legs hanging down, holding water between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your mouth with the instruments joined together according to the quantity you want of the impression of the mother' s mouth, so that she makes no noise.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of turn that they call the children:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Shape of turn that pushes forward the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Shape of turning that turns the head to the side:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is put together with two pincers at the end, sometimes, and in some women it is made long sometimes, following this form, sometimes, and with these same pincers sometimes, according to this shape, sometimes, and with the pincer that has the teeth on the back part of it, so that it is incised and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Small form of turning:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a single turn with no point:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a double turn with no points:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Pincer shape, with teeth closed on the head of the fetus to hold it:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Shape of a spatula with two ends by which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two spatulas broad:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and when they are multiplied in quantity those spices and are prepared by the artifice, how much less is used for their operation and how much less do the men who perform it.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you don't need to open those instruments again, because the necessity for them is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the second:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is detained, then if you command to the mother that she hold her breath and tighten your hand over her mouth and over her nose, and if by doing so it is forced out, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	Then, if not, you take a bowl and pierce the lid with a thorn and pour in that water and let it be in the mother' s mouth, pressing and drawing, and drinking and smelling, and using the acrid and bitter and fragrant herbs.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the bowl, and pour over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a funnel of cane in the mother' s mouth, and hold it there so that the vapor comes into the mother' s cavity.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then he forces him to sneeze again, as we have said, and the second child is driven out quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this cure remains and is not driven out, then order the mother to dip her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of mint water, and insert it into the vagina, searching for the second child; and when you find him, force him out little by little, following the route that we have described; and if he adheres to the wall of the womb, then remove his hand from there, and place the other hand on the mother' s belly, and if the second child is stuck, then stretch it a little with your fingers.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Then he will be moved to the right and left easily.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it is adjusted in the quantity of attraction, for she will obey and escape from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if her mouth is stopped up, we have already described the cure with sneezing and with the water of herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if this child is not driven out by all the means that we have described, then do not make him fall into the mother' s mouth again, but keep him in your hand and wash him with warm water and a little bitter herb; for he will be scorched after a few days and will be driven out.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it is cooked, it will have a bad smell to the head and to the stomach, and let water be given to the mother; then administer the water with smoke and with care.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the Ancient Herbs are already prepared for smoking with nose-clearing and fig leaves.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of a device by which the woman is smoked, suitable for the retention of blood and for the second child:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Of wood or iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the sharp end be placed in the vagina and the wide end over the fire, and smoking be done on the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that in which is consumed that which is consumed by sub-fumigation and repeat the other.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For cure of the child's anus without perforation.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Now let the children eat and their anuses not being perforated, which already have been made subtle and oiled.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then let the midwife pierce that child's anus which is made subtle; and else, pierce that one with a sharp instrument, and be careful that it does not touch the urine.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place over that wrinkled anus a wet and oiled cloth; and treat that one which is consumed by sub-fumigation.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	May be if you fear that it has been oiled, then pause in the throat a tube for some days, and prevent it when the child will want to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And already has happened oiling of the anus because of consolidation of plague or of abcess; then let that consolidation be scarred, and is cured with water which we have said for the cure and the rust.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For cure of the fistulas which remain.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas which are in the entrance let them be pus-filled and grossness which they have near to the anus or in the space of the one entrance.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or a clyster.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And with that grossness is old and runs of the moistening that it is white or subtle putridity, and some are of those fistulas which penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known because of the water which is discharged from them by exit and because of windness; and some use the exit of the patient, and it is discharged from them with great force.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And so of those fistulas some are known in the space that penetrates into the bladder, and into the meat of the vulva; and so of those that penetrate into the junction of the thigh and into the nose of the crotch.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And the water in which is known the fistula that penetrates into the anus and not, it is that you place the thistle that is said endic in the anus, and entrometas tries subtle to make fire or to pierce in the fistula when not it has been made.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	May be if in that there is prudence, then entromets in that try subtle of rust or of hair of horse within which you feel the try or the fur in the thistle.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that one of all or do not make discharge of the exit of any cause of excretion or wind or windness, thus have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then treat yourself to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the vulva, then the meaning of it is completely urine of that one and prohibition of it at this time that the place to medicine be consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	May be if it is penetrating into the junction of the thigh or into the bone and pain in the circulation of the crotch, then know that the meaning of it is that the try has penetrated here if it is not prudent within the bone, and pain in the circulation of the entrance; and that it has putridity always; and that it does not value in that medicine, nor is consolidated with a wet.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas that penetrate there is not complete cure, and the cure of those is work and futility of the leaves of medicine over which they are closed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	May be in that one that is not penetrating and not old, there is expected cure with iron according to what you have recommended, and the water which it has already heard and has proved.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the hernia is between your two legs over your navel, and raises the cambas of him within them, the spaces are leaned to the belly of him, and entromets tries of rust or of fire if it is in the fistula prudence, then know the place where the try penetrates.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that one feels the hernia turning the navel, then let you enter with the thistle that is said endic in the navel.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in the thistle try already has entered discovered to penetrate, another water that you feel between the thistle and that one is made subtle or of meat, then know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that one, because it is not in that cure, thus have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But nevertheless others say that it is cured in some men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine with which is expected improvement in him is that you ignite cautery subtle according to the width of the fistula, thus has preceded, and enters that one in the fistula that penetrates turning the navel; and then repeats that two or three times within that you know that they have been made close all those fisticled meats which seem to feathers of goose of white.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then treat that one with wet wrapped in padding within that all those meats which are close, and then treat that one with medicine of the engendered meat and consolidating, and if it is cured, it is good; and else, then it is not cured in any time by another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the try enters and does not penetrate within the thistle which is in the anus, and between that one and the try which is a subtle meat or of sub-fumigation, and sometimes the fistula in water which severs the surface of the navel, then dry the navel from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if it has been dried by the fire, and is in the fistula within that section penetrates to the place where the try ends, and through the try is liberated and catz.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then separate those fisticled meats which are assembled to tube of goose of white and not it is the rumbling of any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	May be if flux of six times that it passes between you and your operation when you place those meats, then the milk which is and the instrument that is cauterizes with fire or with acute medicine, because cauterize with fire adjusts well to two: so is close of those fisticled meats which are close, and excuses from the six-fold exsecution of the moistening.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Then treat that one with wet wrapped in padding or in three-fold cause within the place that it is wet and bristly, then treat the plague with a wet meat which engenders and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And those medicines in which there is strictitude and exsecution; when it has been restored then it is cured and you do not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	May be if the fistula already has penetrated within the navel of him and it is long of the surface of him, then entromets the thistle in the anus and asks that one.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if the try is hundred and between you and it is subtle of meat or of sub-fumigation, and is approaching to the penetration, then is not operation in him but according to a trusted way and of hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is administered in him by three ways: or that cauterize it thus have said; or that dries it within that you reach the cavity of him for so that you can enter with the needle and the cure is likely; and do not process that one to the section so that it does not injure the urine-containing bladder, and that you obtain the section in order that it has been made subtle; and then separates those fisticled meats which are separated within that section for the navel, thus have said, or with the try or with another instrument of extreme point, and then dry those meats which are separated within that section for the anus, thus have said, or at the fire or with acute medicine, and then separate those fisticled meats which are separated in the section for the navel, thus have said, or by the use of a needle; and then treat that one with water which has been said because it is very good medicine; or that prolongs that subtlety and makes that one which dries within that section for the anus, thus have said, or at the fire or with acute medicine, and then separate those fisticled meats which are separated in the section for the navel, thus have said, or by the use of a needle; and then treat that one with water which has been said because it is very good medicine.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases the fistula is closed according to this method: it is when you introduce the needle into the fistula and then into the surface of the body with the thread and on the margin of the buttocks, then take a small piece of flesh from the tip, which is done so that the needle can be used to prepare the bodies according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and wrap it in a small piece of cloth or insert it; and then take the needle into the fistula before it reaches the cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates into the margin of the buttocks inside, then you take the needle out from there as you insert it in the buttocks; and you pull out the tip of the needle and join the two ends together, and cut them off, and leave it for a day or two, and when it is healed over, put the needle into the meat, which is between the two ends of the thread, and let those pieces fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then heal the wound so that it is solid and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the hole in the fistula is not penetrating, then do so with some preparation on your part, but do not do it while piercing the skin, because you may hurt yourself; and then heal that hole so that it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the needle with which the fistula is split: its curve is sharp and the other end is blunt, so that you do not hurt yourself when piercing, because it is unnecessary, and in this way.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Suture of hemorrhoids in which blood flows into the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Emorrhoids according to two methods, because they either lie between the buttocks resembling carbs, or those are covered with a kind of rash.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large, and the blood flows from them at all times, and it is a lot, and they only occur outside the buttocks, and on the edges of them.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that are on the outside of the buttocks according to two kinds: because some of them have little moisture, from which yellow or a little blood flows continuously, and they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for those that are inside the buttocks is that you order the patient to lie down and press, so that the buttocks burn, and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cut yourself and hang them on nails or whatever you have with your nail, then make an incision in those spots where the skin is.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails do not have them because of the moisture in their skin and its softness, then take them with a sharp or jagged knife, then cut them off with tweezers, and sprinkle some powdered herbs on them after cutting them, so that they are at those spots instead of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is preceded in the chapter about cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Then heal those with the other cure, so that they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttocks do not obey to leave, then tie the patient with a knot in the rope that is slightly small, and wash them with water from the buttocks, which obeys to leave easily when tied.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks, then the cause of them is due to your hand, or because you hold them with a needle, and make an incision in them, and then heal them with water that has been said to be healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you want to make a small incision, then prepare the suturing of them according to this method: take a needle wrapped in cloth and insert it into the needle and then take out the tip of the needle and join the two ends together, and leave it for a moment on its own; and then tie the thread tightly.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Then let it rest completely, leaving one of them uncut, so that the excess blood flows from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place a cloth spread with olive oil or wax on the buttocks, and place that one on the buttocks, and order the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then leave that one alone until it has healed; and when it is fallen, heal those with oil or with another cure, so that they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the cure for fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Some things occur because of a split or from nature's pressure.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since those are old and do not respond to that medicine, then know that they only become wet and are hosted by them from above, which prevents their solidification; and then heal those once they have been consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then stop them with a fierce pain, more intense than the first one that causes pain, and then heal those once they have been healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the cure for dysentery, thus is the end.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Be aware that the cure for dysentery is to pay attention according to the color of the body resembling a carrot's tip, and it is done in the whole body, and mostly in the parts near the feet and in the mouth, and through them, you feel pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then know that it is done according to the end of the clause, and if it has been cut with scissors or a needle, and its roots have been removed; then heal that one.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the second according to what is preceded in the chapter about cauterization.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	The small warts are small, sharp, round lumps on the surface of the body, and some occur in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The cure for them is to stretch them or to pierce them with a needle, or to make a cut in the part where they occur.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it according to what has been said, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	Then they are eradicated forwards and backwards with the instrument that I have directed you to use.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	The wart is a small, swollen lump on the surface of the body, and when the finger touches it, it feels like a frog's bite, and it occurs inside the skin.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The cure for them is to take a pen-point or a quill, and make it hard, and place that one over the wart where it is contained within the circle of the pen's points or quills; then turn your hand around so that the blood reaches the wart, and then heal it with blood that has reached it.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, make water with the iron or lead according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The cut of the pen should leave a small slit in it, silent (if not piercing), wrapped so that its tip is covered by it, and its revolution turned.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the wart according to what has been said before in the chapter about cauterization of athy.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the shape of the instruments that are used to give a cure.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some are given a cure of silver or lead or melted or malleated; and some are given by small instruments or large according to those which they administer, because the one that is administered in the cure for children is small; and of those which are administered in the cure for adults, the cure is large.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The shape of the cure, large and small:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The end of the pen is turned upside down in the place where the bag is attached, so that it is wide according to this method: and its distance from being attached.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	"And be the bag in which the medicines of the beast's bladder or sheep's wool are placed, and the thread of it is a palm."
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	"And be pierced by two slits as it isrevolved, and if the space between the slits is of different thickness."
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	"And insert it into those slits with a strong thread of pure honey, which shall be of such a quality that you fill the bag with the medicine, which shall be heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and guard that it is not too long or too short."
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	"And raise the patient on their back, and elevate their legs in their direction and place a bed or a mattress on which the men can rest; and apply the tip of the cautery to olive oil, or to white honey, or to mucilage of fenugrec or something similar; and insert it into his arse with ease, and the minister shall squeeze that bag with two hands and squeeze it vigorously so that it is evacuated in the bag all of what is inside the cautery; and then remove the cautery and the patient's legs be raised to the wall."
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	"And if the medicine compels it to defecate, let him hold as much as he can; and if he sleeps for an entire night, it is a sign of recovery."
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	"But if you apply the cautery to the patient' solute of the stomach and his defecation is cured, then repeat the cauterization until he is healed."
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	"And if in his arse are painful hemorrhoids or blisters, then be the cautery very subtle and a lion among the cauters used to treat children."
De curacio de las plaguas.	"Of cure for wounds."
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	"You have already said in the division of the cure for plague patients that it is fitting to free them, and I say likewise the cure of those with fever and the medicine according to the complement."
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	"Therefore, I say that plague patients are diverse according to where they are formed and according to the place where the plagues fall."
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	"And the causes by which plague patients are formed are: as a result of drinking water infested with pestilence, or incision with a blade, or stab with a lance, or a spear, or an arrow, or something similar to these causes of plague."
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	"But the plague that is in parts of the body are: as a result of a pestilence which falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the breast, and similar to these causes of plague."
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	"I am also recommending the cure for some plagues so that this reasoning and regulation may be applied to the other plagues."
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	"I shall begin with simple head plagues, for the recall of the composed will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	"Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and is not a fracture, consider: if it is from drinking water infested with pestilence or something similar, and he has already taken three cups of water regularly, and there is no delay in doing so; and extract from him to the third day according to the quality of his virtue if there is no other cause that prevents taking water, more so if the plague is caused by a simple fever.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	"And be the water drinking of the opposite of the infected part; and keep the patient from repletion, and from eating and drinking anything heavy."
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	"But if there is no prohibition of any cause, then reduce the food intake and do not bring him close to meat or wine."
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	"And pause for the plague, if it is caused by an apoplexy, use olive oil or wine in which is added saffron."
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	"But if you are sure that it is caused by an apoplexy, then pause for the plague, if it is recent; and do not change the powder I have recommended to apply to the feet."
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	"And if the air has already changed that one, then pause for a while inside and be healed."
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	"But if the plague is great or is caused by incision with a blade or something similar, and his lips are not adjusted for suckling, then adjust those according to how I recommend sewing them."
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	"But if the plague has already broken out from the bone and is not reticent in him but only a small suspension; then incision on that part and immediately cure the plague with medicine and restore flesh to its place from meat; and order the patient that he be fed on wine and bread, and similar things to those mentioned above, as long as it is possible."
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	"And if the codena decays and does not adhere to the bone, then you shall incision all of it and pour vinegar on it; and immediately cure that."
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	"But if these plagues are an artery or a vein through which the plague flows and does not heal with medicine; then inquire about that artery, and if that artery decays, then incision it with a blade or ligature; and if necessity compels you to do what I have said not to conform to, then cauterize it so that the plague is eliminated."
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	"But if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is slight; and you shall apply this powder to those parts, for it has already been mentioned that when the air changes, those particles should be applied."
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	"And the way to prepare this powder is: take a part of olive oil from the separated water; two parts from dragon's blood, three parts from an unknown cause; all mixed together and well shaken, and if there is a plague filled with pus, it should be bound by a good constriction on that part so that it does not spread; and be boiled with the powder."
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	"And return that paste to dust and leave it there; and do not stir it while it is like that, for it will be broken down and the medicine will be eliminated from it before it is healed."
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	"And never apply this oil alone; but when you have separated water and dragon' blood, and when there is a plague of pus, then apply it."
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	"And do not delay this operation in great plagues; but when the plague is recent and its sanc has not been altered by the air."
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"But if the air has altered it, especially in summer, then do not apply this powder to those parts; but cure them with water that I have mentioned; and apply oil to those parts that have been infected by a different method, as I have described above; and cure them with another cure before they are healed."
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	"But if you get a fracture plague in the bone, which is small, then extract water from it by gesturing."
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	"I shall direct the cure for head fractures in poison."
De las plaguas del col.	"Of the neck plagues."
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	"But if a plague occurs in the neck, there is a difference in medicine; and between a head plague and one in the neck, when it is simple."
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves in the neck are already injured or damaged, if they are nerves, not in the limb but rather should be avoided treatment that would cause great violence to the blood, thus with the cauterization and cauterizing that it is infectious and similar to their wound nozo on nerves and contrazen that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not pause on any part of the plague causing all the fever, for the substance of nerves is a fever and the continuity of it is to the brain, which is pus or all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is to be cured with light medicines, so with it is to wash with warm water, some mixed with rose water or non-rose water, and to cool when washed with warm water and the other herbs are minimal according to this method, and to wet with moisture.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the plague is great, then administer sutures or clamp their lips, and then cure that with dust inside so that it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the plague is deep or happens in the pus lower split, then pierce that in the place most affected.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if the plague is already an artery and a constant flow of blood, then separate or dry that out, or cut that off, or cauterize that if necessity forces it to water.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the spine of the neck has already been injured or all of it, and the veins of the neck are safe, then you adjust the lips of the knot to suture over the cane of the neck and do not touch that; away make that even and reduce that over its natural figure, and then strengthen that with a straightening, and leave that for several days; and then cure that with the fire in which there is stypticism and excitement within so that it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the plague has already caused damage to the bones, then strike that out, and if there are fragments of bones, extract all of them that you can; and what is not covered with a dressing, leave it inside so that the plague can corrupt it, and be separated from it and the excrement be washed away.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent then sprinkle on that powder which I have recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the plague has caused a fistula, then cure that with water from which the memory will come to its right place in its capital.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the neck plagues or similar when it happens between the shoulder blades and is caused by a space or a knife or a lance or a similar thing.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a knife or a lance strike and sometimes the depth, then consider whether the patient's breath is warm when they are heated; you will know that the plague is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is not depth and the plague is recent with the patient' blood, then you pause in it at first hour with powder, and do not strengthen that so that the blood does not remain stuck in its depth and returns to the body, and then pause on it with an attractive wetting, and then take away that twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the wetting is not to you present, then you pause in the orifice of the plague with a cloth so that it sucks water that contains moisture; and make the patient sleep on the plague so that it runs water that is in it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if the plague has passed three days or more and there is no happening of spasms or tremors of the heart or stricture of the air passages, and sometimes other good dispositions of it, then you will know that the plague is over; and then cure that with water and with the other treatment within so that it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is delayed and has already been opened for a long time, then you will know that it has already become a fistula; then cure that with its capital.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is by incision of a space or a knife and it is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then cure that with water which is preceded by a suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the bones have already been injured by pre-incision and they are already separated, then you will know that those bones must be extracted; if they are not separated, then you will know that they must be extracted.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them inside so that the plague can corrupt it, and what is extracted from it is washed away.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other accidents of plague on other members, the treatment for healing is the same as that which we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the belly plagues.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that happens in the womb is either great or small or slight.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the large ones, there are the intestines or nerves of the intestines, so that they cause an invasion of them and the suture of them is very violent and very subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is difficult in another way, and if you do not cover the area of their invasion with your body for a long time, because it opens and thickens because of the instruments of them, then the reduction of them is very difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And so the best disruption is slight, because in that one is not difficult to reduce the intestine, but rather is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you will know that the suture of the belly is in four ways, two sutures are common which are added to the other two sutures of the other plagues of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures that communicate with the others, but only two are proper to the belly suture.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend to you all of them in exposure and explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So I say that when the plague is small and causes an invasion of the intestines through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in two ways: either by the slowness of the disruption or when the intestine is inflamed by the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And then, when it is like this, you will know that you must cut off the intestine, rather than submerge a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or take it into cold water, and to spread out the intestine on it so that the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some of them cause water to become violent, and it is better than warm water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And if you see that the inflammation is resolved, then you will know that it is better to moisten the intestine with water which is slightly heated and not too cold because by water it is washed away more quickly.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument of healing does not come into contact with this treatment, then you will know that the disruption must be made with a small instrument, and to incisions or bleeding on it.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first treatment is the best, when it is proper that there is not an incision, and it is not necessary to dry out by occupation;
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	As for the instrument, let us see its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The one end of it is sharp and the other not-sharp, and its extreme is subtle, and it is not the subtlety of a knife, but rather it is slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And if the plague is widespread and causes an exit through the intestines, then you will know that their reduction must follow their natural form, in their own place, if possible on it, because it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But if the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you will know that you should lie down on your back, and pause your feet higher than your head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you will know that you should sit up, and pause your legs higher than your head.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pause your intention and your consideration at any time so that the part where the plague is is put out than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	Then you will find that you serve them in great plagues and in lesser plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small plagues, pause what you are preparing, and let the minister be between your five fingers, who has the whole rupture to his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and let him uncover from that to another who sees the suture with a certain cause, let him see if he can see.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common way of suturing: one in which you take the needle, or choose according to the quantity of the width of the plague; and let go from the end of the rupture of the little finger, and tighten the needle one, or other than you cannot place faith in the two ends of the knot, leaving the knot between the splits inside, while you make that enter from that split; and you have already added the two ends of the knot and four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And let go of the needle on double thread in the circuit, and some veils of two parts together, and let add the two lips and the plague by addition properly; and let go of the thickness of that little finger and let another needle stay there with double thread, and let tie that with a knot properly; and do not cease to do so if necessary until you have completed the whole contract of the plague.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the smaller needles be between delicacy and thinness, because the smaller needles slightly cut the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult in the knot, so that by what means they will be small in thinness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not see that the needle is fixed in two adjacent ends of the knot proper, so that flesh does not slightly cut and the plague hides before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not be prolonged with suturing so that the plague does not hide from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And insert the ends of the needles so that they do not remain hanging on the patient's side where he sleeps; and you will pause over the suturing powder spread from all split, which holds the ends of the needles; and let those be inside so that you know that the plague has already been consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these spices of suturing with needles in what way is most suitable in small plagues, because it is sufficient in the suturing of them a needle or two or turn those inside out.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suturing is most appropriate: and it is that you serve them with four ends, of the knot and two extremities of the cipher, in a veil, with the needle with which you are faithful wrapped around in delicacy and thinness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle will have penetrated these four ends, you reduce the needle of that starting split from which you begin, so that faith retires there from the upper split of the plague, so that the suturing is like a second skin on it, with which the skins are tight.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suturing the quantity of the thread of little half.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This suturing makes men weep.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And at this suturing I saw the plague that was accidental to a man in his belly who was infected with a scalpel, and it was the rupture of the major plague of a palm, and it came out of the intestines inside two palms from the bottom of the intestine and it was the disruption of the middle member; and then I reduced that afterwards than the intestine had been broken by the plague for xxii hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in the space of xv days or more, and I healed that one and it was cured; and then he vomited by motive of anxiety, and it is spoken about its dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other metges had judged that it was not cured; and for a miracle it came about, because I did not heal that one with a mouth, because it was in a place where the mouth was not attracted nor any medicine, but I paused over the plague a knot of two veils every day and washed thoroughly with water from honey into that until it was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And you would direct two special sutures proper according to the narration of the Bible.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with suturing of the knot, and turn the needle from the split outside to the split inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so with the needle that penetrates in the knot and in the same way it continues to all of the body, and lets go of the end of the cipher in which you have inserted the needle; and let the other end of the cipher penetrate from the split inside to the split outside in the other extremity of the midsection.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so when you have finished that penetration, then do another penetration in that meteyssa extremity of the midsection from the split outside to the split inside; and let go of the end of the cipher that is in this place, and let the other end of the cipher penetrate from the split inside to the split outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that penetration with your own hand with which you made that penetration in the cipher in the extremity of the midsection that is in the split inside until all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then you begin again on that side and cut that with the end of the cipher in the other place, and take out the needle from the knot, and turn it around to the other side and pull out that one from the knot that is on this side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do so a veil and another, and make a veil between them until you have cooked all that there is behind according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this way of suturing is that you sew with a thread on which you sew the hair; or, that you sew the cipher once on the part of the extremity of the knot, and that you let go of that other veil until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second special suturing that is recommended for you, and this is spoken about it from you and because of it that you sew that other half with which some medicines sew that, or, that you add all the split to its own half in a way convenient according to nature; and they apply one end of it to the other by turning it around, and there it is done according to what you recommend.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Then you will find the needle in the extremity of the midsection to your side of the split, and make that penetration inside in this place, and let go of two ends of the cipher; and then turn the needle around and make that penetration from inside to inside in two ends of the cipher.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn those caps around, and make that penetration of all the splits from inside to the outside in two other extremities of the midsection that are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this way of suturing is better than common suturing slightly, and it is suturing that I preceded with a reminder.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they called him some name, and this is the way of suturing in the belly that is corrected with two needles, so it is that you insert these into any one of them a needle, and begin to turn the needle from there that is right for you, and make that penetration inside the other place according to the sutures of those who sew them tightly.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when rupture is in the middle place of the belly, then the suturing of it is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	May the treatment of plague be judged as such for other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which causes it to be when you have caught the plague recently before that air alters it, and reduce the intestine and knots that and apply poultices of ash with care, then pause over it with a smoldering ash.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over it with a smoldering ash and apply poultices of ash to your body until they make a hard crust and fall off, and are hardened and healed; and treat it thus as for other plagues, until it is cured.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	May also if you do not feel the medicine, then pause over it for a while, since it begins to tickle, changes places every day, and teaches you, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in various situations when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	May also if you fear that the plague will spread to the main members, then dip a lion's wool in oil of quality or oil of rosewater, and pause it over the affected areas, leaving gaps between them; and place ash on the skin.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, because it is often caused by the presence of something there, then apply a black stinging oil to it, and more so if the decay has reached the intestine and there is an exit through its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that those who are fat have a slower recovery than those who are lean.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to recover from it because the intestine called "gegunu" does not receive plague recovery that enters it completely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and to its size, which is small, and to its proximity to nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	May also if the treatment you are applying is for the plague and you have caught it recently, then return to your normal diet gradually; and treat the intestine by reducing it in length.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	May also if it has passed a long time and is now yellow or black, then apply poultices of ash on the area that has turned black, so that blood comes out; because in the intestine there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then insert another thread into it and pause two extremities of the thread hanging from the edge of the hole through which the intestine passes, so that above you is relieved the attraction of the intestine towards the plague forum; therefore, your body does not emit the stink of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it will spread to some people; why? Because I saw that one which was infected on the right side of the stomach with the stroke of a lance, and it was the plague of the lower part of the stomach, and it had gone back and had become a fistula, and it discharged its contents and became warm and windy.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then you saw that the treatment of it was not yet established for its healing; but gradually apply it inside until it is healed and the area is hardened.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And you saw that the area had already hardened, then hold the patient in a prone position on his back; and do not let him eat anything that is harmful to him or drink, and exercise him in water and sweat.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people have said that when the plague occurs in the intestine and it is small, then tie it up according to this method: and that you take a piece of cloth of large size; and adjust the two ends of the cloth to the opening of the intestine and pause one end of the piece on them; so, when you press it on them and tighten it, cut off the tip of it, because it adheres to it and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then pause another piece next to the first one, and do not cut it off to make more pieces according to the amount of plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then return that and bind the plague; and let those heads remain attached to the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient at all.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible that the intestine becomes thin with a thin thread attached to it, because it is like a needle; and you take the end of those threads, and if it is blunt, then wrap the end of the thread around it, and thread it through a needle, and bind the thread to the needle; then thread the needle into the thread tied to the intestine, and return that disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This method of stitching with a needle is only another way, a second path of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	May also if the plague is large and widespread, especially if it occurs in a small intestine, because then there will be no healing for it completely; and it will not be healed at all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of treatment with ash and of the fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Do you know that every plague and pustule is called a ulcer when it is inflamed and swollen; and it does not harden and dry up completely, but gets bigger all the time, and does not heal, then it is universally called a fistula and we call it ash.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And the fistula, according to its truth, is a deep, persistent, white wound that does not hurt, and which is concave like a ulcer; therefore it is called "rizat", that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	It is in wet men, which gets bigger; and the moisture is discharged after a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	In some cases this moisture becomes dry, but it is little, and it is thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	I have seen before it has spread in the division, then when you have spoken about the plagues, that every ulcer which is not healed or does not become dry is because of one of these nine causes: of which one is that the pain causes a wound; or from the poison of the skin; because between it and the lips there is hard flesh, impeding its growth; or because it is a thick fluid; or because that ulcer is poisonous and the matter which enters it has a bad quality; or because the medicine is incorrect for its treatment; or when corruption enters the region, causing an epidemic; or per proprietà of the region, as when it happens in Zaragoza, where difficult digestion of the poisons takes place, and therefore that ulcus is not cured by nature; or because there is a bone in it, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	It has all of these causes, and its treatment with medicine in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so you know that the treatment of the fistula is carried out by surgery.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for some of them reach the veins, arteries, or nerves, or the intestine, bladder, or any of the joints, and from similar members.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Then those of these fistulas that are like this way are the difficult-to-heal plagues, which do not receive treatment, and employment in them is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	May also if one of these fistulas is too deep not to reach those areas that it reaches, and you wait for healing; then you try to cut or pierce it, and if the fistula responds well to treatment, and you inquire about it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a soft probe because lead has the ability to lift and curve the body's framework from the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is causing horrible pains, then it is not possible for you to examine it gently.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	And then crystallize the orifices because the moisture that you use to lubricate the orifices will run down from the other orifices.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire carefully, according to which method you are able to know if here there are os or nerves, and it is the cavity of the fistula distant or near, or is a fistula that has only orifices and it is over that completely as much as your strength permits, through your interrogation, and which interrogates the patient, and the invention of the pain should be by your pressure on the area, and similar to the meanings and accidental causes to the inflammation.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all those causes at rest, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent near fistula or a sore, far from a joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the areas whose knowledge you have and say.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then dry the fistula according to what is said in front of it, and this water that is in filtration and corrupted meat, and this that is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the teeth and similar things, and cure it inside so that it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	And if the fistula is of great depth, and it follows rectitude, then cover that which you cut off completely as much as possible, and clean it from all its corrupted meat; and then administer hot water wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce those inside the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood by feeling.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And make this water, which is wrapped in some drops of sharp medicine, that it corrodes completely what is rotten in the cavity of the fistula because of the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore that with cleaning those which generate healthy meat inside so that it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	And if it is not healed by water, then you cauterize that according to what has been said.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the cause of the fistula is a bone and it is necessary to investigate it, then you inquire and dry it according to what has been said, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as I have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and blackness, then you cut that which the corruption is completely hosted; and then cure that with water that it passes inside so that it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and gushes blood like a jet, then you know that you have not reached the total eradication of the corruption; and then you discover the reason of it and clean it carefully with the last powerful medicine, and restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, then well it is; and if not, you know that the corruption is in the depth of the body, which has not been reached, and then to you there is nothing but to investigate that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is corrupted slightly, or if it is possible for you to throw it, then you throw it with small scissors that are convenient for water.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then investigate carefully the extraction of all of them, and leave none cause for you by your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	And if you have any difficulty with the cause of the moisture and in its incisions there is no fear or mistake, then incise those limbs or meats if they are here, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if you have not prepared for cutting the bones of your patient, then pause on the edge of the wound where you can find the edge, and leave that inside which is surrounded by those bone limbs of meat and limbs, and keep the wound where it has not been consolidated, and force the section that you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	While preparing, if you fear, pause on the edge of the wound immersed in tri-salt water, or an Egyptian ink, or one of the strong unguents, because when you introduce those limbs, and the bones are separated from the ablation, and the attraction is relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	And if it is a large bone like the spine or the pelvis or the thigh, and this one of the bones is corroded and blackened, then clean that only behind with a sharp knife after that is completely corrupted, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	And if the water that is corroded by it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the core of the bone, then it is necessary to close that which has been cut completely inside the place where the corruption has entered, and then heal that which has been consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I repeat to you the water that I give to him for this man in his crotch so that he pauses it on himself and assists you in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Focus on a young man for age about 30 years, who suffers pain in his crotch, and the split is large inside that is wrapped around the inner part of the body so that it reaches the crotch, and this is matter of inflammation with great inflammation, and he does not have external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then focus on the time for this error of the measurements so that the inflammation is moderate, and he returns to him the matter quickly, and the swelling becomes large, and the cure returns to him quickly inside that the pelvis is inflamed, and the fistulas form in all orifices which all have pain and moisture in the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then a large number of doctors were called for him because there is pain in it.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the crotch of him and the matter running from those orifices by a large path; and his body was completely stiff, and its color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted my attempt into one of those orifices and brought the attempt to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I searched carefully all the orifices and found this coming from all parts of the crotch.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I hid myself and incised on one of the orifices where I discovered a piece of bone, and removed that which was corrupted, and it was dry and blackened and decomposed; and one part of the crotch had already penetrated into the pelvis.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I closed the wound that was discovered by me and prepared the bone that has been discovered.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I considered that it is not in the bone but that corruption which I have removed and cleaned, and I had already removed it completely.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I resumed the healing of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then I returned and discovered the bone again according to the first discovery, and removed that which continued to corrupt with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I closed the wound that appeared to me after that corruption, and then I resumed the cure and healing of him, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered the other side and did not cease to cut the small bone little by little, and performed the healing of him with a small knife, and then I continued the cure and healing with medicine, and it is completely healed, and it heals.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary repetition in the operation of him and his section but for the disposition of his foolishness and because of the weakness of his tolerance and fear of death, since he falls into all hours by superfluity of vomiting syncope bad.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore it is healed by entire sanatio, and there is nothing in the place of hard os carne; and is made good the disposition of him in his body and returned to the virtue of him; and is turned about in his dispositions and does not make opposite him in ambulacio or injury in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the os eminent is in place of the body has already been cut, then do so that you cut it this way: and that you take care and tightly tighten him at the end of that eminent os, and order a person who extends that tightly; and stops that tightly with wool made grosser than the first tightly; and bring that tightly onto the flesh that is left of the os, and extend the end of him so that you pull the flesh to the split parts, and you uncover the flesh over the place where you want to cut it so that the cut does not touch the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Then stop the flow of blood or table from which the os falls smoothly, for when you make blood not prohibited that cut not harm the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And when the cutting is on the place of corruption little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the os and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and forces to the tightening of him from another side seen.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the os is corrupted and eminent, advance one split continuous up to the other, and the corruption is at the place of him or in a split of his, then you uncover all the flesh entirely; and bring fust from which, and tightly tighten that from the first split where there is corruption until it is completed the tightening of the other split.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And be the cutting according to the place of corruption a little, according as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	But if the corruption is in the joint, cut that joint corrupted, and tightly tighten the os where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then not in him reason but foolishness.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the pect of the head or neck, it is difficult; However do you inquire about the corruption in what way it appears to you, and cut that, and make that according to each disposition which is possible to you, and at any time straightens to you, when it does not make opposite to you a vein or a nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you know what is cutting and the cuts to cut these bones are much according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of them, and the thickness of them, and subtlety and size and smallness of them, and hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare for every kind of operation a tool convenient to that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you know that this operation means to you of the kind of tool which you desire; since it is great study and long and careful thought of the ways of this art, and witnesses of ways of sicknesses, for then already have you seen by yourself what is convenient to him of the instruments to all malado.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I give you simple forms in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will put on them simply as you will make use of them to your prohibition which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Shape of a knife or blade:
Forma de autra serra:	Other Shape of a Knife or Blade:
Forma de autra serra:	Other Shape of a Knife or Blade:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Other Large Shape of a Knife or Blade:
Forma de ray:	Ray Shape:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ray according to the star-like shape of the claw: and the points of him are according to the shape of the points legibly.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And they do not fit except that there is a confusion of the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a great wide mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Other Larger Scissors Shape:
Forma de razori menor:	Other Smaller Scissor Shape:
Forma de razori lat:	Other Wide Scissor Shape:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Other Shape of a Knife or Blade:
Forma de lu:	Shape of a Saw:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Other Scissor Shape with Concave Blades:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Other Subtle Scissor Shape:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Other Scissor Shape with Curved Extremities:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Other Small Scissor Shape Resembling a Tentacle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Other Pincer Shape Used for Bone Incisions:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Other Minor Scalpel Shape:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Other Scissor Shape Resembling a Ray:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The ray shape which fits to the ratio of that which is pierced of the oses:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of him is triangular and has an acute point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian steel, and it seems that all the causes that we have said of razors, incisers, and saws apply to it.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incision ends and the tightening of os bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends can be cut for an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or you will cut that member into this which does not affect any cause, then do so that the corruption passes through that member entirely so that the malado disappears by that water of death or of evil which is a greater removal of that member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that person is that the member becomes black as long as it is affected, or it can be blackened appropriately and then the blackness enters into that member which makes it limp all over the body; so take care to avoid such a thing.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And apparently if it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous things, so with the sting of a sea scorpion or an eagle or a rattlesnake and other things like that.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or stinging is at the end of it, then cut it and do not give space for the corruption to enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And apparently if you have touched the hand, then cut off that part of the fire, and do not give space for the corruption to enter into that member where it has touched the fire in the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you have touched that part, then cut off the arm at the shoulder in the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption and the spine pass around it, then death for that patient is there; and other causes of cure are to be sought out in quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And apparently if corruption appears on the foot as well, then cut off that part of the foot at the toe.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it is taken in the heel of the foot, then cut off the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	May also be entered into the ankle, then cut off the sole at the joint of the ankle.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already come upon the ankle, then there is only one way to save it, and let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way of cutting off a member or of sawing it is that you tighten the ligature in the part where you want to cut, and strengthen another ligature over the spot; and extend the minister a ligature to the ends, and extend another ligature on them; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligatures apart from one another so that all the flesh is uncovered; and then it should be cut or sawn.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And when it has been stopped with a piece of cloth from all parts so that the spot does not touch, and comes to the patient's injury adjusted and poultice cautery.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	May also be a flow of blood when you work, then cauterize the spot properly, or apply some powders to tighten the blood; and return to your medicine until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then tie the aching member with a ligature that suits you, and heal that part so that it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that he goes to a man in his own shoe, this kind of accident which I have recommended to you and which is called the blackness in his own shoe because it was gathered together by fire combustion.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurred in his foot, where it extends all over the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared for himself later than to remove the cure to the member with the speed of his hand which hurts and dries up him; and he cut off the foot at the joint, and fire healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago that corruption occurred in his foot which was infected.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he went to me, and so he performed the surgery on him again which I had performed on his hand, approaching the dissection of his body; and that surgery did not recur, and it began to go to the other hand from the head.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he called on me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to perform the surgery again which would recur on that hand, and rather I performed the surgery of cutting off the hand of that man because the virtue of the patient was over death.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And then he went away from me, and he returned to his own country, and he sent for me that man; and I prepared him, and cut off all his hand, and it was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added to this narrative, but to serve as an assistant for those who fall into this illness, and as a sign of what it means, and according to which it is turned back.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of cures for diseases and the quality of poultices with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an ulcer occurs on thick members and the space of the ulcer is prolonged before it forms a scar, then it is broken and pierced, and drained out from it the pus, and the place where it has been opened is sutured, as if it were a vein, and the thread with which it has been sewn is not cut in the flesh or in nerves or ligatures; it is called an ulcer, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged until corruption advances towards some member, then it is called a fistula, and not named zook.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure for him is that you cut off that entire ulcer with a sharp knife, and more so when it is softened and made with cloth, and that it does not stick to the spot by its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you hope that the ulcer will adhere and that that corruption has not come about by a subsequent infection, and in the ulcer has opened from the front, then treat that with poultices.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And consider the ulcer, and if it is large, and the odor of the flesh is terrible, then poultice it with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil and vinegar and honey, and they are applied to a piece of cloth, and placed over the fire so that the medicine boils and spreads in all directions.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take from it the water which is necessary and dissolves the honey in it; and poultice with that ulcer, and tighten the orifices of it, and leave the medicine on it for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then you remove that with a waste; and water for so many days until it is cleansed the ulcer and is refreshed the breath.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is poulticed with water of ash, when this medicine is not presented to you; and you take the ash and put it on the water; and then you pour that and poultice with it in the ulcer so that you will know that the ulcer has stopped.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or water of ash, then poultice with honey and water and add to it dried rosewater, and poultice with that and honey mixed with vinegar, for the property of honey is that it cleanses and washes, and the vinegar binds the ulcer; and when it has a flow of rosewater, then poultice with that.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have made water a few times and know that the ulcer has stopped, then poultice with water which softens the flesh of him.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take from it an enfleurat and dissolve that with oil of rose and vinegar, or poultice with some medicines which have the properties which I have described in the treatise of the infusions.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the ulcer is straight in which it does not receive the thread of the poultice, then you widen it little by little, and put on it a few layers of cloth impregnated with Egyptian or basilic infusion until it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And apparently if the orifice is wide, then you add the threads to it and leave the quantity in which it fits between the poultices.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of him from which the arm comes up to the shoulders is raised above the part where it runs under, then dry that with a poultice placed on its back, because when the arm is pressed in the cavity of the ulcer, the flesh is torn there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to cut the sinew between the bone and the skin as quickly as you want, then know that you should prepare the member by preparing it so that the leg moves easily according to what you have dressed it and that there be no reason for the leg to stay in it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are poured over the sinew at convenience so that they extend on a cloth of it.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And let the cloth be of such a great quantity that it allows for communication of all the sinew; and place the scissors on the right side of the sinew's orifice a bit more wide than its hole; and then spread another cloth over it according to the amount of the cut, and place it by a far position from the orifice so that the leg's blood is kept away from the cloth and does not wet it for several days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May that which is over the sinew's orifice, which you move constantly so that it does not come in contact with any liquid that may cause the leg' s swelling.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if what is moving from the leg is a lot or a little, or if it is digested or not.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And consider the place of that sinew to you, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the apoplexy.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And if your medicine is prolonged in such a way, and you see that the matter that has stuck to the sinew' s orifice has already dried up, or it has become fixed there, then let it be washed off or change the cloth every third day, and when you wash it off, change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May that if from the sinew comes a subtle virus, then do not despair of its attachment to it, for the leg' s healing is acquired, since in some men with slow generation of flesh in their joints plagues, and in others where it is made the opposite way.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinew comes a lot of days and it is undigested leg, then know that the sinew does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinew is prolonged and caused by the long-term use of medicine, then adjust in drying out of the medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their effectiveness, then dry them out with an ointment of dye in case of the excessive addition of tar.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best aftercare is that you take an ointment of dye and dissolve it in rose oil, and put it on the leg, and use that ointment.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And already it seems similar to that action when there is no leg swelling, take an ointment of dye, and add honey when it is inside that it thickens, and use it; or that you take myrrh and aloes and grind them all together and pour it over the honey when it is on fire, and then spread that one over the sinew; and sprinkle that which has been ground onto a cloth and tie it up.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some times you administer to him a long-lasting aromatic oil and grinds of celestial lilies (and it is the lilies from heaven) and flour of erys, and use that simple or adjust it, grind them and sift them and sprinkle over the honey that I have recommended; and handle it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinew is prolonged and does not heal with this cure, then know that corruption is in the leg' s bone, and already there is an inquiry about the bones or other hard members or at the joints; then you should treat it with a cure by a tube, so that urine comes out.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of cure for paronychia and rubbing of nails and cutting of fingers and sectioning off.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paronychia is an apoplexy that comes from the nail of the toe or finger and is caused by an incision in it or by sectioning it off; when it is prolonged and its cure is not prompt, then know that it is a painful apoplexy or a corrupted apoplexy; or it is rotten, and it has broken the root of the nail, and then know that all of it is corrupted, and then its color becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that one with water that I have said in the division and do not trust your cure, then know that you should cut off all the excess that is coming out from under the nail, and then cauterize the wound appropriately, since cauterization is beneficial in healing.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	May that the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and that additions to the nail have already spread flesh from within the joints, and it has begun to ache and swell, then know that you should pause a sharp thread from the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push that flesh out; and let that one rest over it, so that what remains of the medicine is burned by a corrosive liquid until it is all gone; and then heal that one with an ointment.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	May that if corruption has already entered the bone, then know that you should cut out the bone and extract it, for there is no healing time in which the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if often the corruption and corruption go into the finger, then cut that one in one of the joints according to what it deserves, and then heal that one within.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	May that if the nail has been punched or cut, and then there is pain in it, then know that you should pour the poison at the beginning, and then dry the nail with a sharp edge on it from above; and take care that the cutting does not reach the flesh that is under the nail, for you would cause pain to the patient by causing the poison to come out, and then cause unnecessary swelling in the joint. And then heal that place with an ointment.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May that joint is fixed, which is born in the most of men, it is very flesh and bone, and very much in the bones, or very much in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is born in some of the joints.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	May that which is born in some of the fingers does not harm you, but that which is born in some of the joints causes great pain.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are born flesh, the cutting is slight, and it is because you cut that one from its root with a sharp edge.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	May that which is born in the roots of the joints, healing is difficult; and so guard yourself from separation from it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May that in the finger joint, cut off the flesh at the beginning of it with a round incision into the bone, and then secure it with one of those blades, and then heal that one within.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	May that consolidation happens to the fingers between their joints or by birth of man who has it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning fire, or by analogy; and then dry out that consolidation so that the fingers do not return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then leave between their cloth of it wetted in rose oil so that it does not solidify greatly, and separate them from each other, or leave between them a thin piece of lead so that it hardens according to what you know.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if consolidation happens to some of the fingers on the palm, then dry that consolidation according to how it has been prepared and adapt it to the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incisions of times, there are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices so are varicas, and so are thick veins full of melancholic excesses that occur at the extremities of the body, and most of all in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore I advise you to administer a purge of black cholera in some cases with a strong vomit, and then draw blood from the patient's basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the cure for them has two methods: one is that it be cut and that black blood be drawn, and another is that the vein be lifted and all of it be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision on him is according to this manner: dip the thigh at the beginning with water from within so that the thick blood be resolved, which is ferment of the thigh, and then tighten the thigh of the patient at the start by a cloth, and then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three in a wide incision, and then raise black blood up to the patient's hand from within his thigh, and then down into it, so that the amount be extracted which you wish, and which is enough for him. And this tolerates the virtue of the poultice.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then bind it, and command him that he abstain from black blood-generating foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure with bloodletting when veins are filled and it is felt by the poultice.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you who scrape the patient' thigh, if it is sore for him, and then dip it in water from within so that it thickens and veins are inflamed; or that he be exercised by a strong exercise, if bath is not to your hand, so that the limb be scarred.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the cord at the right of the vein by incision in the long or in the back of it you must cut it from behind, or at the bottom of it you must cut it off.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the cord with nails and extract the vein from all of it until you feel it coming out, and this is the appearance of it that sometimes comes out black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so if you drain it and of the cord sometimes comes out white what is called a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then hang that away from him by rope so that it be raised and taken off the cord, and suspend it by an ounce or a lion's tooth.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another incision near that one by three inches, and then extract the cord from the start of it from within the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise that one and cut it in the back section you must cut it off, and then extract that one and raise it up until it is extracted by the second incision, and then extract that one from the section that is above that one.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And then make a hole where you extract that one from the section that is uppermost or farthest from all of the sections, so that it is all extracted; and then cut that one.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey me that you extract and raise it, then insert a double sharp needle and tie that one up, or insert the rope from behind him and turn your hand over all of it until it is tied up.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And keep in mind that if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to extract that one, and it has come out on the poultice through that needle.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when that one is completely extracted, then place it over the location of the swollen vein immersed in wine and oil rosy and not rosy, and cure that within which has been healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the wine has been contracted without there being a tortuosity through which it was enveloped in the extremities, and is not according to rectitude according to that I have said, then I advise you to make a cut on that one at all parts of tortuosity from him and places of envelopement for him, and then suspend that one with nails so that you raise that one completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And keep in mind that your section must not cut the vein and not wound that one, for it will be difficult for you to raise that one; and serve your prudence on that one.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision with which the wine is dried:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of the sharp needle:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	Is not to him Accuited in this way with the needles nor is of acute extremity so that it does not wound the vein; and is of great flexibility for, if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; however, keep in mind its superfluous coarseness.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of extraction of the vein of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in flat lands in this way when the sun is in the sky, as it is in the Arabs' land and in the arid lands of little heat and where there is no grass or water.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And very strong it is generated in other parts of the body except for the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its production is of putrefaction that comes from within the cord in this way when there are snakes, worms, and insects born between the cord and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the coming of it is of this vein that occurs in the leg inflammation with fierce heat, and then the place is swollen; and then the vein begins to come out from the location of that swelling as if it were a root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, as soon as he has come out of the body, cover that piece of lead with which the weight of one dragon is balanced, and place it on the chest; and let the lead hang from the back.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And in so many cases when there is some reason for it to be in the extremities, wrap it in lead and then weigh that one.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you cut a section of him and wrap it up; and do not cut that one of root within which has been extracted, for if you cut that one, it will be contracted and enter the flesh, causing swelling and sore in the location and ulceration and bad healing.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it is treated with heat and is extracted little by little, so that it comes out from behind him, and does not stick to anything in the body for any reason.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And of this vein is extracted in so many men who are of their length of the palm and are given up, and I have already come to me that I extract one of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut in the hour of its medicine, then insert a sharp instrument into the middle of him and pierce that one with a long sharp instrument through the body so that all that is in the matter is removed, and administer putrefaction of the location for several days with medicines; and then cure that one by treatment of ulcers.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein has caused some rashes in some cases, and most of all when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it comes out through the holes; and is extracted from each hole as if it were a root.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then treat that one in this way when we have said, in the division and above what has been said.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section above worms generated under the skin and is called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called specifically in some lands as bovine illness because it appears in the animals and is rare a type of worm that is born between the cord and flesh, and goes into all the body causing pain, breaking the cord and leaking it out, and it appears at the feeling that has to be its own reaction to the member's movement within which the cord is broken and leaks out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is of putrefaction of certain humors in this way when worms, snakes, worms, and asci are generated in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the malice of him, because when he goes in the body and is raised to the head, and comes to the heart, a strong fever comes upon him and enters and destroys the heart, and there are visible motes.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to treat it and remove it, do not do anything without first preparing his body and mind for the operation, and then go in and cut off what is above it and what is below it firmly and tightly, and then dry it out completely and remove it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is sinking in the flesh and not being removed, then you stop cauterizing that place where it is located, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it, so that it corroded the flesh as I have said before.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	But if that person comes to the heart near the stomach, then tighten it with a strong bandage and dry it out completely and remove it; and let the patient use medicine to evacuate the bad fluids by causing vomiting and keep away from food that causes putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of surgery for disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called nafir in our land, and it causes pain that spreads to the joints, and then it changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that second thing that I will recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	And I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I saw her arm swollen and there was a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and it continued to swell for an hour, and then it went away little by little, as if it were alive, flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain of that place came into the muscle and stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it went to the other side, entering into the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I told him to turn over completely, as I had seen it; and he was very amazed at the change of position and at the speed with which it went from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I have already seen that before in my bones according to that way, but I have never seen the movement of the members as it is now.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see that in the bones when the woman was sick.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think that it would be like this because the woman was young, whose body is dry and has no veins covered up, and in this appearance, the movement of the members was evident.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear in this way, because it is a return cure for those who are weak and have soft veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to treat the patient and he feels that pain, do not appear to him as I have said before; then tighten it and dry it out completely in that place where the wind is stopped, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in the bones, then cure it with the excretion of the body and with water that expels wind, and with pills made from dried herbs and those that resemble them.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are different depending on the type of herb and the location of the body where they lodge, because their diversity is this: some of them have large tips, small ones, hollow ones, solid ones; and some have three angles, while others have tongues; and some are star-shaped.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and feet where it lodges is according to two ways: because the main members lodge with the skull, the heart, the chest, the lung, the lungs, the budels, the bladder, and those similar to them; but when it lodges in any of these members and you feel a death-like sensation, which I will recommend to you, then know that you should avoid extracting that arrow from those because death seizes them. And if you do not appear to these bad sensations, and the arrow is not lodged in the depth of the member, then extract it and cure the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the senses is when it enters into the arrow and pierces the bone, and it comes from the skull, because it causes a violent headache, vertigo, rigor in the joints, inflammation, and rigor of the tongue, convulsions, confusion of thought, and colicky vomiting; and then it separates a word strongly, and it is destroyed; and it is located in the area of the plague with white secretions resembling pus, and it has a similar taste to the moistness of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if these sensations appear to you, then you should abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But if the arrow lodges in the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and you feel that it is stuck in a hard place, and does not cause any pain; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and the pain of the plague disappears blackly, and freezes the extremities, and makes a hissing sound, and faints; and if you knew that death descends completely.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the lungs when the arrow has plague are frothing with a sputum of plague, and the vessels that are near the throat are dilated, and the color of the patient changes, and they breathe heavily and ask for air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow lodges in the veil that is on the foot, and the pain then comes to the small ribs, and it causes great pain and a sigh, and all the members of the muscles do not work well.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow lodges in the stomach, then it causes great pain from a digestive disease.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow lodges in the belly and gets stuck, then a wound from the plague or bladder or bowel is torn apart, and there is no hope for treatment by extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow lodges in the bladder, and it eliminates urine outside, and causes some disease to come out outside, and then it causes great pain on the patient's back; then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not lodge in any vein or artery, and is not an evil arrow; and the various types of arrows that enter the body are: those that lodge in the bones, and those that go into the chest, and those that go into the neck, and those that go into the arms, and those that go into the legs, and those that go into the abdomen, and those that go into the bladder, and those similar to them.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recommend to you that you understand about these arrows so that you know how to treat them properly.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	That is because an arrow can lodge in the eye of a person through the nose; and I extracted it from him completely, leaving his ear intact, and it healed without causing any damage to his ear.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Judge who had lodged it in his ear; and then I left the eyelid intact, and the arrow was hidden completely, and it did not succeed in taking off even a small part of his ear; and it was an arrow of sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head on it.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And that is the Judge's sentence, and no harm came to his ear.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had lodged it in his neck; and it was an Arab arrow, and that is the one with the ears; and then I carefully extracted it, and it healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from the man which was lodged in his belly, and thought that I should die of it; but since three days have passed and there has been no change in his condition or his disposition, I cut into the arrow and tied it up, and he recovered, and nothing bad happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow was lodged in his thigh, and the plague settled on him; and since it has been seven years, and there is no change in him, I cut off the arrow at its head, and he recovered, and nothing bad happened to him.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow was lodged in her belly, and the plague settled inside her; and she has not changed in her condition or disposition, and the woman has not suffered any harm in any of her natural parts.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow was lodged on his face and the plague settled there; it broke the arrow, but he did not suffer any harm except for a slight pain, and the appearance of the wound was similar to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the king's princes which was lodged in his nose, and it had already fallen on the right side a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And he was called to the treatment of him immediately after three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I relieved the plague of the arrow with a sharp attempt; and then I inquired about that gently, and did not feel it; but he felt a pain on the right ear, and then I realized that that pain was caused by the extreme end of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied an ointment to the place with an effective and digestive virtue, promising that the place would give itself to me so that I could see the place where the arrow was lodged, in order to stop it from spreading there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And it did not happen in the place where the accident occurred that the arrow had lodged itself; and I continued to apply the ointment to him for several days, and there was no accident; but while the plague settled during that time, it broke out again in another part by space of five days, until one day he felt the arrow come out of his nose, and he brought it to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I stopped the plague with an acute corrosive medicine for several days, until it broke out again; and then I tasted it, and I relieved the extreme end of the arrow which was adhering to the stick.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted it in the treatment of the plague with that acute medicine until the extreme end of the arrow was clearly visible to me, and passed it through my hands for a space of time up to four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then the plague became stronger, and I tried to reach it with my fingers, and I removed it in this way, but at the end of those efforts I did not succeed; so I decided to take a different approach, and I performed a surgery by cutting through the skin with scissors, according to what was possible to do; then I extracted it, and that plague was relieved.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors said that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it; and the plague settled, and healed completely; and there was no harm done to him in any of his natural parts.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I will return to you the quality of extracting some arrows; that you stop them with a rule and consider them carefully, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by me in narrative form or in written form.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise men know it little by little; and that which is presented here is when it is present; and they operate with a new method and use new instruments to bring down foreign causes of disease when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And I say that arrows are not shot from the members in which they are lodged, but according to two ways: either by attraction of the place where it is located, or by repulsion of the opposite part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is shot from the body's place enters and passes through the flesh, and is shot out and removed.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not observe the time when it is captured, then know that you leave it for several days until you can find the meat which surrounds it, and the attraction of it will be reduced and its exit will be easy.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And apparently if it is lodged in the bones and you do not observe it carefully, then leave it for several days and continue to apply attraction and moisture to it every day, and it will be shot out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not observe it carefully for several days, then know that you pierce the path of the arrow in that bone from all sides with a sharp tool; and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is lodged in one of the bones of the head and has already penetrated into one of the cavities of the brain, and appears in the plague which I have described, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it for several days; because if the arrow pierces the brain, death will be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not lodged except in one of the bones and does not pass into any cavity of the brain, and remains in the plague for several days, then you will be able to extract it with a sharp tool; and you will be able to operate on it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is just lodged, and you do not extract it, then administer to it the same way as I have described here, and then heal the place.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow has already entered into its place in the body and is causing pain, then you will ask about that with an attempt; and if you feel it, then shoot it with some instruments which are suitable for attracting it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it by the constriction of the plague and its length, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein here, then you will act on the plague until it becomes stronger so that you can extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is under the ears, which are attached, then you will free the meat in which it is lodged from all sides as much as possible; and operate on it, because if you cannot reach the ear by twisting the bones, you can disassemble them.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you extract the arrow from any place where it is located, then use your hand with scissors at all times until it makes the arrow obeaise; and use subtle methods to extract it little by little so that the arrow does not break and is extracted from it difficult attraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot reach that with your hand in a short time, then leave it for several days until the parts which are not attached to it can be removed; and then repeat it, because it will be less difficult.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you cause opposite flows of blood, then administer to him the cure which I have described in this chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your skill in cutting veins or nerves, or strings; and perform surgery on him with all the ease and caution possible; and I will return to you what has been said here and more.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And then you will turn the arrow away from itself, so that the plague follows its natural course; because it is more useful to follow the figure according to which the arrow was lodged in it, as it is easier.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then administer water which is possible for you by the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Mays the arrows that are shot out by the opposite side, or that you have already proceeded with some part to the parts of outside, or do not make it too big a hole in the tip of the arrow by feeling the part above the cord next to it and times there is an eminence; then wipe off that one; and cut it according to the amount in which the forceps hold; and throw it away, because it is only made easy.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If the arrow is stuck in the bone, then you should twist it according to the opposite direction in which the arrow goes into the bone, and increase the rotation; and then remove that one.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat the operation inside until it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the tip of the arrow is in that one, then you should press that one down.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the tip has fallen and you want to give a shock, then insert that one, if it is hard, use a sharp object in order for it to enter into the concave part of the arrow and press that one down.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrow is hollow, then you should press that one down with a sharp object so that it enters into the arrow, because the arrow is relieved by that one.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then you should cut out all of the meat in which it is lodged, as much as possible, and then clean that one with water; and if it is necessary to remove it.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the arrow has hit any of these parts: the foot, the abdomen, the bladder, or the rib cage, and is so close that you touch it with your hand, then wipe off that one and be careful not to cut any veins or nerves, and remove that one; and if necessary, cut off the affected part until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of the forceps from which the arrows are shot:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	If their ends are made like a hook, and they are made with scissors when they hold on to the arrow so that it does not escape.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from those are made special threads, large, small and very thin according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its flexibility, and the width of the wound, and the contraction thereof.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of the concave end from this one that is made like a hook in such a way that it is relieved by the arrow inside it, and pushing from that one that is hard:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the end that is hard:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	in such a way that it is relieved by the inside of the arrow in the concave part and is pushed into it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	of bloodletting from veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which bloodletting is customary to take are: from which bloodletting is done on the head. (1) two pulsating veins that are close to the ears, called auricles;
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins to be bloodletting in the arms are: 5. Because one of these is a head vein, and it should be taken from the wild side; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is a vein that is stopped in the middle of the forehead, and it is named because it is stopped by the finger; and it is called "citillar" by the common people, and they call that one "the vein of the belly"; and the veins that run from the arm, and they are stopped over the fire, and that one is the one that is bloodletting, and it appears clearly on top of the finger with two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And on the foot and leg there are three veins: the first one of those is that which stops at the bend of the ankle bone of the wild side; and the second one is called soft, its location is stopped at the bend of the ankle bone of the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, its location is stopped at the bend of the leg; and there are other veins that resemble those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The beginning of these veins that are close to the ears is made from small, emigrant, safford and ulcerous blood vessels on the head from old bad blood.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those veins is according to what you observe: it is that the head of the person be shaved, and that the scalp be rubbed well with a cloth; and then tighten the person's hair with a bandage tightly around their head until you can clearly see the two veins and their locations close to the ears at the top of the head; and want to cut those ones with a knife, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, then do not attempt it.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the knife, and it is that one that is inserted into the cavity, and it is that one that is stopped within the cavity until the bloodletting reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then you raise your hand towards the vein and the cavity, and you insert it with a sharp object into the space above the vein; and cut the vein with a sharp object.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the cut is the quantity of two fingers or more of water; and make a hole in the vein as much as you want to.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then tighten it well, and leave that one inside until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And in the beginning of this book, the cutting of those veins and their cauterization have been described.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The bloodletting on the two arterial veins that are located in the temples is done to old, evil, and frequent headaches that flow into the holes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting on those veins is according to what you observe: tighten the hair of the person' head with a bandage tightly around their head until you can clearly see the two veins by feeling them with your finger, and then test them with your finger; and if you feel the pulse of those veins, then do not attempt it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then you raise the cavity above the vein with your finger, and insert it into those veins that are open by a sharp object from the side; and make the cut with a sharp object; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of what is necessary for you.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you cut off the hair of the person' head, and pause the bleeding for an hour; then put your hand on that one and tighten it with a strong grip, and leave that one inside until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And in the beginning of this book, their memories are described; and those veins are cut, and their cauterization is described.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And so the bloodletting from the forehead vein is done to old bad headaches, and to emigrant, robust, and ulcerous, putrid blood vessels on the head.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the bloodletting is according to what you observe: if the hair of the person' head be shaved, and that the scalp be rubbed well with a cloth; and then tighten the person' hair with a bandage tightly around their head until you can see the vein; and take the instrument that is called a scissor, from which this one is made:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then pause the point that is eminent on the head of the scissor on that vein, and cut it with your hand or with another cause in the manner of it, and leave the blood flow according to the quantity you want; then remove the hair of the person' head, and tighten it well, and leave that one inside until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some of them are opened by the use of bloodletting, but I will not cover that bloodletting is of acute extremities just like others; it should be on one side rather than on both sides, and it should be applied across from one side to the other, for the bone is close together and very strong and would easily break if bloodletting were applied with a sharp blade in such a way.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the healing take place in two veins that run along the sides of the cheeks by the sharp and soft edge of a scalpel, and to the hernias of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient be bound with a cloth to his head and then bloodletting is done; you should stand above his head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And bloodletting should be done across from one side to the other with a small amount; for in that spot there is no flesh; and if the bloodletting is fine, then the edge of that side is easily broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And you should have the sand placed as much as necessary for it; and place them on those parts, and tighten them with a thong, and remove them afterwards.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the bloodletting of the nose be done in order to produce acute fever and a violent swelling, and to the hernias of the face and the headache and rigor that occurs on the face, especially when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the bloodletting on his head is that he binds himself with a cloth and then he takes his left hand; and take hold of a small needle in your right hand, and place it on the top of his nose according to the straight line, for the vein does not appear here by feeling, and because the sand begins to flow after a while.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Consider that you finish your bloodletting little by little and let the sand run according to your need; and then tie it with a thong, for it is restored slightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the bloodletting of two veins be done by a constriction of a string and the beginning of leprosy, and other bad diseases and painful and corrosive ulcers, just like hemorrhoids.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the bloodletting on them is that the patient binds himself with a string to each of his legs; and let the craftsmen be above his head, and the patient stand on a bench.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then bloodletting is done in the long vein with a wide needle little by little; and then take off a certain amount of sand according to the season or as much water as necessary, and then do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then you should loosen the string and tighten the two veins a little with a thong so that the patient does not choke; and let him lie down on his back because the plague is cured.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the bloodletting of the veins that run along the cheeks and cause small blisters in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that are on the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the bloodletting on them is that you stand in front of him, and bind his neck with a cloth, and open his lips wide and examine two veins, one on the right side of his lip and the other on the left; and the color of each of them is darker than the color of the other two; and then cut each of them with a sharp blade.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	And if you are in doubt, leave him; and do not know which of them is, then go back to cutting the main one of them, and from the manifest blisters on them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make a mark on the two veins that run along his cheeks.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Then customarily, cut more often on one of the two veins that run along the cheeks.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	May the healing of two veins that run along the cheeks be done before the bloodletting of the head is done because it causes pain; for the healing of the uvula and the mouth is painful.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bloodletting on them is that you stand in front of him towards the sun, and raise his tongue; and look at his tongue, one vein from one side to the other, and its color changes to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then bloodletting is done on each of them; and be careful not to finish your bloodletting on those veins because they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are bloodletting in the arm are the ones on which it is customary to do bloodletting on all men, and the bloodletting of them is done in two ways; or they put a small blade in order to cut with subtlety changing; or cut with a razor blade, and if it does not work, then this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And that one works by cutting and from those special narrow veins and according to the thickness of the veins.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of bloodletting with a razor blade:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Cut the vein with a blade from time to time, and it is done by opening the concave veins that are full of blood, and to those that contain thick blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of bloodletting with an olive:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bloodletting method has a smaller blade and more subtle sharpness, and it is done by bloodletting on veins that contain subtle citric blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the healing of the bloodletting on the basilic vein take place because it is one of three veins: for it removes the sand from the headache and back that are on the left side, and from there, it goes to the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is the duty of the bloodletting doctor when he does that bloodletting to keep him away from danger because he is dealing with an artery, and if he makes a mistake in the puncture of the bloodletting, he will cut that artery and cause a lot of sand; so be careful not to do that bloodletting with a sharp blade.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic does not appear by a manifest sign, then you should leave that vein and go to another one, or look for some hair; or bloodlet on the end of his arm because that is where it is; and cut it with an razor blade, and if it does not work, then this is its form:
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	And if you want to do bloodletting on the foot, then consider that you stand in front of the tightness of his arm at the spot where you can feel the pulse, and then put your hand on it; and then open the arm and cut the vein with a razor blade, and if it does not work, then this is its form: cut it with an razor blade, and if it does not work, then this is its form:
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see it, with a strong hand, place your hand on the spot where you feel the pulse; then that inflammation is an inflammation of the artery, and so it stops.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the sand flows in bloodletting in the form of a child's breath, and the sand is fine; then you know that it is from the sand of the artery; and then put your hand on it and pause it for a long time; and then stop the pulse, for if the sand is cut off, then you should tighten his arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient away from the moisture of the air, and let him be afraid of him and do not touch that place for a few days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the sand is not cut off, and it is necessary that you do not give medicine to water, then you should cut the artery, if it appears at your hands; for its end is contracted, and the sand is cut off; or take a piece of mustard, and open that vein, and place one hand on the spot where the vein runs, and tighten it with a thong, and put the other hand under the vein, and then tie it up, and if it does not work, then this is its form:
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the bone has been cut off, it is good; and if not, then heal that place from which the blood flows due to the cutting off of the bone.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the removal of the bone from him is difficult in certain situations because of the small size of the wound and the possibility of the limb being amputated.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But if blood comes from the black vein, then quickly remove it with a bloodletting scissor at the root of the head and at the root of the body; for this is composed of branches from the skull and branches from the head, as I have said before.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And if the person who is undergoing bloodletting is afraid of bloodletting on him, because it will hurt him; and then adjust the cut with the bloodletting scissor and tie up the nerve, it will cause him to be in a stupor, and his recovery will be difficult; and it will not heal completely. And these nerves are seen moving when they are felt; and if they are overlooked at some people, and are subtle and are not visible, then pause bloodletting from where you cut with the scissor, and avoid hurting the nerve with your tourniquet.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should open the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The quickness of bloodletting from the head vein is that it removes the blood from the head and prevents the headaches from the patient.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this specifically, if you want the bloodletting needles to be used for olive bloodletting or bloodletting with a blade; because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not hurt the arteries or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But however, you must also consider that when performing bloodletting, you do not poke the scalp too much with the needle, and seek out the softest place, and do not hit it with the first punch; if you do, then a few drops of blood will come out.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But however, it is firm for some people to react with bloodletting when they are not bloodleted in the first punch; and if they do not know about this pus, then it will happen.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of the bloodletting from that person and its accidents are what you should consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first one is that from which bloodletting should not be done unless it is in the interest of health and out of fear of accidents; and that it should be done in the first spring, at the beginning of spring, and in the first autumn, and in winter close to the meal time, when there appear signs of fullness.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And do bloodletting on the third day or as soon as possible after three hours have passed from the morning.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But bloodletting that is administered, more so when it causes convenience and necessity to the person, or at night or during the day, at any time and in any place.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And that you do not bloodlet if you are over twelve years old, and women should not be bloodleted unless they are in the seventh month, and elderly people should not be bloodled if they have already passed sixty years old.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wants to be bloodleted in some way, then make sure that the intestines are clean before the bloodletting with a bellows, if there is a retained hernia; so that the veins do not draw out the superfluity during bloodletting from the intestines, which are harmless, and they do not hurt the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not bloodlet patients who are nauseous and have a hangover, or who are escaping from disease or drunkenness; and that bloodletting is avoided when the person has a sore throat, or a headache, or many pains, or an upset stomach, or excessive exercise, or long meals or vigils, or any other reason that destroys the strength of the body or the animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider with great care the types of foods and drinks that are eaten and drunk before bloodletting, and medicines as well; because it will affect the outcome of bloodletting on the person.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And you should not bloodlet if there is any reason to prohibit it, or exercise in any way that would cause the blood to be drawn out.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause bloodletting from him at the feet of the day; therefore, it is about three hours after morning.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And I instruct you that the feet of that person should be kept away from any animal accidents, such as anger, fear, and sorrow; and from all unnecessary work, and eating, and resembling their behavior.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at the same time, you should not consider the causes of the person's common problems with aromatics and odors, and balms, and resembling them according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the bloodletting person on a mat that is soft or that the mat of that person should be bloodletting.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And remove the arms of the person, and rub them with the bloodletting needle twice or three times; and fasten the limb with a strap and wrap it in two layers.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And it is a moderate fast, because the fast without food, or with less food, does not affect the blood; or if it affects the blood as a mild effect, then prohibit eating meat.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And the fast should be followed by that person who is to be bloodleted; and rub your hands together between them, so that the veins swell up, and they are apparent to the touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the bloodletting person's needle should be unsealed with a little old oil specifically; and pause their left hand on that vein from which you want to start bloodletting, so that the vein runs a little, and stops bleeding because of the veins being constricted; when the needle is placed on that vein, it should not be drawn out, and if it is drawn out, then stop bloodletting.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	So, for this reason, the bloodletting person should be kept quiet and calm in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause bloodletting if the vein is hidden in a crease, otherwise, move a little away from that place, or above the navel, if the place has been hit.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is hit, or the patient is frightened, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not fasten the limb, because it will cause a lot of blood to come out quickly, and it does not enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the bloodletting if you like it.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the person's reaction is small and their blood is drawn out slowly, and you worry that it will not draw out enough blood, then repeat the bloodletting in that place a second time, and adjust the cut a little, and do not fasten the limb; because the place is hit with a lot of people, so there should be a few drops.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if that person has already been hit, then do not repeat the bloodletting there, because there is no excuse for it; and pause on that part of the oil crease, because it is comforting to the body' blood vessels.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than that of oil and the other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And administer oil fenda in all bloodletting, and the veins should be avoided from bloodletting because of the person' blood; and when you pause from one of those places on that part, because the blood is drawn out quickly when it is large; and apply the drink of honey and sage when stopped from either of those places, because the blood is drawn out slowly.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of the bloodletting is born a great pustule, for certain it happens that the blood flows freely there, and mainly to that which is not bleeding but the pustule, or in the sight of the small vein, and then you stop and put a sponge soaked with water and salt on the spot, slightly burned, and tighten it for an hour, for it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And when the water comes out again from the vein, so as to fill it with blood, or another vein, and let it flow.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if some black or greenness remains in the place for a few days, there is no water; and if you want to, put on that spot any substance of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or any substance of mint extract or calamus or similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And so that the bloodletting can be done from the base.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And so place your hand on that spot, and if it hurts, then you feel pain in that spot; and then take care to put something that stops the flow of blood from that artery, for a lot will flow from it.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an ointment with it so that the place is hardened, and then treat that with the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And when you have drawn all the blood from the person according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the prevailing color over the blood, according to what appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then leave it to congeal until it hardens; and if it is thick, then leave it to thin out until it is sharp; and if it is clear, then leave it to harden its clarity.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And when that person is fat and strong and needs bloodletting in a single vein, let the bloodletting from the vein be increased and the bloodletting be prolonged.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And when that person is feverish, do the opposite of what was done before; and when you draw blood from him in several veins, let the trauci be tight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing that can be administered in bloodletting through a vein is to make a transverse section, not to pierce it.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of bloodletting is saved from the flow of blood and from the cutting of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and more saving than bloodletting according to latency and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And when the person is accustomed to fainting, then do bloodletting before giving him a little piece of bread soaked in milk or simple syrup burned; and draw the blood from him in three veins or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if the person is weakened by sickness, then put on him before bloodletting a little infusion of myrrh or an infusion of honey flavored with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or an infusion with fragrant spices, or a flavorful infusion and a bit of pepper.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs due to bloodletting, and it is a cause of the person's weakness, then put on him drinking water of meat and infusion of fragrant spices slightly diluted; and use something similar, and bind his feet with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes we have mentioned in the division about fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to remove the person's arms and dissolve his blood according to a motion evacuation, and his virtue is feverish, he should remove the blood little by little every day.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But if he wants to remove the person' arms and take away his blood according to a second extraction, and his body is strong, then do bloodletting from him every seven or nine hours after the first one.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But if he wants to remove the person' blood from his body in the opposite way of what was done before, then do so on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But that body in which there is much blood and it is hot and feverish, then draw the person' blood from one vein and make many incisions until fainting occurs, more than if the bloodletting had been done by a skilled and careful person. And place your hand on the person' pulse, so as not to die of fainting, because it happens that the heart stops beating when the blood is drawn out.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is not good when you want to remove the arms and take away the blood according to a second extraction, although the vein orifice has already been closed and it is difficult to draw the blood, for then you press down on it with force and bend it painfully, for that is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	And wait until the bloodletting is over, or let it coagulate in the vein orifice, or put a light compression on it so that the blood comes out again; or place it on tarry ochre or rosewood, and compress lightly until the blood comes out again.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is pustulated, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the pus has settled.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity forces you to remove the blood according to a second extraction, and it is not an excuse, then draw it from that spot or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "bracing" is bloodletting in place of the veal or bazooka, when not bent or swelled, because it is made up of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient's hand enters into the water tail-first, so that it dries out and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then make a section on it with a sharp instrument, and bloodletting according to the transverse little method, not laterally or according to length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make an opening wide, and do bloodletting on that spot with your hand a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if you prevent the flow of blood, then put your hand in the water tail-first and let the blood run into the water until you obtain what is necessary.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in summer, then you are excused from the hand-in-water method; and the season is paused for drawing the person' blood in water tail-first during wintertime.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And this vein's bloodletting is more saving than that of any other vein, because it does not have a pulsating vein or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the bloodletting from the right arm's palm is done according to the method of the small finger.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of bloodletting is that you hold your hand firmly with a strong grip or slightly, because you have put it in the water tail-first, so that the vein swells and is clearly visible; and then do bloodletting on that spot transversely; and if you cut off that spot, you will not see the blood.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep your hand from being cut off during bloodletting, because those nerves are bare flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then put your hand in the water tail-first and let the blood run into that spot, because if you do not dip that spot in the water, the blood will coagulate at the vein's orifice, which is prevented from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when you draw blood according to need, then place it on a sponge soaked with oil and salt, so that it is not hard; and if it seems hard, then do so slightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	And the improvement of bloodletting from the left arm' palm is that it is done according to the method of the small finger; and the season is paused for drawing the person' blood in water tail-first during wintertime.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And make a similar incision in the patient as you did in the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the incision of the venous artery in the patient is made where there are openings to the outside at the end of the crotch, as well as the openings that occur from the mother’s breasts, and the retention of menstruation, and the openings of the nostrils and ulcers of the crotch and old breasts, and their similarity to those openings.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the patient’s incision is that the foot should be immersed in cold water and a friction made on it until veins appear; then place the knife over the joint of the foot; and from that vein, make branches towards the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And so, in the incision, place a wide patch and from it make branches to the knife; for it is better and more effective that way.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you make the incision on the foot’s surface, then take care of the nerves that are under it on the surface of the foot; and place your incision in such a way as if you wanted to cut it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	and be careful with the incision.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if it is forbidden to let the blood flow; then you will immerse the foot in cold water and let the blood flow from it until it has been drained.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bleed is too much in the first incision, then repeat the incision a few times, for the location is good; and do not fear from it, but take care of the nerves, as we have said above.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And make a similar incision on the other foot inwards.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, its location is as we have said, to be cut where it begins at the crotch.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the incision of the patient is made from the hip when there is blood coming out from the incision.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the patient’s incision is that the foot should be immersed in a bath, and it should be done quickly and firmly; cut the skin from the hip bone until the vein appears; do this with four fingers together in a long thin cloth, for it does not appear except by water.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then make the incision on it with one cut or two cuts across, and this is better done than not; or cut it by incision or cut it by sectioning it off, for its location is good.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	It is in men with a slow pulse; and if you feel that it does not appear on the sensation of two fingers, then make an incision on a branch of it, and this one appears between the second and third vertebrae of the neck; and the ring finger also appears in the middle of the second vertebrae.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And take care of the nerves, and let the blood flow as much as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then return the intestine to its cavity and tighten it up; for lightly the incision heals.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Of ventilation and of the qualities of dealing with corns, or of warts, or of healing.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And the ventilation is made according to two methods: one is by incision and extraction of blood; and the other is by ventilation through incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation that is by incision is according to two methods, for it is either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the places where ventilation is administered by incision and extraction of blood are twelve parts of the body, from which one is behind the neck, and this is the last division of the head; and another part between two molars in front of the mouth; and two spatulas; and two horns; it is over the heel bone; and two blades; and two claws; and two nipples.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract blood but from the small veins in the flesh, and through this, virtue is not extracted by incision; nor is it done with fire or without fire, as ventilation that is made because of an opening of the body that is completely empty.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity leads to ventilation because of illness or constantly; we bring it forward at the beginning of the meal and at its end; and in the middle place, and whenever is necessary.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	And the cause of this is because in men who have an abundance of blood that can be extracted through ventilation and stolen from their heads, which causes them great fatigue; and these are those who suffer from headaches and dizziness, and darkness of vision and stupor in their eyes; and those whose breath multiplies; and those whose tongue sticks to the roof of their mouth, and spitting up blood; and those who sweat with sleep, and those who have dreams and visions during sleep.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore, if these things happen for such a cause, and especially if it is during the third or sixth hours of the day, then order ventilation to be made sooner than at the end of the day, within two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the cause of ventilation from the nape is that when it makes weight on the head and sinks into the throat; but take care that this does not mean a complete evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is in the place of the venous incision on the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good to use water that is too hot or cold; for this gives great pain.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And through the water does not pass that people should bathe in it, nor do their heads have fevers.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to those who, while making ventilation on their heads, become conscious of the sensation of it; and take care that your hand is not over the ventilation, so as not to cause confusion about consciousness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventilation of alcohol is in the place of incision on the jugular vein and the carotid artery; and through this it causes shortness of breath, constriction of the larynx, and stabbing with scissors, and coughing, and a tightness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And take care that the alcohol ventilation is not stopped for even a moment; for if it stops, it causes weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventilation of alcohol causes headaches in the head and blindness, and migrans, and pre-focus, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and this is in the place of incision on the carotid artery.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And take care that your hand does not press too much on the ventilation, so as not to cut the artery and cause a rush of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And if ventilation is stopped in the mouth, it causes alcohol to taste good in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and a similarity to those illnesses that occur in the mouth; and this is in the place of incision elsewhere than on the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But ventilation that is made on the two spatulas causes a headache through heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And ventilation through the two holes from within causes a good incision of three veins; and those are from the carotid artery, the jugular vein, and the cerebral vein; for those veins are smaller than the others inside, and those veins come together with them to make a path for the blood to flow.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventilator not to cut too much in incision; because it is denuded of flesh, and leaves aside its nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a wind that blows over the legs and gives to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and the ulcers put there.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And when you command the ventilator to be a strong wind, and that it is of air, for the place demands strong section; and strong hand over subtle torn winds, and be scarified with the scarifier.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Lesser winds of the legs decrease very much by manifest caution, for they will attract the blood from all over the body, and confer it to old pains in the chest and the head, and to the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and confer it to bothorrhea and biliousness; and are in place of phlebotomy of two veins, and ablation, and of two tendons.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However they can debilitate the whole body and cause fainting spells in men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the ablation winds, the restoration is proportionate to the restoration of the two-legged wind.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the winds is that you pause the wind at the beginning to see and drain through the opening in time, and do not prolong the position of the winds, but pause them slightly, and maintain them firmly, and let the humors come to the place by way of arrival inside.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat it until you see the place already redden and swell and that the handiness of the hand appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then scarify yourself, and repeat the little dung in little amounts, and then consider the disposition of the bodies.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who has tender meat, when you scarify it once and not again, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the ventilator to increase the scarification a little, and make easy the dung.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if in the hand is large, then when you scarify two times, for in the first scarification the way of subtleisation to the hand and its water is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And less in the second to the acquired scrutiny of the gross extraction of the hand.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the hand is very fatty, then the third scarification should be made so that it achieves the last one.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract little by little or a little bit, it is enough to us with one scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract from one hand, scarify with a heavy scarification; and if you tell me that the hand is large, then when you scarify with a heavy scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	Is the end of scarification in which the depth of the wound is only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if that hand whose knuckle is large, hard, rough, and the pores narrow, then when the places of the winds are softened slightly, opened broadly; if it is in summer, then also with oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of purple-colored flowers, or oil of chamomile root; and if it is in winter, then oil of rose, or oil of mint, or oil of chamomile flower, or of hand.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is large, sprinkle, then let the oil be amaranth, or balsamite oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and like them.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the ventilator is of large pores, then when it is forbidden to use oil, and when the places of the wind in their neighborhood are softened with a strong wind, or with cold water from salt, or with cold water from the chamomile root, and like those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if that hand whose hand is of a damp humidity, wash your winds with vinegar, or with water of myrrh and sumac, and like those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluities are large, wash your winds with vinegar of old age, or with water of sage, which is marjoram, or with anise water, or with chamomile water, and like those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And when the wind is kept in front of a bath; keeping it administered for an hour or two, and then sleeping near the wind.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is to be done so that the wind is controlled before the phlebotomy?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Then consider at the beginning: then if the ventilator or he who is to be phlebotomized is coleric and blows over his hand hot and inflammed, then when it takes cold things, such as milky granulas of vinegar, and artichokes of salt and lettuces, and marjoram, and like those.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Then pause their foods such as potatoes, and meat of black lamb, and prepared foods of spice, and like those.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the composition is fresh, then drink sweet syrup of alsace with spices, and sumac, and this should be eaten lightly between meal times; and that to him be commanded to use a little quantity of drink and eating, and pause his meals of bread and wine and water and petz of black lamb and pigeon.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	Then when the day of wind and phlebotomy, drink more than eat.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And when it is given in drink to a few men of toryc medicine, or medicine of musk, which is musk, before the wind and phlebotomy, or near them, so that the main members are comforted and the hand is subtilized; and do not take those scalfatings.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	And the winds of the feet that are made with a strong scarification are stopped on their bones, and over the kidney, and over the heel, because these members do not suffer a scarification on themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not wanted for those but the attraction of the hand of the member, thus when a wind is stopped on the breast in malady of flow from the hand of the member; and use that which dissolves fresh wind without hurt to the member, so when it stops over the belly and heel; because that rarifies the member and cuts it off and spreads pain because it resolves the wind.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And already is stopped on the chest when it happens in their operation or rain, because of virtue of strong attraction that raises the operation hand and removes the rain from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it does so when it is stopped on the feet and the kidney because of wind in those closed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these winds are given views with dung only; and some times are given by fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are given full of tepid water in malady of the hand.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And water is to fill the wind with a large quantity; it is water of tail or water in which herbs are cut for water.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of wind given by fire: be the width of the orifice two fingers wide, according to which we have formed it; and the quantity of the pour is most of a palm; and be in the edge of it, in the place that it is in the circuit, most of it, the stopcock is small according to the quantity that enters into it a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Be made of eraser oil or lemon, of large marbles, lion, hawks and third ones so that it does not lead the member from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And be under it a transverse pole of eraser or iron, where it is stopped candle by fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And already is this great wind of that which we have described; and the little little of that one following on malady and the state of that uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the wind that blows in the tired and weakened is different from that which blows in young and robust people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of stopping this wind from burning the member is that it spreads the fire of wood decently in front of a few candles of wax, and places it on the middle of the transverse beam in the middle place of the wind, so that the fire is lit around the opening in order to not burn the corsets of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And place it on the member of the patient, and the windpipe that we have said, until when we have the wind, so that we do not hold it and it burns the windpipe, then let the wind be dissolved soon.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And light the fire according to its way, and repeat that if you are hungry from that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Might there be a wind that is administered in the malady of pleasure, with water, in which there is no transverse beam or windpipe, and it is not administered but is filled with water, and placed on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the way of it: And this wind is more and more, so much the better, so that it can receive a great amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 67.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguessuguas are not administered in the head members but are in the members in which it is impossible to place windpipes, due to their parvinity, so as not to cause pain and bleeding, or in a naked member of the flesh, when they are like the nose and ears.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that if you have found blood-suckers, they are in the clean water of the mouth.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them lie down in the water at night, until they become hungry, and do not cause any pain in the abdomen of those; and let them be washed out with bloodletting and wind, and let the member of the patient be fanned, and let it be placed.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you can suck the area from the windpipe, it is better to wait in healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Then, however, wash the area with vinegar and immediately pour out water; and let it be fanned and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if you prolong the patient's time, you should put a cloth in water and place it on the area where the blood-suckers are lodged, and let that remain until the blood is drained.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the wound multiplies, then sprinkle over it three-parted vitriol, or fry and similar things to those of stinging causes, until the wound is dried up; or let them be placed on the area of the beans that are boiled, and let them lie down until the beans stick to the area, and the wound is dried up.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And in addition, if necessary, an iteration of blood-suckers, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if blood-suckers are forbidden by suspension, then let the area be fanned with a wound recently made or a needle is placed in the area until it causes pain; and let them be placed, for those who feel any pain soon.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to make them fall down, sprinkle over those a little dried three-parted aloe, or salt, or ash, and sometimes soon.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Here begins the treatment of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very important in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of a fracture and an accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Or son you aware that this chapter speaks of the jesters of medicine and the vulgar doctors, and those who at no time have not looked at the livres of the Ancients, nor read a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason it is made that this way of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten that at any time completely; and I have not adapted to that which is harmful, but by long reading of the livres of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I drew out the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	Then I will direct experiments and studies in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described all this in this chapter of my science, and on which is passed the greatest experiment; since it has been renewed for you and freed from occupation with elaborations; and it renews itself at the end of elaborations; and demonstrates at the end of a declaration; and forms in it the shapes of the instruments that are administered in it, in addition to a declaration, as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	First chapter: On the existence of fractures of bones, from which a necessary premise is taken before we begin to mention the members that are broken and diverse if each one's.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, I will say in the prologue of this chapter the highest words; and the chapters to understand those who, at the beginning, are surely the creators and are aware of the truth of those; or they who are eager to learn this noble art from others instead of you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when it happens to a certain fracture or dislocation or twisting or positioning, then let you be aware at the beginning with bloodletting or cooling of the member, or any medicine, if it is not prohibited by any cause, as it destroys virtue, or that in which it happens to be feverish, or hot weather, or violent weather.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Then let it be content with a diet of fresh herbs and meats of birds and crabots; and prohibit gross meats and fill it with a diet that fills the veins of blood, until you are sure to prevent fever, and if you do not fear the escape of matter from the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the patient to his usual regime first by what he usually does with him.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore the broken bone begins to be restored; and let it be said that the patient is fed with nutritious foods of meat that are strong and thick in consistency, as well as corn meal cooked in water, and rice, and potatoes, and fresh milk, and these foods are digested easily, and with ease, and taste similar to those, and when fed on this diet, there is a clotting of the fracture slightly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	You know that bones break when they are in people who are in their youth and the old people; it is not possible for them to be continued and to be consolidated according to their nature by the drying out of the members of them.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times by the drying out of those members, and they are continued and consolidated that are of them in the end of leniity, as with the bones of children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature ajustes and amnesces on the broken bone from any cause that is similar to glut in which there is a thickness that adheres to it, and strengthens it within until its end, since it comes to strength and firmness; as with fire at the beginning, since no cause prohibits it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to stop the patient's food, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	There are different types of fractures according to the different member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	You know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, as a fracture in the back bone is different from a fracture in the head bone; and a fracture in the foot bone is different from a fracture in the leg; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have remembered all kinds of fractures, described in my separate chapter from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Of various kinds of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the various kinds of bone fractures within themselves; for an arched fracture happens in its stars; and some are broken according to the length of the bone: and those of the shank and toes and additions, either coming or not coming, so it is done when prepared to write, and a fracture is made with pain and disturbance on the head, and that fracture is a small crack.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And all kinds of pain are invented or torment properly when remembering it distinctively in its locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Of a sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this is known a fracture of the bone: it is a wrinkling of it, and from that prominence and appearance of it at feeling, and so with it when it compresses your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when it is not in the location of the wrinkling that appears or not it is not done with gentle touch when touching the bone with movement and the patient does not suffer great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	And while it is possible that there is wrinkling or a small crack, then do not compress all of it with your hand and at the same time pause over it of the medicines of which you have remembered properly that moment in which it is caused; and then put it tightly by a subtle tightening.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that the place where it is arched and does not split into two or another that happens in its shank, when it is straightened completely from its fracture, then begin your hour to correct it while happening to it that a blister comes up with care.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if to it that blister comes up with care, then leave that for a few days until it stops coming; and then put it in either way that you can of levitation and inventing.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you know that restoration of the bone and healing of it is lighter than that of the bone where such happens.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then strengthen that second which will come with the reminder of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	May it be that the shanks are broken in two parts, if it is the hand or the foot; or the hand itself if it is a small member; or two strings or one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And be your position in which you pause the member loc where it fits according to its natural figure, while the fractures are extended from the member that is broken, then know that you must make points in them to heal, and according to any way that you can in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And watch your strength so that it does not happen to the patient through your operation or injury; and according to your ability, apply a member of one bone to another according to its thousands of forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Then when you touch your hand with it in that hour, and if there is some other cause, correct it and put it in by the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And he exhales a violent extension and compression, as when foolish doctors cause blisters to form with their operation, or cause a contraction in the member where it has happened; so that it is seen that by the operation of its members the patient does not feel pain, and then you have done.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Then put it together, put it in order and a strict operation on that member, and rest and quietness; remind the patient about this and do not touch it in the hour of its vigils or his sleep, and observe its revolution and movement, and know all its functions, and wait until the position of the member is in a proper place where the pain does not happen, which is when the cause is that it feels in the disposition of the position of the injured or lesioned member; then when you change that to another position of that, so that the member does not happen to wrinkling when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the member's rest is that which I recommend; so that you know that broken members are different in their smallness and greatness and in the form of them.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small so that the arm is like a feather and similar to those, then know that the wrapping is of fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	May it be that they are big so that the leg or the back is wrapped, then know that in them is a binding around and hard, because the binding around connects the large member and strengthens all parts with a binding; and not in it enter spots.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then begin your operation of equality, pause carefully at it, over the location of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to the member you want; and strengthen your hand a little by the binding.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Then see if it is already done with the most sober member of the fracture's location, and strengthen your hand that does not feel the binding in which you have strengthened the site of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then lengthen your hand a little by wrapping up the site of the fracture, and soften the binding little by little, until it takes a large piece.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another object and wrap it up over the injured site with a wrapping, and see if it is done with the most dry of the wrapping; then see the operation in the binding and softening of that one according to what we have said in the first wrapping.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then pause between the wrappings of leather or cloth where it is wrapped up in the wrinkling of the fracture, if there is wrinkling; and otherwise, do not pause for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then pause over another object, and also put it under those wrappings gently made, if there is no swelling or blister at the site, then pause over that water which causes the blister and that holds the swelling; and leave that for a few days; and then strengthen your hand over them.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	Let the stelae of most canna be light-colored, and be shaped wisely; or of oak; or of palm branches; and let the width of each stela be according to this shape and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, know that the stelae which are placed over that fracture are thicker and further away from one another than those others, and their length according to what is more in magnitude and smallness; then strengthen your hand on them with another object as you did at first with a binding; and then leave it gently according to what we have said about the binding; and it is as if that member were its own; and the greater it is from the fracture, the less the binding.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And know that the strings are lighter in thickness and subtlety, and they are less; and if the strings are thick, as I have seen through the operation of foolish doctors who put those string of rope on their fingers, it is a great mistake, when one feels the binding out of equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very fine strings are not convenient, because you cannot achieve a binding with them that is desired; and it is not seen between stelae and stelae that there is a length of one word.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is tied with those stelae where the binding is tight in its locations, then pause away from those of leather or wool woven within, so that it does not cause him a injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some kinds of fractures are painful, and it happens in the knuckle, and I have remembered all its uniqueness in another chapter.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you know that all broken member is not straightened with the stelae on the first day; and this is because the member, when it is big, does not know that it pauses over the stelae except after a few days or seven or more, according to your assurance of coming blister.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the way of the embowels who the ancients restored, which are placed over fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of the embowels as a shower of restoration of fracture, convenient to complexions and mostly to women and children, for it is not from there that heat or frost comes: and that because you take powder of flour and is the meal of the flour that moves in the face of the miller.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And how this is done when it is ready, but you take powder of wheat and use it: and place this on the face not thick nor thin; and then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way of applying the plaster to restore fractures, dislocations and twists: take asafoetida, myrrh, and sweet annis (milgraner), all in equal parts; also take mirra and aloe (ten parts each); use these together with some water or milk to make a paste; this is good for light cases of scalds and burns; and apply this plaster, since it is made up of good ingredients and restores broken bones slightly injured, and gives life to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way of applying the plaster to fractures and twists: take myrrh and sweet annis (ten parts each), also mirra and aloe (five parts each); also take acacia (six parts) and bol armenic (fifteen parts).
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All three are sifted in a mortar to make a paste, and then sieved; they are mixed with water or wheat flour and given.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of the embowelling of separated joints and bones from their places, and of pain that happens in them or cracks and fractures: take sheep wool and dip it into wine and oil and wrap it over the joint.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	May be in this embowelling does not have virtue of restoration, of cooling fever and expelling pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of the embowelling that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig and leaves of wild poppy; grind them all together and make a paste of it.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of the fresh embowelling that is administered to restore the fracture of bones and for the resolution of feverish colds: take powder of marjoram, of chamomile and of violet flowers, of barley flour, and all together in equal parts. All three are sifted and then mixed with water if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	May be if it is scalded, you take powder of coriander and mix it with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of the embowelling that is more firm and resolving than the first one, when it happens that feverish colds occur: take powder of marjoram and of fennel seed, and of hyssop, and of marigold, and of chamomile, and all together in equal parts. All three are sifted and then mixed with water depending on the quality of the member and the repose of the color of the skin.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May be the Incense does not need to be burned in the air that is blown over the injured member for restoration, but it should be wrapped in wax and oil and not because of other causes; and remember that it is mixed between thinness and thickness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May be the ointment is seen that has been applied to the injured member for restoration of it and causes in which it is exsanguination with small amount of quality as asafoetida, of calamine and similar to its causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of the embowelling that is used for injury and pain: take mint, of calamine, of a man's beard or of a woman's hair, and of marjoram; grind them all together in equal parts. Sift it and then mix it into paste form.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May be the quantity according to the quality of the wound that is being bound and then is removed, it is because you consider if there is no pain or injury or the bone is not broken from its place, then do not remove it a lot every day.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is pain or injury or swelling at the place, then you hide it or remove it in the hour, and then apply the ointment.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth of linen and wet sponge with sea water, and dip that in hot water, and apply the lotion to the place until the swelling and pain cease; then allow rest for an hour; then place sheep wool dipped in wine and oil or rose oil over it, and let it remain there for a moment as sure from feverish colds, and that the swelling of the member is relieved, and the pain is soothed.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that lotion slowly and gently and apply little ointment to the wound for your first time, and gently as that inside is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the feverish colds and pain and swelling and all the accidents are relieved, then you repeat that lotion as needed; otherwise, you continue with the ointment and the strengh.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there is no cause of those injuries that we have mentioned for the member, then do not remove it, but only three or four days or nine or ten. and some covered all of it is left for twenty days according to what you consider in the release of the member, as we have said, until the fracture heals, and if it is not released, then allow blood clotting on it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the strengh more than your first time, and adjust the thickness of the member according to what is required for its memory.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	May be if you notice the place of the fracture has become dry and thin more than what is needed to cover it, then know that nutriment is forbidden to arrive at that; therefore, dip that in hot water as much as you consider; and let it remain there for all three days; and loosen a little, and this is good for the operation; and bring nutrition to the member, and heal gently.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	May be the water that is used to clean the member as much as it covers; and when it does not restore at the beginning, according to what covers it, then it restores according to its thickness, which is an error according to the operation of them, and great fear, and if it is a dry member, they will grow larger with the water.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen this in any of them that water does not taste good, so it is more reasonable for it not to make you drunk.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capitol: From fracture when it happens on the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are different, and the figures of them are also diverse, and the causes are distinct, because from fractures there is percussion of spasm, and the percussion stops all the bone inside the ciphac, which leaves the bone, as much as it does so in the wood, and this type of fracture is called ascial; or the spasm hits a part of the bone, and hits the flesh of it and does not pass the hit within the last one; and this type of fracture is called absolute levitation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or extension; and its cause is percussion against wind or rain on the ground, and similar to them.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture or it is penetrating that already is approaching to the pannicol which is left the os; or it is in the face of the os, and the plague of these two fractures or is great or few.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of fracture it is that it is melted in the os, in the subtility of the hair little, and for this it is named by this name a small capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is fracture that it is made or by impact or by percussion of stone and sounds like, that enters some layer of the os in the concavities, and it is made in the location of the concavity thus also when the role occurs to them of the sound when it occurs to their percussion and its entry is parted in the concavities.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly it is made there in the bones of the os of the humeur, thus also when the heads of the effants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And so to all these species of fractures it is said, so are points also it is said when the stars separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I come with a re-remorse of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I discovered all these species of fractures by detection on those and by inquiry about their re-remorse and ostentation of the corrupt meat that is above them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary specialty it is known by this one that it is discovered on the os, and it is dried up, and limits on it am-tent, since the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	More in the treatment of fractures it is considered at the beginning of the accidents of the patient, and if you see by the accidents that have meaning by clear manifestation on pain, also when it is vomiting of cholera, and ekstasis, and loss of reason, and absence of thoughts, and syncope, and acute fever, and sweating of the hands and feet and resembling to them of the accidents in the major dispositions, it is taken that it is not cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you times accidents do not correct you hope for salvation, then you begin the treatment of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which cause it is since if it is come to you the plague in the beginning when it is plagued and that is in the days of winter, then consider that you study on the ostentation of the os before the day 13 according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then consider that you cover up the os before the day 7, holding that that is left the os is corrupted by the pannicol, and that occur the accidents that have recommended them.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached to the pannicol covering the cervel, and it is am-parted little and worn out, then consider that you follow up the broken one according to what I have recommended to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you race the head of the patient who is plagued, and discover on the os according to custom and manipulation to you possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it is gentle over the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it occurs to you the detection of the os, flows of blood or pus caut, then you pause it am-aquo that you cover, and it is that you put on the place of sheets infused in wine and oil rosy, and let rest the plague until that it is sedated the apostema, and sure of flows of the blood; and begin in the circumference of the os and in the ablation of him.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And there are two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first way is that you cut the os am-cut with an instrument of sharp edge, and this one is the form of him: And approach to administer another cut with it, a little less than that; and this one is the form of him:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And approach to administer more of the cut which is less than that second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And consider that there are diverse types of cutters, some of which are less sharp than others; and some of their shapes are less broad than others and are made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use their ease in percussion on the cutters so that it does not hit the head and that one.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the os is strong and hard, then consider that you perforate in the circumference of him before that you administer the cutters on the edges, which are named not-deep perforations.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named that way since these do not stop the term of the os from the test to water that is next to him, since this is a round edge or margin on him which is left the head in front similar to a small margin or circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the consistency of the os.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take from these types of edges in great number since each one convenes to the consistency of each os, until you present in all tests of the cervel the edge of which is sharp, the quantity in length and brevity being according to the quantity of the consistency of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this one is the form of three types of edges: The quality of piercing in the circumference of the broken os it is that you leave the edge on the os and turn him am-lines over the line that you know that the os has already been penetrated; and approach to place the edge at another place, and pause there the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around him.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you cut with the cutter between each break of the os and turn it gently so that it can be put on water's edge, also when we have said, until you separate the os, or by your hand, or for any other cause with any instruments which will fit to him, also when you have rinsed and forced-out the blood.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And consider that you watch carefully that the cutter does not touch any edge of the os.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And therefore when you have circled the os you perforate it and separate from the os if it continues to him, and then you extract it, considering that you race and include it in the asperity of him on water that it is in the os am another instrument which seems like a cutter, more however consider that it is less sharp and subtler than the other cutters.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if it remains any small edge of the bones it is said, then consider that you take this with ease in water that it is necessary for you of the instruments; and approach to put out the plague with the towels and wash them which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other way of operation is light, far from pain, which is named by Gualia and the lauzec for great length; and this one is the discourse of him: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin to discover the break of the os in the place in which it is the most violent and manifest fracture, until when you have discovered that break and have paused it am-cut from the edge of him long and gentle of the cutter whose this one is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the round edge is sharp and does not cut any edge, and the sharp edge is of him before in length, also when you times: That the round edge is adjusted to the os with the face of him which is sharp on the os.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then you hit on the cutter of a small break in little part until you cut all the os easily also when it is rolled over, and you are sure that the pannicol does not occur to it the accident which you have feared in any way, and if the medicine was the most ignorant of its people; certainly, and if it was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And then consider that you hit on any cause annexed to the os of the pannicol in some places of os, you cut it from him with the edge of the cutter which is less sharp, and you deliver it easily since it is delivered from him the pain and the trouble.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate within the pannus, and what is excised or remains on the bone is its face, and it has roughness and subtle sharpness, then cover that roughness and eradicate those subtleties with sharp and subtle razors which you have prepared, in various quantities so that you can administer them in all places most convenient to their use, and the rightmost of these according to where you lose your way during your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And when you administer in your hand where you are cutting the bone at the beginning with those razors whose edge is thickest, and then use the thinnest of them, and do not stop to cut according to continuity until you reach the place where you can administer the most thick and the thinnest of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Or in any of the other small fractures of the capillary and subtle fracture, then administer cure according to where you have lost your way towards its correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	This is why it has not been applied to all those who have studied in that science.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And it has not been applied to this which we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the pannus is rettangled when you eradicate the bone, then take a drape according to the quantity of the wound, and immerse that one in rosin oil, and pause it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another drape double or triple and immerse it in vinegar and olive oil, and pause that one over the first drape lightly as much as you can over that one, which does not cause any pain to the patient; and then administer over that one with a thin edge, and do not strangle it except by the quantity of the wound so only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let that one be left with this cure for a day or two until you are sure of an apoplexy; and then remove it, and then administer medicines to those which are superfluous dryness, such as with linen rags and flour of erysipelas, and powder of enses and aristology, and of similar things for those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	This is because you make of these medicines a powder which is to be sprinkled over the wound, so that it is dry; and generally, administer in that one all medicine of its properties by which it is prevented from smelling and not chewing.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your cure is clean; and do not be in its surdice of ointment or other; nor do you leave adding virulence to it; for when it is adjusted over the pannus of the skull, it corrupts that one and destroys it, and comes to the patient's foot properly.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And comes to the patient' foot properly and carefully, because when it is adjusted over the skull cap, and when the bone is removed from its cavity and the wound is larger than it should be in the cure of it, and it is darker on its surface; and then consider at that time if such accidents come to the patient, you will know that they are dangerous altogether.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if that blackness does not happen except from the medicine which is placed on it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine that such blackness happens, then take a container of honey and another of rosin oil. And on those rags put a drape, and then pause that one over the skull cap; and then cure that one with the medicines which you think convenient so that it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the Restoration of a Broken Nose
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You will know that the nose is not broken from two pieces of cartilage alone which are separate, or one of those alcinas (nasal passages) is blocked, because there are two bones, because the piece of cartilage is broken and does not happen to it except by atravertimento and tortuosity and pain.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	Or if one of the two pieces is broken, then put your little finger in its nose, and press that fracture inwardly with the tiny point, and outwardly with the large point, so that it returns to its natural form.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do it easily for you, and be careful that it does not fall during your operation on the patient' foot.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not pierce that one, then make it equal to the end of the bone at which it is small in thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make a semblance of that one.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Rest and take the first day after the fracture, if possible; otherwise, then start to work on the patient to relieve the apoplexy.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then put a drape over the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two rags, if the fracture is in two parts, and make it of such thickness that it fills the width of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And say of the old restorative remedies that the rags are wrapped in cloth, and they are changed every day, but I have not seen it; unless the rags are wrapped in albumen of egg with powder of molasses; and then leave the one inside so that the bone is fixed and made strong.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Some of them are blocked in the nose, instead of one rag, except for large rags wrapped in cloth; and that you have already broken your nose more violently and the patient does not stop breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This is not necessary for you; and if you want, make it one rag, and if you want, make two rags.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another accident of apoplexy comes to the patient, apply to the nose with a cerote or a cotton swab in vinegar and olive oil, or with diaquelone.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	And if apoplexy does not come, then immerse that one outside with flour of erysipelas and powder of cofit with albumen of egg; and then pause it on the foot of a lion, and do not apply to the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	And if the bones of the nose are broken or crushed, then separate them with a pair of scissors and cure that one with water which hardens and consolidates it, and apply to it according to what is convenient.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is a wound inside the nose, then cure that one with rags and administer an air tube into it so that it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the Restoration of the Mandible When Broken
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the mandible is broken and its fracture is not towards the interior, then consider if it is towards the outside only, and if it is curved towards its sides; then its knowledge is slight.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And then, if the fracture is on the right side, put your little finger on the left side of the patient' mouth; and in similitude if the fracture is on the left side, then put the finger on the right side; and press that one towards the outside with ease at its end which is broken, and make it equal to the other side of the bone at which it is curved.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the mandible has already separated into two parts, then administer extension of two parts according to its continuity so that you can make it equal.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you experience concuss of teeth and disruption, then strengthen those on which you hope that they will break with a thread of gold or silver or cedar; and then pause the cerot over the broken mandible, and then pause the doubled drape over it, and then pause the large star over it properly, or a weight of one thread to its length; and then remove that one upwards according to what you have fixed in the lacing, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the servant to rest and be calm, and pause the meal for him in small sips.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the figure has already changed in some way, then put yourself in a recumbent position and leave it for three days; and correct what has already changed from him with powder of moly, album of honey, or flour of cicero, because you will have remained the cerot of him, and place over the plaster woolen lion.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And afterwards, as soon as it is well fixed to him, and the disposition of the bone does not change, leave him, that he should be healed and strengthened in the fracture; because if the fracture is seen to be straining after three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another wound of putrefaction has appeared in the seat of him within that it should be healed, then administer to him that he has said that it is seen to be healed, and let the putrefaction remain.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a deep one, then consider if it is a separation of the bone or a fracture, then you will have to support those with water that you carry in the movement of those of the weapons.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the hole of the wound is straining, then you will have to increase it with a flush-cut according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And afterwards, as soon as you have left those fractures, and if there is no re-bleeding, then you will have to plug the hole of the wound if it is large; and if not, pause over that one of the plasters that you carry with water and plug it, so that it should be healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the Restoration of the Jaw when it is Broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The fracture of the jaw when it is in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of these three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Either it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts, so that there do not occur any fractures; and it is easy to restore him; or if it occurs that such fractures have occurred in him, and it is difficult to restore him; or if the fracture is very deep.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that, when the fracture is very deep, it is that you have two ministers present, so that one holds the jaw in place and the other extends the nerve under that break, and the other serves to support the patient's body.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then cut the fracture with a sharp knife within that it should be made the shape of him, and not in his little eminence or concave hole.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you are in a place where you do not have more extension, then stop the servant' hand from shaking, and let the size of him be according to the quantity of your need; and stretch and raise the jaw and support it with your hand within that it may cut the fracture according to how it is.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot reach the end of the jaw to the outside, because it is coming towards the neck, then consider that the servant be supported on his chest, and place over the muscle a small cushion in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister press the muscle of him to the sides within that the bone of the jaw is raised in its place in the neck, and then you will have to cut the fracture and support it with a sharp knife.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel any pain of the jaw or it is difficult to move, then consider that you cut those with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, then you will have to use an incisive instrument of him that you have placed aside the jaw of the weapon with which he has been struck; because this is the shape of him:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a hook of which this is the concave shape; and its size should be according to the water that you have needed for him, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of him should be according to that it is possible for the operation; that there are two ends like this, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have cut when you extract the fragment from the bone is wide, and you are sure that it is free from putrefaction, then you will have to join together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is little, or you are afraid of putrefaction, then you will have to use a cloth and powder according to the quantity of the wound's opening.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if putrefaction occurs, then consider that you dip him in wine and olive oil, and place over it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the tightness of the bone when it is broken and separated is that you place a plaster made of flour with album on him, and place over it the lion' skin, and if you need to turn him, then consider that you do so gently, and if necessary, turn him by a shield; and place over him double powder; and wrap that in cloth, and then wrap that cloth around his neck and back, and reduce him on all sides, and when the tightness of the fracture is made according to the tightness of him, and it is that you do not cover it above.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all this so that the star does not open the broken bone; and for this reason you see the servant every day, and when the joint is moist or the plaster has already been opened, then you will have to tighten it again.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then consider that you place the servant' sleeping on his neck, and leave him from shaking his hand a little cushion; so that the aid of him is raised above the jaw, and the fracture of the jaw is raised towards the muscle; or if his arms are tied to his neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And you will not remove the joint unless there is a little pain in the place, or putrefaction occurs within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then consider that you renew the plaster if you see the face of him towards water, and adjust it to the tightness and restore that fracture; and leave it so that he should be healed and the fracture should be congealed.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and supported according to the month in twenty-eight days, and a few times it happens that it is made in men of time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the Restoration of the Shoulder's Fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The tart spatula is broken in the place of him where it lies, and not broken from him but only from the sides.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the place of him is broken  — and it is broken in the middle of him  — and is not understood unless touched, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare him for you and reduce that according to the natural figure in any way convenient for him; and if necessary, make a cut on one side.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then consider that you place over the place with flour on it and olive oil, and place over it a double cloth; then consider that you place over it a thin shield according to the quantity of the spatula whole or a little less.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the shield leaves a concave shape in some part of the place of the spatula, then consider that you fill that concave shape with olive oil, and place that shield over it according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then consider that you tighten him with a long thistle and hold the shield tightly, and so that it should not be moved from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And observe each joint daily; and whenever it softens, add another bandage and tighten it and make the support equal if it moves from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Then remove the patient's clothing over their body.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the splint is to be removed in twenty days or on the twenty-fifth day.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then dissolve the bandage, and be careful to know that such is of the bones whose beginning is not painful nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if there is pain in the place of the bone and you take away the splint, then cut it on both sides, and tie it up tightly, and do as we have said about the fracture of the scapula with respect to apoplexy, if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter. VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot, in certain cases, breaks at its midpoint and is very much hurt thereby; but the ends of it move about as if they were cicadas and crushed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of the foot when its middle part breaks, it is that it inclines towards the inside and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, sweating, and vomiting; and it is manifested in the cavity of the broken bone, and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient' clothing be laid over their two feet, and a cushion placed between their thighs; then press the muscles against them, and adjust their ribs between two sides, and do so carefully in the operation upon them and in making the adjustment according to any way possible which enables you to return the bone's shape, provided that it returns to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And place over it paste and straw and a thin tablecloth of silk or of calico and their likes in suspension, because you wrap that up in a cloth; and carefully do not tighten it upon the broken bone so as not to cause pain; and consider the bandage throughout the entire hour, and when it softens, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity compels that a corrosion or pruritus, or pain, or apoplexy occur in the place, then you cut off and peel it away and remove the paste and correct it as by water in the way of cure; and carefully reduce the bandage, if it were necessary to return it to its place; and adjust the tightness, provided that it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter. VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the Restoration of Ribs When They are Fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Be aware that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large places which meet at two points; and from the ends of them, starting from the front, it does not occur to those fractures unless by water because they are cartilage.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from sensation; therefore, inquire about it through examination.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration be such that it join the fracture through examination according to any possible way, provided that it is not swallowed according to what covers it; and carefully bandage the broken bone with a splint, if you wish for it.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the inside, then there occurs to the patient great pain and prickling, as if he had wept, and by water because the bone is covered with a membrane; and there occurs to him difficulty in walking, coughing, and vomiting from pain; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Antidotes are well prepared for that purpose.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them it is said: "Let the patient fast for three days, so that he abstains from food which engenders inflammation and ventilation, in order that his belly may be inflated and extended, and the fracture driven out towards the outside."
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we will prevent water from entering in such a way that it does not cause pain to generate apoplexy, unless it happens; and if it has already happened, then help is already on the way.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they say of them that it is to be stopped from having wind, and that it is to suck strongly; and it seems like reasoning, but it is feared that the wind will throw away the excess by means of weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they say of them: "Let that place be covered with wool which has already been submerged in oil, and let powder be placed between the ribs until it is filled up, so that it is bandaged up tightly when you wrap that up according to its roundness; and carefully cure the patient through the cure of pleurisy from fasting and medicine."
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes violent pain and the bone is covered with a membrane which causes pain, they fear for the patient, then let them stop causing pain in that place, and let them discover the broken bone through opening it, and carefully take out the chip; for I will inscribe the bone with ease.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And let us adjust the two lips of a blister, if it is large, with fire, and cure that with paste until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if apoplexy occurs inside, then you cut off and put rose oil powder on the place, and bandage it up tightly; and carefully cure the patient through water which covers apoplexy from inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be placed over the back upon which he sleeps, provided that he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter. IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Spine and of the Neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some cases, in fact, fracture the bones of the neck, and are similar to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if water occurs in any of them and you wish to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider that, if their muscles are already softened and stupified and dead and they cannot be extended or tightened by means of the tools which you have mentioned, or when you prick them with a needle and do not feel pain there, then you shall know that it is not to be healed, and in the middle of such dispositions it is deadly.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if those bones are painful and feel a restriction through examination according to the needle pricks, then you shall know that the spine of the bone is saved, and that the patient should be cured through cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to water and wish to know whether it will be healed or not, then observe the feet of the patient.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you notice that they are already softened and there occurs to them wind and defecation according to their will, and some cases are raised up on their two feet and urinate, then you shall know that it is deadly, and do not continue in the cure of him.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if no cause occurs from those, the cause is better and less painful.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure of him is that you pierce into the blister which is behind the spine with rose oil or with molasses; and place over that blisters in some cases, the liquid within them until it is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the pastes which soothes and exists upon it, and tighten it up tightly with a thread; and order the patient to rest and be tranquil and not sleep on that side on which he hurts until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if the spine of the bone is broken or there occurs some cause which has already separated it from its place, then let them cut off the bone with a chisel, and carefully adjust the two lips of a blister, if it is large, with fire; and cure that blisters with alchohol; for I will inscribe the bone.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the heel of the foot is broken, and this is the end of the season, then place your right foot in your left hip, and join the broken bone with the other as much as possible according to circumstances; and then put plaster and a splint on it, if you wish; and then tighten it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel aching in the foot, then place your hand on it, and hold it, and cure the plague with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On Restoring the Ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	Of Restoring the Ankle. The bones of the ankle are broken, and if they are broken, then their fracture is only a communication in the extremities of those and are inserted into the length and decline towards the parts inside; and it happens to the patient pain at the site and stings, and the chest is stunned when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of it, then place it according to your clothing for circumstances until it is assembled to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the length or has already declined towards the parts inside, then place the patient on their stomach until you are ready to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have set that in place, put plaster over it, and place the wooden splint on top of it, and tighten it with tightness so that you do not fear breakage or movement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And place the cavity with something that fills it until the foot is joined by equality, and order the patient to sleep on their back or open their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if there is a fever with chills, then stop the excitement of it and of the restoration until the fever is calm, and place the water that sits on it according to what comes before; and then return to the restoration of it, and tighten it like this with care.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there are aching bones or they are broken into pieces, then place them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On Restoring the Fracture of the Calf.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The calf is what goes from the hip to the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in two ways, of which one is that you take a wooden stick half a hand-breadth long according to this shape:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And join two limbs together, and make it be suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a couch; and then cut off the broken arm from the wood in such a way that it touches the tip of the foot in its natural place where it is joined to the leg's curvature.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend it over some heavy cause, or let the patient walk on his legs; and then give the medicine that breaks the fracture with their hands, until the fracture is healed according to how it goes.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other way is that the patient is lifted up on his neck and held by one limb, and then order two ministers to hold water for the fracture with their hands; and then let one of them open the fracture with its hand according to how it goes; and let the other hold the pus from it; and then each of them extends to a part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the excitement to be stronger, then hold it with two limbs on the fracture and on it with another limb, and let each of the two ministers extend to their two parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then place half the limb on the hip and the other half over the fracture at the top of the leg.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is nearly at the hip, then place the limb over that place and over the hip itself.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Place it with ease and work, and then when it is set, hold it with tightness so that it is applied well by good application; then tighten it if there is no fever.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if there is a fever, then let it be tightened for seven days, and place the woollen cloth soaked in wine vinegar on it until the fever passes, and then tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The way to tighten that limb is to place plaster over the fracture, and then place a drape around it; and then adjust the arms over the calf, and place your hand on top of the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And then hold the drape and tighten it over the calf, so that the arm is in place of the stelha, unless it prevents this by some heavy cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use this:
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And this is that you place over the fracture the sthela that is further away and stronger than the others; and then place between each sthela the distance of a palm, and add three fingers to the length of the sthelas according to how they are broken.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then hold them with tightness as was said at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your tightness on the site of the fracture be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fever is gone, then let the tightness be lessened.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you change the position of the sthelas and the tightness like this at the time when you restore the limb to its place, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear a fever, then let the tightness and the sthelas be loosened after seven days like this at the time when I have spoken.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the limb in all parts for three days so that no harm comes to it or swelling occurs in its place; or is forbidden the food coming to the limb by the disposition of superfluity of tightness; and then correct all of it according to what I have spoken.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are certain that there will be no harm caused by it, then do not loosen the ligature until after three or more days.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and his feet toward the south, and his hands toward the north.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place the calf's woollen cocoon on the calf, and consider it throughout the night or during the day to see if the broken limb's figure does not change or if the limb is soft; then correct all of it with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And then consider the patient's food according to the order that I have spoken before, in the beginning while it is loosened until it is tightened; and then when the food thickens.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The custom of the calf and its chest is that they are made strong after ten days; and then when they are relaxed, give it a bath and medicine to correct them.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is still painful, then you do not loosen that limb and the sthelas from it until after a month or more.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On Restoring the Fracture of the Arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is made up of two bones that are called the shafts; the one is small, and it is that which supports the little finger, and the other is large, and it is that which supports the thumb at its end, from the part that is more on the side.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	The large shaft is broken only, or the small one, and strong are its joints together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small shaft is broken above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and its cure is faster.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the foot is broken on the side of the heel, the injury is bad, and its healing difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse of those is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore if the bone that is broken is the little foot above, it is appropriate for the doctor, in order to restore him, that a small extension be made quickly without difficulty until he is healed and set back in place.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the big foot is broken that has been twisted, then it is appropriate that a violent extension be made.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both feet are twisted together, then it is appropriate that you make the extension more vigorously.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And since you have placed the hand in a resting position on a cushion and its extension over it extended, and the wrist of the hand is lower than all the others and the auditory bone is lower than the others, and the patient lies on a raised bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And a cushion before him in height or behind him, so that the patient does not suffer strain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arm of the party below him with his hand or limb, and another minister extends above him as well.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor sets the bone within that second while he maintains the best position for doing so.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the fracture of the bone there is a split, then you pierce all its length with your tool at its location.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if in the split fracture there is a knot that does not correspond to your expectation in the restoration of him, then you break it over him and continue with the second according to the method we have described.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is open, I have already made a small cut there, and now I take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an apoplexy comes at the beginning of your restoration, then you lay a cloth on it with a thin layer of olive oil and white wax, and make it soft between the speculativeness and subtlety, and tighten the cloth over it tightly within that the apoplexy is given; and then remove the cloth and put on plaster made from powder of ash mixed with clay of wheat, and place shells; and that is the shell that is placed above that fracture on one side and more firmly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the names of the shells for the arm are in the majority of positions, or that is, when the fracture is in one foot or two feet together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your stricture on the location of the fracture with more vigour and violence, and when less severe extensions are made from the fracture to the sides or lower parts of it, you place the stricture a little less vigorously according to that which is followed by remembrance at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture should be soft, not hard or rough, and the true cloth that is tightened should be between subtlety and thickness, as we have described it.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And take into account the limb and the member of the body.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there is a cause for which correction is necessary, when you put the member into the water, that the pain of it stops.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Then let the limb rest without support, and return to the stricture.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the stricture is already softened and the bone is already restored to its appearance, then you correct it completely with your tool.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if by the stricture nourishment cannot reach the limb for its excess, because then it is softened a little and left for several days until it reaches that nourishment, and tighten it again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not have a cause of those that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove the stricture within xx days or about that period.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And hang the hand of the patient by its own movement, and let it sleep on its two sides.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you should know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XXXII days, and the strong one is restored in XXV days, and all of it depends on the dispositions of the complexities and the dispositions of virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the Restoration of the Wrist of the Hand and of the Sayings.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	And you should know that to the wrist of the hand and the fingers are attached, and if the fracture does not occur at the front or back, then it is seen as a problem.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the fracture of the hand or the back occurs, then it is appropriate for the patient to be seated facing forward, and place the hand in an extended position on a cushion.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor sets them together within that they are well joined.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then it is appropriate to put plaster and chalk, if an apoplexy does not come; and place the shell above according to the quantity of space, and you have wrapped that in a cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the twist is inside the hand, it is a twist of the palm, and make an extension with a long cloth, and command the patient to tighten that with his twisted palm; then it should be made tight with a long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the shell of wood is lifted up with a cloth, in order that the wood be applied to the palm; and tighten it according to what is necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is outside the hand, then place above it a shell of wood and another one on the sides of the hand in the palm, so that the hand may be opened and closed; and then tighten the stricture, when the hand is moved to the side by the fingers with the member.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in one of the fingers of the hand, then it is appropriate to make that small twist according to what is necessary, and tighten it at the palm; and if desired, place above it a small shell turned to the side so that the fracture does not touch it.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in one of the fingers of the hand, then it is appropriate to make that small twist according to what is necessary, and tighten it at the palm; and if desired, place above it a small shell turned so that that finger does not touch it.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider in your restoration, and place above, the disposition of caution and opposition - according to the true operation - before that which is necessary according to what has been told.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	And for the restoration of the fracture of the hip bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The hip bones are twisted and it is seen whether they are broken or not according to their movement when facing forward and above when standing.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of him is made so that the limb is tightened above the fracture and on one side of it, and the patient is prostrate on his stomach and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the minister extends all the limb to its side according to the quantity, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is at the edge of the hip bone, then extend the limb to its side in the form of the letter Z, so that the extension comes out at its end, and another limb is placed on one side of the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the twist is at the edge of the hip bone, then make the limb extend to its side.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And if the doctor joins the bones together so that they do not separate again but adhere to each other by a good joint, then cover with plaster and tighten it down, otherwise there will be a gangrene of the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if it happens that there is a gangrene in the limb, then let him lie so for several days until the gangrene has passed and then resume your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should also be applied in such a way that it is wrapped around the fracture tightly, folded over itself twice or three times and removed if it comes into contact with the bone or root of the thigh; then wrap the trunk.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long thread between the thigh and trunk at the hip joint, where it divides into two parts; take the ends of the thread from the higher part of the two branches, then turn them over the trunk and thigh so that they do not come into contact with the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place a support under the hip in the area of the fracture and put a stake across the bone of the trunk.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill the spaces between the trunk and thigh with soft cloth so that the tightening is complete.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then begin a strong tightening of the ligature at the fracture site with three or four folds, and the more you move away from the location of the fracture, the looser and softer and the wetter should be your tightening; this is to prevent injury to the member.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And stretch the ends of the thread from the hip joint to where it divides into two branches; tighten them both equally so that the ligature does not come off its position.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then leave the tightening in place, lest it cause gangrene or gangrening or swelling or similar to those; and if any of these things happen, then cut off from it what is affected and correct it all together, according to the number of folds that you have made.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is thick, then join it according to what is possible for you; and if not, cut off from it and heal with that which remains, and cure with it those who are affected within;
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some of these fractures of the thigh are stronger than others and should be adjusted with greater care; as we have said before in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But for the restoration of it in such a way that there is no limping on the part of the patient; and if it is restored alone, then apply to it another leg, because it is necessary that he should not limp on that side.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You know that the thigh is strong after a hundred days or more or less; and everything depends on the various conditions and other factors.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Ankle of the Foot.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that this fracture of the ankle is much worse when it happens behind; and there are several things to be considered: first, the condition of the bones; second, the position in which they lie; third, the age of the patient; fourth, whether the person is healthy or not; fifth, how long the injury has been.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if this fracture has happened, then it is only a crack or a break in the parts; and that depends on whether it is in the middle or at the ends, for the latter is more painful and more difficult to heal.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration should be made by joining it as best as possible in the middle of where it is broken, because it is easier to do so with ease and less effort;
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then apply plaster over the stake and tighten it down, if you need to; and strengthen the tightening at the foot.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Consider all the recommendations that we have given for other fractures; and if there is a gangrene it must be avoided, as much as possible, because it should not happen to it until it is healed over;
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Trunk.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the trunk there are two bones which are called by their names: one is large and is called the "trunk"; and the other is small and is called the "sideral".
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	It happens to all kinds of fractures in the arm, which are two bones; and the restoration is made in the same way as that of the arm, and the operation is one and the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones break together, then the trunk becomes shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if one of the small bones breaks, then the trunk becomes broken in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if one of the large bones breaks, it goes behind; and it is one of those cases that are not familiar to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then apply the same measures of stretching and tightening to the branches according to the engagement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But if the fracture of the trunk is not very severe and there are no broken ends, then apply to it a moderate stretching; and rejoice in your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the trunk there is a reason for an operation on the arm; and it is when you join the branches together and complete all the operation; then take from the ends of the handle what are made of fine wood; take care to cut off only that part which is necessary, and do not damage those parts that are useful; and if they are small, take care not to damage them; and if there is a long piece, join it according to the length of the trunk, and from the hip to the top;
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap each sheet twice according to the length of it; and place one over the other from one side of the trunk to the other, and put between them a space at the top of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then tie the two branches at three places: twice at the ends and once in the middle; because with this tightening the trunk does not lean to the right or left side, and it is in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And one handle of wood has been made according to the length of the trunk; and it should be placed in it so that it moves with the trunk.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Then, after having finished this work, then you will know how to heal it when broken; and there is no healing for it.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then consider the trunk every day and study it carefully; and you should guard against gangrene or swelling or similar causes; and if any of these things happen, then cut off from it what is affected and heal it, so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the Fracture of the Ankle and the Foot Bones.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not fracture altogether; but in the bones of the foot there are some fractures; and in the feet of the horse there is little fracture or none; and in the same conditions of age and health.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	But if the bones of the foot are fractured and they are raised above themselves; then the patient should be lifted up with care, facing downward, and prepare it for treatment.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on top of the other bones; and press down on them and join them together, so that they do not separate again but adhere to each other by a good joint; and if necessary, appeal to Podagors for help in this matter.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply plaster over it, and put something under the foot; place a small table on its two edges so that they rest on it.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tighten that foot with a descent stretching, because you have wrapped it in cloth and from other causes from which he suffers;
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	Then after three or four days pass the ligature, because you will see if the bones are engaged or not; and the operation in them is done with care.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If some say that their toes are numb, then restore them, and also cover those with ice and give them wine to drink in small amounts, and keep them warm.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then pause the pinching for a second according to its length, and place a little bit aside; then remove the foot from this table, which is recommended to you, and tighten it with a tight bandage.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If there is a pinching in the bones of two or three or more, then you pause on each one astela of its quantity wrapped in linen, and tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand over one of the heads of the table with your stomach facing the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes that have been said to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and pause for any accident that you may have.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the Fracture of the Knee-cap of the Femur and of the Hip-bone, and on the Arm of a Man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the knee-cap of the femur is pinched, then make that cut in a knife-like way, and incline it a little at the top of the two, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Then the midwife presses on the knee with her hand, and makes it move forward with hope; then the woman is shaken, and raises her two legs little by little, for as soon as this leg is outside, it will be in front of the knee with hope and the pinched bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then pause with powder on her legs, and when she wants to urinate, she removes the bandage easily and urinates, and reduces it and returns that second to the way it was at the beginning, and returns to her first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And so it is done for seven days or more, because that one is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a bladder of oil and tighten it on the top of the leg with a cannula of leather; and introduce all the bladder into the knee of the leg, and blow into the cannula with strength within that the bladder is inflated inside the knee, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Then it is filled with bandage and left for a few days according to what we have said, so that it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the arm of a man or a woman is pinched, then administer to it the injection and re-injection of the water that we have said about the hip-bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that water which is on the right does not hide these close fractures and those that are not much, mostly at the one for whom this study and use is made known; because that fracture means to you in the main ways of rightness in the restoration and strictness of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	If the arm of a man is pinched when it falls, take a bladder of water, and put the arm into that; then pause it over the wrapping of linen, and wrap it up, and leave it wrapped up for three days or more, and be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the Restoration of Fractures of Bones when they are swollen.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the person to whom the fracture has occurred with swelling, and most especially if the bone is large, such as the hip-bone or the shoulder-blade, that you keep it warm and give it water often; and if the conditions of bloodletting allow you to do so, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling goes away without causing any harm, then you will have kept it warm in your bed and powdered it with dried mint, unless there is another cause that presents itself.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture on this day, and do not prolong it, except in case of a fever.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If the fever comes on gently, then you will leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, as long as the fever does not subside; and do not bring it closer to the third day and the three in all, because you would make bad accidents happen.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the broken bone is prominent on the outside of the joint, then you will have it reduced and enclosed with your own skin as easily and as little extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not prepared by you and is a complication of that joint, then reduce it with your own skin as easily and in little amount as possible; and that instrument which is made of iron, the length of it is seven or eight days, and its width is according to the quantity of swelling; and it is necessary for the doctor who takes three or four, according to the quantity that you need for the cure in all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	Then make it round, and make it small in size so that it does not bend the skin too much on that part in the hour of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it is sharp at the end, so that it has a margin on its ends; and this water of him is a great thing that tends to him, and most of it is inside the joints.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it is done:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called in Greek "labra volentiaratelare", which means little knife.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the end of it is raised on a sharp edge above the prominent end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	Then put that in a cloth, so that it returns to the bone, and enclose it with a certain equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore try to enclose the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the bone that is broken is small, and do not take the instrument for a good operation, then you cut off the end of that bone where the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone completely with water that we have said, then cut it with one of the scalpel knives that we have mentioned; or cut it with one of the razors in some way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then remove what remains on the bone of small scratches and little cuts.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone has been reduced, and the pain of the patient is very severe and burning, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and at that moment give water because you have deprived the patient of great good.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	Then, when your restoration of the bone is complete, then cover it with black vinegar, and especially if it is in summer, and do not pause about the swelling or corruption, so that it does not cause bad effects and decay.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Then administer needles in the hour of the perfect completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the swelling uncovered in this way that you cut with scissors the edge with a needle, and use wrappings according to the quantity of swelling.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And you will keep it with all caution so that you do not increase the swelling with the fracture, for foolish physicians make bad accidents happen, and cause death or great corruption, or putrefaction; and this is healed.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the patient's swelling is mild, it will subside somewhat, unlike in other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the swelling is great or is a bad swelling and you fear some other bad accidents that we have said, and feel pain in that place, then do not pause on that bone, but wrap it up tightly with strong cloth instead of needles, and tighten it with a bandage.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	Then when a day or two have passed since the swelling has begun, which may be an hour, then you will stop the water that you had put on it with warm cloth, and administer calches, wet them with those with which we usually treat swellings, and make them boil; and do not allow anyone to drink water until they are well boiled.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you have to make the member move so that the rot will run from it to the joints more easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the swelling has lasted for several days and does not subside or disappear from the arm, then you must know that this is a sign of a serious illness and that it will spread to other areas.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those that separate and are extruded, those that do not separate and put the member in such a way that they cause pain, then you must cut them off according to your ability.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the swelling becomes hot or cold, then it is a sign of fever or some other kind of putrefaction, so you must know that you should pause and wait for the swelling to stop causing pain before attempting treatment, which is described in the previous chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And on that which you should rest and present your leg: when the swelling has decreased a little, move it with the help of the thigh and the supporting leg and similar to those of the large members, and do not think that there is any attraction from within or that the extraction will cause harm, because a strong pain will come if you do not wait for about twenty days or three months. And then heal the swelling if it is visible and if not, leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the treatment of a broken bone that occurs in the shadow of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This type of swelling occurs in the shadow of healing from a fracture, and most often affects the joints, and it distorts the shape of the member; and it strongly prohibits the natural movement of the limb.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have been described above, and examine, and search for, and match them with the symptoms; also, do not neglect those that are slightly swollen or fully swollen, and apply those medicines to it frequently: vi-styptic, or milk of lead, or vi-agar, and place it on the swelling in a cloth, and constrict those around it with a good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And allow the constriction to remain in place for several days; and then remove it and repeat this process as many times as necessary until the swelling is reduced; or apply a layer of lead over it, because lead has the property of reducing anything that is swollen in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Or if the swelling has already turned into a chronic condition and stricture forces it to open, then cut it open with care, and remove the excess and the prominent part, or cut that off with an edge that can be used again, and heal the opening.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of restoring a fracture when it has healed and bring the member back to its natural state, without any deformity or pain.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When the bone fracture has healed, and bring the member back to its natural state without any deformity or pain, then know that this may be due to a variety of factors: one is the diversity of solutions for the limb and the ligation of it, which does not occur according to its nature; or because of an excess of stricture in the limbs from which the nutrient is prohibited from reaching the member; or because of a multitude of unnecessary embrocation; or because of excessive movement that is not appropriate at that time; or because of lack of nutrition in the body and for the treatment of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And heal that member by giving it food and making the heart of it strong when the pain multiplies in it; and administer baths, and pierce it with a needle and treat it kindly.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then pause the application of a paste on it, so that the paste provides nutrition for the member, or continue the application of liquid food on it, which runs and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the treatment of broken bones that are restored with twisting and prohibiting the operation of their joints if it is needed.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member is already restored with twisting and healing from a broken bone and swelling, it has taken on the shape of the bone, but nevertheless, the member does not prohibit its natural operation; so you should not accept that the person who owns this member believes that it is a new break.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	However, there have been many false healing methods and restorers that have failed in this world, and such an operation is very abhorrent and carries the risk of death from the sigil of which it is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the claudication and swelling are recent, then know that they should be treated with wet herbs that are soft, as well as with leaves of mint, and roots of sage, and honey; and it should be applied with a paste made from milk (dill) properly prepared, or that it is pressed out of the root of sage and applied with olive oil of cypress, and placed on a plaster of the same; or that it is made of soft fig oils and triturated with the seeds of collyrim, and similar to those of certain medicines called "universal consolidation."
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some are dissolved with a constant light friction that is more moist, and administered the movement of the limb at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the twisting has already begun from behind and is caused to be strong and turned into a chronic condition, and it is necessary to heal it with fire, then know that this is due to an excess of swelling in that member, and the continuous part of the bone is dissolved; and it is cut off with a sharp edge, and administered easily to that which requires treatment and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is a loss of the natural shape of a member at its joint, so that it is prohibited from moving, and the figure of the limb appears deformed, causing great pain and damage.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Then if you encounter a dislocation, immediately cut it off, and do not delay reducing it, because if it is delayed, the joint will split open and it will be very difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And so it should not be stretched or bent at that time when reducing dislocation, because a strong pain and cramp will come.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	And then when it happens to you, know that you should prepare yourself for the flaybotomy of the limb, and pause it so that the spasm stops; and then the member is treated with water from a tail and oil, and reduced easily.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the whole body should be healed with water of which the memory comes to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation, following those of fracture: from the upper limb to the lower one.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the two jaws are not tartered; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: either they are remounted by a little movement, or they are softened slightly; or they are completely dislocated and softened at the joint before healing them, so that their saliva runs from their mouth and they cannot keep it closed, and the tongue is wrapped in its word.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	Then if the dislocation is slight, in most cases return to their usual state by itself if there is a slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is entire and complete, then know that it should be reduced with care, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	Here is the translation of the text into English:
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction is difficult and primarily if both mandibles are dislocated, then administer water of chamomile and oil, within which a slight reduction of both can be made and not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so, with return and Engualadas, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then pause on those cloths of drap at cerot, and be made of wax and oil rosy; and so tie with ease with liamens mols.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and the head of him between two armpits, that he may not swerve in any part right or left; and do not push for any reason; have the patient's food be forbidden lion, within which when the pains are relieved and the mandibles are no longer swollen, then drink what you want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this water should be administered with ease, and do not work on the mouth of the patient in eating or drinking or calling, within which the mandible is swollen and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two mandibles is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not turned into their places, then visible fever and frequent urination occur, and very strong gas comes out of the patient's belly, and very strong vomiting of pure colic.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see water, then know that it is a loss; and visible urination occurs within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter. XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the Reduction of the Dislocation of the Jaw and the Extremity of the Muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the side within by its continuity to the foot; and some are dislocated at the outer end, and water is produced according to the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of him is that the patient jumps on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then return the place to your palm with a strong grasp, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then pause on that paste and cloths and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The end of that which sews the joint is continuous with that, is not dislocated at any time; then cover so that it is reduced and Engualada according to what we have said and according to your apparatus.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then pause on that paste, and cloths, and tighten it, and order the patient to adhere calmly and to rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this cure the end of the muscle is reduced when separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter. XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the Reduction of the Dislocation of the Muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except by three ways, and one of these is that it is dislocated at the end of the titillac to the end of the thighs.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the end of its muscle, and this is done easily; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder, and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most often it is dislocated and comes out at the ends of the thighs towards the titillac, and most often in those in which the meat is little, it is dislocated easily; but in those in which there is much meat, it is dislocated with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And very strong gas occurs in some men by percussion or pounding, and the muscle of him is inflamed with inflammation, and it is detected by water that has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then cover so that you desire water until you are sat on it, and then proceed in the cure of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is recognized that the dislocation has occurred when it is at the ends of the thighs towards the titillac; so that you distinguish between the muscle that is dislocated and the other one, for you can easily tell them apart; you feel the concavity of the muscle at the end of the thigh towards the titillac, where a hair, and to the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor raise it for all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from the foot or behind it, then you feel a clear sensation of touch, and it does not conceal itself.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation is made a slight reduction when it is fresh, and the patient is child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand to its ends; then pause the ties of the cloth at the end of the thigh towards the titillac, and raises the joint with strength into its place, and the minister raises the hand of the patient, and extends it in front of him; and then pause that at the back because it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if by water that we have said does not return, and only from the beginning that the dislocation occurs, then wait for a few days, then cover him with blankets so that he is warm and relaxed, and apply oil to his joints so that they are softened and relaxed, as if his joints were broken and tied up, and fenugrec, and melilot in water, and administer it.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then let the patient lie on his back and be paused at the end of the thigh towards the titillac with a blanket, waiting for wool that is placed between levitation and tightness, and then let the doctor pause his leg on the spine, and raise the head of the muscle by virtue, and throw the hand of the patient so that it is not raised to the ends, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not raised to the ends, because that quickly returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish, you can reduce it in this way: and know that you should be present with the man who is longer than the patient, and is on the side of the joint, and enters his muscle at the end of the thigh of the patient and raises the thigh of the patient towards the back within which the patient hangs suspended by air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the ends of his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is easily dislocated, then know that it is so because another cause is suspended, for this reason that the dislocation quickly returns.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced by another way: and know that it should be placed on the ground a long staff whose head is round in shape, like a mortar, which is not thick or small, and then pause on the staff at the end of the patient; for you pause on the staff above the head of the patient, and the patient stands according to the length of the staff, and then extend his legs from the other part with force, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of him is difficult because of all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and know that you take a staff whose length is twice as long as the arms, and whose width is four fingers, and whose thickness is reduced in the tip of the titillac according to this shape:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And over the head let there be a soft drape to keep the patient's head from moving around.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And let the servant stand away from the patient's feet, and extend the hand or arm above them, so that he reaches between their legs, and holds him by his feet, holding on to the sides and arms, and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then let the arm stand on a step according to its length, and the hand be extended between their legs, and the other thing be suspended from the other side, for the joint is between them both.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is complete in accordance with any manner that is possible for you, and then cover it with a quantity of woolen yarn; and place plaster prepared from powder of millstone and egg-white over all the muscle, so that when it is turned upside down, and then tighten the yarn around the joints; and let the limb be turned over the plaster, and the hand of him be attached to his neck, and let it lie still, and not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And when the patient' food is little enough that the member can be comforted, for it is lighter to the recovery of him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then let his food be given in greater quantity every day and let exercise be made; and if it does not soften and become easier, then he is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	And if the joint is displaced by moisture that occurs to it or by any other cause, then let three punctures be made there according to what was said in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this still does not heal and seven days have passed and the plaster and the tightness are little removed from him, and the joint is not set in place, and the punctures and stricture are little reduced on it, and he cannot raise his arm to his side, then you will know that the nerves of him, which are at the top of the muscle, have been cut or extended or softened, and you will know that the joint will never heal in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the displacement of that which is caused by the foot and the nipple or rear joints, reduction is done with a push and extension to the ends, as long as it does not return.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then let another tightness be administered there, and heal that before he is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if a heavy injury occurs to the member and delay in his movement, then let the patient use warm baths there before that injury is lightened and he returns to his nature first.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of healing of joint displacement.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is displaced with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and that is displaced at all joints, especially at the front ones behind, and the displacement of him is not hidden from you because it is caused by the rope or touch according to some figure is displaced, and when you adjust the shoulder that is displaced with the hand, then let him know definitely, because the joint is bent and he cannot bend his arm or touch at it his own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And when you have the shoulders and reduce the displacement as soon as it comes to him an emetic cautery, because if you look at the emetic cautery, reduction of it is difficult, and it is not easily healed from all; and more so when it is behind the joints, for it is worse of all the other types of joint displacement, and more painful, and let certain death occur there.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of him, when that which can be healed is reduced, is that the hand of him be extended with two hands, and his arms are spread out, and the sides of his body are over the shoulder and away from it, and he pushes the joint with the tips of his fingers or the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the displacement is in front of the joints, then let it return so that he bends his hand with his own hand, as long as it does not strike the shoulder with the tip of his hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the displacement does not obey reduction, then let violent extension be administered and let it be very strong.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	That is that two ministers extend the arms, and have that emetic from two ministers so that it is not remanded before extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then let the arms be turned upside down all around, because it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over the hand of him, or limb.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the finger touches the joint with its own hand, then let that be unwrapped with some oil so that those causes which help in lubricity of the joint are eased; and then push the joint with violent pushing until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then let the reduction of him be made there is wrapped in a paste on which stringency and accuracy are applied with egg-white, and let it be extended with a stricture downward, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and left alone for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then let it be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the limb of him and leave that alone.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not stronger, then you repeat the plaster and the limb, and leave that alone for several days before you extend it again; and then loosen that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if a heavy injury occurs to the joint and its movement is in difficulty, then let dampness be administered in a bath and subtle friction, and pressure, as long as it is lightened; or pause above the joint and let it lie, so that it does not move quickly; and then tie it, and leave that alone, leaving it over the bone for a day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then loosen that and put it in a bath; and when it softens, then you rub the joint with gentle friction, and then repeat on that which is relaxed, so it makes noise of movement, once, and again, and the third time.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already come about in the innermost part of the bath, before it is cool.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, pause above that cow's wound wet and sharp with the edge and stretch it over that; and make some cuts there, because that is wet and reduce its movement.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of healing of joint displacement of the shoulders, which is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	A few veils of the hand are displaced, and reduction of that which is displaced by him is little, but the opposite is true of all other joints; however, if it is rapid in reducing it within an hour when it is displaced, then let him be treated with a cold emetic or its own cautery.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	Then let the reduction of him be that you pause the joint of the shoulder on a table and a minister extends the hand of him, and the side of his body pauses its own hand or its own palm over the edge of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, if the palm is already shown to the stomach of the hand, then let the shoulder pause its two hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the displacement is before the hand, then let the two hands be placed intricately on the table, so that the side of his body boxes over that edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	Then if he returns quickly, it is good; and if not, then let him be tightened with paste and the emetic applied to him and left alone; and do not repeat that, because unless several days have passed it does not suffer or can heal by you because of the reduction being slow.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Now however the Roman joint according to its tortuosity; and there is no cause for the patient, but that the hand is softened and cannot be strengthened for any reason; then know that the nerves are torn or broken, and there is no chance of it being a strong hand except by cauterizing properly and strongly so as to confer some cause upon him.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Now therefore when the patient's malady has returned, then pause over it and make it solid and firm for a few days; and then untie it and exercise his hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Now if the movement of it is stopped and happens to it some gravity, then soften that by water and friction some veils, so that it may be relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocations.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some veils are dislocated from the beginning.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a digit of those between the two palms or the belly is dislocated, then make it stiff and push back the dislocation by the fingers, so that it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the top of the digit and hang it from the part where it is dislocated for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then hang it up and stretch it out so that it may be re-joined in a day or two.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is healed, let him follow that narrative and do not cease to untie it in the day and exercise its movement, and let him sleep at night; and make it stiff for a few days.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same to him if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and let him lean on that part and make the first operation of the fingers, so that he may be healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	In the same way, do to him when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocations of the spine of the hand.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation of one of the joints of the hand or neck happens to it, and there is not a proper cure for it, because death threatens the patient,
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	This means that the patient's excretion is outside his will, and he cannot keep it in; or that certain members of his body, such as the arms or legs, become soft or withered away; or that one of the joints of his body becomes stiff because certain veils have fallen away from their places.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then it is said to be "gelbozitati".
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The cure for it is that you shall consider if the stiffness occurs from pus, because there is neither a cure nor healing for all of this.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Now in those which are caused by a blow or by a fall or by chance to the others, the ancient doctors had long-winded ways of treating them, of which the least returns to the profusion; and I have already found it out and renewed it from that which is too much of it, because of my nearness to it and my exposure to it, at which I have come to admire and form a different instrument than that with which I will show him and spread it out.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And let it be known that in stiffness which occurs from the front of the foot, there is neither a cure nor healing for it; and apparently in that which happens at two points.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not healed except that which happens to the hand, of which I have already told you.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the patient be extended on his face over the table with a towel spread beneath him, and that the instrument which moistens him be held away from his foot.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a stick is held upright, set on the ground at the end of the foot round his head, and another stick is placed under his feet at the other end of the foot.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The servant should hold the stick, and not place it in a pit; and the other servant should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap your head in a towel and release the hair clips gently on it; then extend the end of the braid with the stick which is meant to support the head, and let that stick rest on the ground; and then adjust all the hair ties and let them hang on the other stick which is meant to support his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then the servant should drop the hair down to the end of the stick, and not let the two sticks and hair ties rest in such a way; but however, I have already told you.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place his palms on the spine with strength until it returns to its place, or that he places it on a table, and then he should adjust his feet on the table until it returns to its place.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	Now if it does not return with this form, then take a table whose height or length is in the air of three brasses, and dig into the wall where I have said that it is proper for the patient to sit at which end of the table;
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then the table should be placed on the spine of it, and the doctor should place his feet on the other end, and raise his back a little so that the spine may be drawn in and return to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the door which is turned towards the back; and it is that you stand on the ground, and let the patient's head be in the back of two sticks whose length is a palm, and the doctor's feet should be in the back of two sticks; and the distance between each stick should be a palm, and that is where he turns his back to it; and each should be stopped from falling by digging into the ground.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there shall be one stick turned around which is the door; and it should be turned in both ends of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And in the end of it is a stick which forms the turn around stick, whose length is a palm to which it is turned; and in the other two sticks is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then adjust the hair ties that you have made straight in the foot of the patient in the turn which is meant to support his head, and those hair ties that you have made straight on his feet in the door which is meant to support them;
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each turn and a servant should twist the door with his hand, and the doctor should fix the spine according to what I have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the way of twisting:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then when the spine has returned to its place and is covered with a dried-up cloth, then put on it a covering of wool, and then stop it; and then place it on a table whose height is three fingers or more, and the length of it is such that it covers the place of stiffness, and on the end of the spine which was stiff.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then be tied with the hair which I have said; and use the patient' subtle nutrition while it is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any urgency in the place where the cure ends at the end of the healing, then you shall cover them with medicines which soften and smoothen, and also with the long-term administration of the table which I have recommended; and it has already been administered to them in that place a layer of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases there is an imminence of death from the end of the spine of the hand, and it has already been mentioned by me for which reason I do not cover you with this medicine, because it will surely cause your death;
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the Treatment of a Dislocated Hip
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Do you know that the joint of the hip and the muscle do not differ from each other except for a slight dislocation and concave shape.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways; it is dislocated inward, outward, forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Most commonly, it is dislocated inward, and less often forward or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of a hip dislocation inward is this: when you adjust the patient's hips, the hip on the affected side becomes longer and the iliac crest further away than that of the sound side; the patient cannot bend their hip, and the point where the skin begins to break is farther forward than usual, so that the top of the buttock has come here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of one who has a hip dislocation outward is this: the patient's legs become uneven; the affected leg becomes shorter and the iliac crest closer than that of the sound side; the patient's back becomes curved, and the point where the skin breaks is farther backward than usual, so that the buttocks are reduced.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of one who has a hip dislocation forward is that they expand their hips to the extent of their comfort, but do not bend the affected hip; and if they try to walk, they cannot step on their front foot; their urine is retained, and their legs become swollen, and their walking becomes difficult.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of one who has a hip dislocation backward is that they do not expand their hips, nor can they bend the affected hip; and if they try to walk, they cannot step on their back foot; their legs become stiff, and the top of the buttock comes here.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of such a dislocation should be done gradually and with great care, for if it is an old and long-standing dislocation, you must administer it according to its nature, and not attempt any treatment that might aggravate it; and it is not appropriate to try any new method in such a case.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	If the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four types, then you should reduce it by turning the joint inward and extending it at its ends; and you should put it on the right and left sides, as it returns easily and does not require any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong poultice and extend the patient' hip at its end, either by placing it on its side or by making it lie on its back; and another servant should extend the patient' hand, holding it by the fingers, over the hip joint; and a third should tighten the ligature around the hip joint, holding it with one hand; and a fourth should hold the foot firm.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	You should extend him either from the front end to the hip joint, or from the back end to the knee; and then you should place him on his side, facing upward or downward.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And you should make the extension from all sides in such a way that the patient' legs hang down freely and do not touch the ground.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is suitable for all four types of dislocation.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	If the dislocation returns to the way it was, then there is no need to worry; but if not, then every type of dislocation has its own treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the self-reduction of the hip, when it is dislocated inward, you should lie on your side with your legs extended upward; and place the ligature on the hip joint in the location where the skin begins to break; and then tighten the ligature so that the end of the leg is firmly held.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then another servant should grasp the patient' arms firmly and extend the patient' hip outward with great force, as this dislocation returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This type of treatment is the easiest way to treat this limb; and in all other types of dislocations, this limb will reduce itself.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If you cannot perform this treatment because it is uncomfortable for you, then tie the two legs of the patient together with a strong ligature, holding them firmly on either side; and do the same for the two hips, tying them together with another strong ligature.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	You should make the length of each leg four times as long as the distance between the hips, and you should extend the patient' back four times as much as their front.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then you should hang the patient upside down, and you should make their legs four times as long as the distance between their feet.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then you should have a strong young man pull the top of the buttock; and another young man should hang the patient by the feet; and the first man should pull up on the hip to return it to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	If the dislocation is forward, then you should place a strong poultice on the hip joint as soon as it occurs; and you should tighten the ligature around the hip joint itself, and also around the patient' foot.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then two strong men should be placed on either side of the patient; and then three more strong men should hold the legs together tightly, and one man should place a cloth over the patient' feet, so that the patient is not harmed by the leg being pulled apart.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Then each servant should extend their part and the doctor will administer the reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey in reverse, then do so thoroughly; otherwise, pause carefully and then carry out the treatment I have described for this engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	You should make sure that the patient is comfortable before proceeding.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	If the dislocation is forward, then the hips should be extended slightly; and this is according to what has been described above about the pueg; and the doctor places his hand on the patient' hip, and then he extends the hand with the little finger toward the back, and the doctor places his hand on the other hip, and then he extends it in the same way.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is backward, then you should not extend the hips at all, and instead raise them slightly off the ground; holding the patient in this position will cause the joint to return to its own place, provided that there is no other cause of pain; and if the hip is dislocated backward, as has been said above with regard to the treatment of a hip joint dislocated forward, you should place the leg on its side facing upward.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	The compression administered to the patient should be at the joint itself;
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Once the reduction is complete, as soon as you notice that it has succeeded and that the joint has returned to its place, then you should adjust two cushions and place them under the patient' knees; and with your hand on the hip, you should push the leg toward the back, and the doctor will put his hand on the other hip, and will push it in the same way. Then you should place a cloth over the hips, so that they are not harmed by the pushing. This treatment should be repeated three or four times a day; and the patient should remain at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then you should remove the ligature and bandage, and compare one hip to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those bumps in a vise, then you will know that the dislocation is now closed; and so let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and spread it again, and extract it a second time as per your first stretch, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then tie it up, and let it walk slowly on its own for a few days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxiी.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of treatment of dislocation of the foot joint.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The dislocation can occur in three ways: because it is dislocated outward at the joints, inward at the joints, and forward at the joints; but it does not occur backward at the joints.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is that you command the patient to apply the cushion to his crotch; then you will know that the foot is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all kinds is that you make the patient turn on his right side, and let him stretch his legs out in front of him if he can do so; then to attach the knee joints with tape, and hold the patient's foot between his knees; and then to attach the foot to your palms, and place those between the patient's thighs behind his foot as far as it comes back to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of recovery is that your cushion sticks to him; but if it does not, then he has not recovered.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then tie it up and attach the cushion to him, and let them be tied together with a bandage for three or four days, then untie them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient to walk for a few days; until he is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if your reducing of him to you is excused, then administer the following: in the treatment of the heel, which precedes the narration of the cure in a strong way.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the heel.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The heel sometimes wakes up due to a small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated in the complete opposite way, and the dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is that the heel swells up to the joint from which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment of moving him is a light recovery, and it is that he be stretched out comfortably on his back and then wrapped up tightly until he returns to his place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of him when he is dislocated in the complete opposite way, cover that you command the patient to turn on his right side, and let another minister hold his foot firmly at the joint behind it, in its place.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then you are to him on the right side of his foot, and to you on the left side at the joint of his heel, in its place.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then you are to throw his foot to him on the right side, and to you on the left side for two turns, and then extend it with your left hand; and make the foot of the heel work with your right hand if needed.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Then make him turn twice as many times as you have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then tie his foot to the cushion for the third time, and you are at the joint.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if he returns in one turn or two according to this way, and if his foot does not wake up, then repeat the operation on him, because he wakes up again.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are forbidden to reduce him to you by water which I have recommended, then make the servant walk on his knees on the ground, and place a mat under him so that he does not feel the ground; and wrap a blanket around him, and place your hand on his hip to hold him in place.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then the servant of him hold his hips, and another minister extends his foot towards his foot or leg; and the payssel is extended between the servant' s hips to keep it from falling over the joint in front of its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor heals him from his foot; and another minister holds his crotch to keep it from falling, because dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And now if dislocation returns and you declare to him the healing of his reduction, then pause and extract it firmly with a strong bandage; and tie his foot to the cushion.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Then if you fear or guard yourself from the nerves that are behind the heel, so that the bandage on him is not violent and he is firmly tied up.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave it alone for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes soft, then extract it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then return it on the third day, and do not let the patient walk for 10 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to go ahead of the space, do not make sure that the dislocation is not over him and dissolved or corrupt; and let this be understood so that you do not receive a cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens to him to throw away the drink in a way that is described by the following narration of treatment and cure, then let another minister give it to him somewhere else for healing; but if it wakes up again.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	If the dislocated foot is wrapped up tightly a few times, then it will wake up slowly; and if it is not difficult, it will walk in advance.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in two toes of the foot, then cover that you make the patient walk on his knees on the ground or a table, and let him do so as if he were walking; and if it is not difficult, it will be enough.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you are to stand on your heels, and hold his feet over the joints, and let them move with their own strength until they return; then make sure that he is wrapped up and does not appear in its place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the foot of the patient on a table that lifts up the whole foot, and let there be two hands on it, and hold them with their strength for three days; then return it to the ground, and let him walk slowly for three days until he is recovered and the healing is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter  .xxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of dislocation that are caused by plague or fracture or some other way.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of those occurs to you, and if you are involved in the treatment of that disease and the restoration of him, you will see a number of deaths succeeding one another.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And by no means do you brag about the cure of him; but let that man who is skilled in the art treat him with patience and kindness, not impatience or arrogance; and may he use a number of potions to ease the pain slowly, and leave the patient to God's judgment. But if you expect salvation from ruin, treat him with alleviate medicine, and if there is any hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then try to heal him as soon as the cause appears; but not after the disease has caused a fever.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as it is supposed to do; but administer a potion that causes a fever slowly and heal him from the plague by water that you pour on him with dried leaves.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is from a broken bone and occurs in the part that is separated; then try to treat him with surgery, and make sure that he does not drink any water that has been said about simple medicines of water that is used before.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And you keep and avoid according to your strength those things that are in the way of fear; because water is better for him than you do your own Creator, and may you remain firm in your glory, and may you salute the Lord' s body with it at all times.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	So ends the words of Al-Bubakar accurately from which God be pleased.
Amen.	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
