Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O children, since I have fulfilled this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by its completion in it, and by its expositions and declarations, it has appeared to me that you will complete that with this treatise which is a part of surgery through manual operation.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation through manual technique is proscribed in our realm and in our times deprived of all, while greatly endangering the science of it, and its procedures are hindered; and nothing remains of it but some slight descriptions in the books of the Ancients which they have altered and led to those errors and misconceptions whereby the understanding of it is clouded and its power and art prolonged.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it has seemed to me that you enliven that through the arrangement of this treatise according to its second way of exposition and declaration and abridgement; and so that the forms of the instruments of cautery and of the other tools of the work come through addition of declaration, and through preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause whereby no good artificer is found by the hand in our times is because the art of medicine is long, and that one who practices it before he be exercised in the science of anatomy, which belongs to Gualia, knowing the parts of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and having the knowledge of the bones, the nerves and the sinews, and the number of these, and their issue; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their issue.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And on account of this Hypocras says that one whose name is great but in action small, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said of this in the introduction to this book; for who is not learned in that which we have said concerning anatomy, it is certain that he will fall into error whereby men will die, as I have seen many of these, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves from that without learning or experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and experienced physician incise a scrofulous abscess on the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed and the woman died in his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another physician who, when he had extracted a stone from a man whose condition was improved, and the stone was large, came to him and drew out that stone with a piece of the bladder so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called to them to draw it out and saw that on account of the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another physician who received stipends from a duke of our land for surgery, and he undertook to treat a negro who had suffered a fracture in his thigh; and preparing with his ignorance, drew out the fracture over the wound with powders and splints with strong compression and did not leave the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he let him loose according to his desires and bound him and left him for several days and commanded that we unbind the ligature; and it was thus until the thigh and the leg were apostematized, and it came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him and made preparation to unbind the ligature, and tranquility was achieved and he was eased of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But the corruption was nonetheless confirmed in the member so that I could not restrain it and the corruption continued to circulate in the member until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another physician who perforated a cankerous abscess and it was ulcerated for several days until the evil of it grew great with its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of which is that the cold humor is pure, and it does not come to him by iron at all but that it be in a member which suffers that it be opposed to all things.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And on account of this, children, it is necessary for you that the operation through manual technique be considered in two ways: one is in operation which is associated with health, and the other in work whereby there is peril in the greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already expounded that in every place of this book in which occurs operation whereby there is error and fear; so that it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, lest the foolish bring about your harm through speaking.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and with God's protection, and your patients with gentleness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way through God's grace for the sake of health and praiseworthy success and rid yourselves of terrible illnesses of difficult cure, and arm yourselves against that which causes you to fear so that trembling in your faith and in your name does not abandon you: for more remains for your glory and beyond in the world and in the last days for your saints.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galia already said in some of his books:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not heal a bad illness lest bad physicians be named."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have arranged this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of the book and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered concerning the feet, in the forms of the instruments and the tools of the cauteries, and of that which is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of bleeding and piercing, and of cupping-glasses, and of wounds, and of extraction of arrows and their likes, all capitulated and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of reduction and of dislocation, and of cure for twisting and their likes; a chapter ordered concerning the feet and the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cautery with fire and with sharp medicine and reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of the whole book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	That I say the quality of the humors of that cautery and of the nocent things in it, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of the humor of cautery and of the nocent thing in it is long and prolixed, and subtle through science, and secret hid away; and already many wise men have spoken greatly of it, and from it they have disagreed, and for me a little of their speeches suffices, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery confers universally on all complexions, save two complexions which are complexions of coldness without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complexions of coldness and dryness with matter they disagreed; for some said that cautery is beneficial for it, and the others said the contrary of this, that cautery is not convenient in illnesses which are by quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that an illness of coldness and dryness be cauterized.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he said the contrary of this that through cautery benefit is done in every illness of coldness and dryness which one sees in the bodies of men for when you compare the body of man and its moistures to the complexions of fire, you moisten the body of man.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the speech of that which, that experiment that already many times I have discovered.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But it is not necessary to come over here that which is already demonstrated and exercised in the chapter of cauteries by previous exercise, and has known the diversity of the complexions of men, and the disposition of diseases in their bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in the other complexions, there is no fear over you, and especially in the moist and friction diseases, for all the doctors have agreed upon those, and are not disagreeing upon using cautery on them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness, is that it is a simple substance, whose action does not reach any other member except the one being cauterized, and does not affect another member with it except with minor harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of the burning medicine reaches those members from which it is distant, and strongly brings about disease in the member difficult to heal, and strongly causes it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But the fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do that except to make superfluous. And it is known to us through experiment and through the longevity of service of study on the truth of causes; and because of this I am excused from the length of speech. And if it were not that I was not read in this book to you, secretly hidden by the fire, and the quality of its operation on the bodies and its expulsion by which you expel diseases, with philosophical speech demonstrated, which would be acute in your ears.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree on the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient in all times, because the harm by the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of that which is attracted by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pain or necessary pains, strong and violent, which do not tolerate delay so that they fear the evil that comes, which is greater than minor harm coming from the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And you should not listen to them, O children, or they will not believe it except the common people and foolish doctors; so it is that for this disease which is healed by cautery there is no reduction in all times, and they pause at that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think it to be, for cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the moistness which are the cause by which pain comes.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But cautery surpasses medicine in value and power of its operation, and grandeur of his lordship.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his disease will return at some time of the year, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his disease, and its power, and what has been prepared in his body by the accumulation of excesses in him, and what has come upon him through acquisition in foods and like those causes; but if the disease in which cautery was administered is a subtle disease in a member with few excesses and moistness, so that cautery of teeth for pain and its likes, it is possible that the pain will not return in him, but that happens little.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is a common saying that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a true saying, not that they understand it to be, for they believe that there is no healing that benefits through medicine or other cause except cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is in contrast to that; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not unless the manners of healing are administered in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause the man is administered cautery, and benefits from it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here we see that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the vulgar and foolish doctors understand it.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say it except for the equality of gold and sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not make it strong, and that is not absolutely true, for I have already proved and demonstrated that it does not do that except in some bodies without the others, and cautery with it is good and better than with iron as they said; but if you perform cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is made according to the amount you wish according to the roughness of the gold, and it prepares itself to receive friction; and if you apply ignition on it, the gold melts by the fire, and in the fire some sheets are placed so that the artificer sees through the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because of that cautery with iron is made more lightly and closer to the correctness of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and have arranged those of the head among the feet, so that elsewhere I will ask him what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for headache by coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter:
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers to moisture and coldness the accidental servant of which there are two causes, and it is caused by soda and multitude of flux, called neuritis, from the head to the parts of the ears and from the eyelashes flowing, and multitude of sleep, and of toothache and of gum inflammation, and universally of all disease that comes through friction, such as paralysis, lethargy, and apoplexy, and like in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this: first of all command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine the head cleansing, for three or four days, according to that the power of the patient and his age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command that he shaves his head with a razor, and then let him sit between your hands on a heated bench, and let him rest his hands on his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the edge of your palm, and then put your fingers between your eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But however, when that part of the middle location has been reached, mark it with a tent, and then ignite the olive-oil cautery, of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then put that on the marked location, in such a way that it descends, and your hand be slightly pressed there, and you revolve it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand slightly and look at the location, and if you see already some quantity of the head uncovered, as well as the amount of hair, then lift your hand again, and if it has not returned your hand with that iron, with another, if it is cooled, while it is seen by you what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the location, and let that be for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then put on it cotton soaked in vinegar and let that be on it until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the location with tetropharmacon unguent while it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that when the Roman plaster is wet, then as many herbs are put on it, for that is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them said that the jaw should be cauterized within the bone, and have the cautery within it until some part of the substance of the bone is burnt.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then let that be scratched that which is burnt in the bone, and then let it be healed.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Others said that they reached the bone with the cautery before they put pressure on the strong bones, and this is the form of little Alcphatis.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they think that from that place they expel the vapors from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the ulcer has been open for a long time and is not healing, it should be treated until it is healed.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two kinds of cautery at all, except in some men according to the way of fear; and that one, as far as I am concerned, is a thousand times better for health when it is; because the head is devitalized by solution of continuity with him as we have witnessed in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first kind of cautery is more safe and better as far as I am concerned; and that one should be used for health, both its use and its work.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of cautery to the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in all the head there is a chronic and long-standing pain which is prolonged in the patient, and he uses leeches and cupping glasses and caput medusae and plasters and poultices and bandages and cauteries and similar remedies, and especially if he has already been cauterized with one cautery which does not benefit him at all from those causes, then consider that if the patient's head is of a strong creation in its nature; and it is not frail but finds great pain from great heat, then cauterize it with another cautery after that first one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize that above the crown of his head with a cautery until the scalp is split open.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	The scalp having been split and the quantity which we have mentioned having been opened up, cauterize that with a cautery in the back part of the head at the place which is called the foramen magnum —- and it is that place on which the ventouse is applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And loosen your hand in it, and do not open the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from that than from all the other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will tell you about this cautery in its place, because the cautery by which they cauterize the crown of the head and the occiput is much more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cautery for a new wound, not old.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a sudden pain occurs in the front part of the head, or pain is extended to the eye, let it be evacuated with medicated washings, and let the other treatment be administered, which I have written about in the different diseases; and if all do not help, then cautery to it is in two ways: either cauterize with a sharp medicine that burns, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But cautery with a burning medicine is that you take some alum and scrape it, and put the extremes of it on both sides of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then cut into the site of the pain in the temple with a pointed lance until you have made a hole in it underneath the scalp, and cover it up.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then tie it up over there with a bandage so that it might be tightly bound; and let it stay in that place for the space of three hours; and then loosen the bandage, and treat the alum, and let the ulcer remain for two or three days; and then put your hand over it, submerged in warm water, until the site becomes swollen.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you want, do that with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cautery with iron according to this way: heat up the cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a nail-shaped cautery, because the head of it has the shape of a nail with some curve to it, and in the middle part of it there is a small protuberance.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it over the site of the pain, and hold your hand so that it might not be burnt by the cautery which is underneath; and move the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of it that is burnt by the heat of the cautery according to the thickness of the scalp were as high as the size of your fingernail, and raise up your hand so that the artery underneath might not be burnt, so that there might not come a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then moisten the cautery in salt water and place it over the site for three days; and then apply a poultice soaked with warm water, and cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you want, cauterize with the edge of a scalpel according to the cautery, and beware of cutting into an artery in this new wound that is not old.
Capitol quart.	Chapter fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cautery for an old wound.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure a wound with what we have said about the previous treatment, and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment does not help, and you see for the disease that it is not sufficient to it what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then when you ignite the cautery cut until it turns white, place your hand over the site of the pain with a bandage and tighten that while you pierce the artery underneath and it comes out into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However it is necessary for you to beware of the continuation of the mandible, which is worn down by chewing, and that the ligament not be burnt and the nerve underneath it, and that no spasm come over it.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that it is cut, for there is danger in the cutting of it, especially for him who ignores what he does and is inexperienced and unskilled; and let the operation stop at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come with remembrance of the rule for the flow of blood accidentally from the artery according to its own way, in its own place in this free book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not help this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and cure the ulcer until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you want, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter about stretching of the artery with cautery having two edges, and this cautery is better and more suitable.
Capitol .v.	Chapter fifth.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cautery for pains in the ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain from heat and it is cured with caustic remedies and with the other treatment which I have written about in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is that one which has the name puncta, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then prick it with the cautery and heat it, and let it be moved around the whole of the ear as a wheel is turned, or in the circle of whichever part if the pain is in whichever part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Lengthen it with the cautery from the rim of the ear little by little so that you do not touch the site with the tip.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of ten points in all of the ear, and it, and then cure the sites until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter sixth.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cautery for torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured and cautery does not help except with remedies of the spices which come from phlegm, according as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the area that hurts due to dryness or due to a spasm in the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat this kind of torture with poultices and bandages and healing remedies, and don't see any improvement, then you must cauterize the patient in three places: first at the root of the auricle, second a little below his temple, and third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply your cautery opposite to where it hurts because softening only comes from the side that is healing.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the way to perform cauterization is to cauterize it on the right side of the highest part of the auricle a little bit above the corner of the head, and another one at the temple, whose length should be according to the length of the finger, and hold your hand with the cautery until half of the thickness of the hair is burnt.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, it is a kind of knife whose shape is described above.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, one should be more careful because it cuts deep in the skin. And if there are too many bumps on the surface, cut them a little bit.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with what is described above until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On cauterization for ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have described above but don't see any improvement and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries: on all of the corners of his head; and with cautery on the middle part of the head as we have said before; and with cautery on the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the way to perform cauterization is as it is described above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And he has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more effective this way; and he will be cured with what we have described.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterization for oblivion caused by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Give the patient large poultices and pills that are purifying at the beginning.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then rub the whole head of the patient and place on his neck a plaster made from honey as it is described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply it a few times, because that is the way to perform cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it according to what we have said above.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if he heals well with this treatment, good; and if not, then do to him three cauteries in the back part of his head which should go from the highest part of the head down to the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and treat the cauteries with what is described above.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	However, if you see improvement and the patient tolerates it, then do to him cauterization in the middle part of his head; and if you see even more improvement, then cauterize him on both corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat him until he is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped as it is described above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On cauterization for a hernia and on softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Give the patient poultices and treatment for the head as we have said above; then rub his head, and cauterize him with cautery in the middle part of the head, and with cautery on all of the corners of his head, and with cautery on the back of his neck, and with three cauteries on the spine of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body to give him trops and the patients tolerate it and the apoplexy is strong, then cauterize him with four cauteries on the spine of the back, and lastly with cautery over his head until half of the thickness of the hair is burnt, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then treat him until he is healed; and let this cautery be olive-shaped.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On cauterization for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	An epileptic is not cauterized unless the cause of his epilepsy is phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore give the patient treatments for the brain at the beginning of his illness with herbs and with other remedies as we have said in the division when the patient is strong and tolerates the excessive use of remedies.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the patient is a child who does not tolerate remedies, then administer healing poultices and masticables to him for several days with the benefit of foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then rub the head of the patient, and cauterize him with a cautery in the middle part of the head as we have said before, and with another cautery on his occipital bone, and with cautery on all of the corners of his head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize him with cauteries as we have said before, having paralysis and softening of the body on the spine of the neck and the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the cautery be olive-shaped as it is described above.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	However, if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this way:
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are moist and rotten humors and phlegm, then cauterize him with cauteries as we have said in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess and decline to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink what purifies his brain as we have said in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then rub the head of the patient, and make a decently made turban out of linen and place it on his head, and then hold it in place.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be seated, and let him be held upright.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply a liniment; and it is more worthy of being made from old sheep's wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm it over the fire with moderate heat as we have said when he is in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then apply it on the middle part of his head on the circle, and hold it in place until it is cool.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to him once a week for several times, with the other treatment of him being good until he is healed; or if you want, cauterize him making small points according to his condition: this is a kind of cautery which softens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then apply it wrapped in wool or in cotton wool.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On cauterization for water descending into the nose.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the beginning of water in the nose due to the sinuses as we have said in the division, then start and give the patient to drink what purifies his head, and guard him from all moistness.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let him sweat in a bath with vinegar for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command him to wash his head, and cauterize him with cautery in the middle part of the head; and then cauterize him with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of water in two noses, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one nose.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Strike with cautery all the veins and sinuses which are under the skin; and let the cauteries be long in length according to the length of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against flowing of blood when he is cauterized; and if you see flowing of blood from him, stop it with some medicine which is possible for you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	I have come with wisdom that is in the extraction of arrows and in the bandaging of those [wounds] and the cauterization of blood flows.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized on the heads of the bones with two cauteries recently produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the eyes are old and frequent and the veins and arteries through which they flow are manifestly apparent on the surface of the head and it is verified that this is superfluous flowing phlegmatic fluids, then cauterize that with a cautery as we have recounted in the chapter on beginning of water gushing out in the eye, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on the skull below the temples, and with two cauteries on the skull below the bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if it is necessary to add [to the cautery], then cauterize that in all sides of the eye socket over the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of the stench of the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you are treating that with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not benefit, then you prepare and give to drink to the patient the cow's hoofs for three nights; and then shave his head and cauterize the middle of his head with a cautery made from an olive tree.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a cautery made from a clove with two cauteries over the two eyebrows beneath the hair, a little one.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful of the arrow that you do not burn it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the cautery made from a clove, this is its form:
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cauterization for softening of the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to sickness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery made from this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you like, cauterize that over the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in its entirety, and let them be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too much with your hand with the cautery, but according to the amount that the upper part of the eyelid is attached.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cauterization of the eyelid when the hairs are converted to the parts within and close the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eye are converted to the parts within so that they close the eye, there are two ways of cauterizing them, either with a hot iron or with a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If with a cautery of fire, command the patient to look down at that so that he pulls his hairs down as they grow out and are cut off; and if it closes by itself, then you strengthen his eyes with a bandage so that he does not rub them as the hairs grow out.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are growing out and curling, then place the patient's head on your knee, and then draw a sign over the eyelid of his eyes with a pen, make the sign according to the shape of an olive leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place cotton dipped in white vinegar or in mullein tea on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then light the cautery of which this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure which you have drawn, bit by bit, in small spots, until the surface of the skin is burned black and appears like an olive leaf, all apparently even.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of the health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of it lifted up from the punctured eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and lay him down for three days, and then place on him cotton with balms until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if they return for some reason and the eyelid is softened, then do the cauterization on that again entirely as you had done at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are in the eyelid beneath it, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and curled back and the hairs do not poke the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicine is that you command the patient to look down at his hairs as they grow out and curl back, and then let it be made from linen the shape of an olive leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take a pounded soap and of live coals a handful. [Chapter title:] Take that and mix it with the ashes, and then add to those ashes honey, and make that into a poultice so that it is not cold; and then spread that on the linen which is made in the shape of an olive leaf, and place that on one eye or both; and let the eye be closed with a bandage and the patient's head be in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the thumb on the medicine and press that a little and let him not rub it as he feels the burning of the medicine, for the burning is in him as if by fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then when he perceives that the burning, let him look at the medicine and bite it with his teeth; then when the burning ceases, let him wash the eye with water and then consider if he sees the eyelid raised as it is washed by fire or by incision, for then it is well; and if it does not return to that of the medicine on the spot where the medicine has not been applied and is not blackened as your operation is completed and the eye is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place on him a bandage so that the scar of the wound is eradicated, and then cure that with an ointment of theriac or another until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, after your operation, to watch diligently so that no pus falls into the eye from the medicine, and if the eyelid several days later is softened and some cause of the hairs poking into the eye, then repeat your medicine on that spot of the eyelid which is softened, and properly as you have done at the beginning, and then bandage him until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of an olive leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that men's eyes are diversified according to size and smallness, and therefore according to that is made your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not take the path of straightness to that to which it is directed in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are curing a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not agree, then know that you cauterize that according to this manner: command the patient to place his head on your lap, and let him hold his head by some servant so that it is not rubbed nor moved by his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place on the eye of him cotton dipped in white vinegar or in mullein tea.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then light the cautery of which this is its form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which is hollow, like a reed or a feather made from a vulture, with one extremity from which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you wish to go further into the other extremity,
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	then you can do so by using a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the one who is concave is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then squeeze the fistula if it is open, and draw out from him pus and dry up that place.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then cut it open and extract the rottenness from him.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place on him the cautery which has been well lit, and have your hand close to the cautery at the start of the nose so that your hand does not get burned or the patient disturbed, and then apply the cautery on the gums of the hole and corrupt that place.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave that there for three days, and then place on that spot a poultice and wrap it up with a bandage until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then apply to it a sharp, corrosive medicine so that the bone is uncovered and cut according to what suits you in your chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some people say at the beginning: enter into the place of the fistula and open it up, and then in that fissure place soft solder with which is its shape; and pour into that the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and keep your hand with good retention so that the patient is not burned as the melted lead does not reach the hole of that; and cover what you have placed over the hole of the patient with cotton or water, for the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a blow to the nose and reduce the fistula into the nose according to what will come into its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 28
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On cauterization of a split in the jaw.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Often there are fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So if you treat those fissures with what we have said in the sections and your treatment does not benefit, then ignite the cautery with a small knife in this way that it is filled:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its cavity be according to the thinness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that gently into those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment so that it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 29
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth, a pustule is formed and then bursts, and then becomes old, and pus and blood flow out, and there is a fistula, and you treat it and your treatment does not benefit, then when you ignite cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, then place that fire into the hole of the fistula, and keep your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at its back do this one or two times; and then treat that with what we have said about treatment so that it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the pus is discharged and it is healed, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and cut away the corrupted bone according to what comes into its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 30
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On cauterization of teeth and softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are aching, and you treat those with medicines and do not help, then place the head of the patient into your lap, and ignite the cautery in the form which will come there, so that you place the canule over the tooth and insert into it the cautery ignited quickly, and keep your hand close to the patient's mouth so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth where it has pervened.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift up your hand, and repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should fill his mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, and then spit it out, for the aching tooth is calmed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 31
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or in it is cold or red, or the treatment with medicine does not help, then cauterization in that place is according to two methods: either cauterization with an iron brand, or cauterization with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with an iron brand is that you take an iron brand and heat it in a charcoal fire, and then grab the hot end and wrap it in a cloth and place it on the end of the tooth gently until it is cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, dip wool or cloth in the fire below it, and place that over the painful tooth, and place the hot iron on top of it so that the iron reaches the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, cauterization with fire is that you await the needle of iron or of copper, and let it be in its center some thickness and the keenness of the fire not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the form which will come, and place that over the tooth and keep your hand so that the cautery is cold; and do this several times because the pain still continues or on another day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And have the patient fill his mouth with good water and keep it for an hour, and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize with what you wish extreme according to what is possible to you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the needle:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 32
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On cauterization of hernia.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernia are of phlegm and cold humors and are not cured by medicines, and you wish to cure them gently, then ignite the cautery such that its smoke reaches the hernia on one side, and then place it ignited on the hernia another time, so that it reaches the bottom of the hernia.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the hernia is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the hernia, and then let it be for three days and place over it a poultice soaked in ointment so that it is heated up by what the fire has burned.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment and bandages so that it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the needle or of the cautery to such is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 33
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On cauterization of throat and constriction of voice.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes upon the throat of the lung, and especially when it is due to coldness of complexion, then have the patient evacuate at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that after the root of the larynx in the place which is inflamed.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful that you do not bring the cautery to his throat or burn any part of him except a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize this with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last vertebrae of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery for him should be a hot iron according to the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the patient with what has been previously described so that he may heal.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cauterization for illness of the lung and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung illness are caused by cold humors infiltrating, and the patient has no fever nor consumption but rather an ancient illness, then cauterize him with two cauteries over the furcula in the locations beneath the collarbones, and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be hot according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cauterization be with the pointed cautery that is called 'puncta', the form of which has been described in the puncturing of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let the points be placed within those; then treat the patient with what is previously described so that he may heal.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	Now let the cautery have three ramps, for there are three cauteries to be done according to this form; with one blow you can do three cauteries like this:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cauterization of the tickling in the throat.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the throat is dislocated due to slippery humors and has not yet returned to its proper position, and it is displaced by even the slightest movement as we have testified, then first reduce the dislocation, then let the patient return to his normal posture and let him lie on his back or his left side; then raise his chin which is in the front part of the tickling up towards the parts above with your left hand fingers if the joint is dislocated in the front.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the cautery have two points; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Then cauterize where it penetrates into the other side; then the figure of the cauterization will be as follows with four cauteries:
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And they are subtle according to the amount of tentation; and this is their form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to the account by which there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place a little salt on the cautery and let the patient adhere to tranquility, and do not disturb the member for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and tight then do this: cauterize over the muscle with a hot cautery or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity removed and the patient healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is a movement in the stomach and the humors multiply within it and extract from its natural place and if you continue the methods of cure without concern, then let the patient lie on his back with his arms and legs extended and cauterize him with three cauteries: one cautery below the feet according to the amount of a finger with a hot cautery, and two cauteries below the ribs so that the figure of the cauteries comes to a triangle; and separate those which are not fitted because they will make a piercing.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is according to the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be according to this addition, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be punctured at where this cautery frightens him: and you sense on the stomach according to the quantity that you wish with tentation, and then cauterize him at the points; and then treat him with the cure that has been previously described so that he may heal.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cauterization of a feverish liver.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When one feels in the liver pain due to chill or humidity or from grossness and it is driven from its natural place by an excessive egress of superfluous humors, and is treated with what we have said but without concern, then let the patient lie on his back with his arms raised, and sense three cauteries according to this form and quantity placed on the liver below the hypochondria where the position of a man's elbow would be.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body towards the right.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not move your hand while placing the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of that which is heated is according to the thickness of a finger's tip and there is not much heat; and if the patient stands on his feet; then let him sit, for he has already extended himself and raised his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And to you it is possible that you cauterize these cauteries with a cautery needle when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not apply too much in the cauterization, and let the surface of all the skin be heated so that it penetrates throughout the body and into the intestines, for here the liver is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of puncturing a boil on the liver with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is a boil or ulcer on the liver and you wish to know if this boil is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver the patient will suffer grave pain and acute pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the liver then with the pain being very acute and having fatigued the doctors with his cure.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then let the patient lie on his back, and sense the location of the boil with tentation; then let the cautery be like a needle, the form of which has been described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery throughout so that all the skin is heated and it penetrates into the intestines, where one would expect pus to flow.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat him for the cure of other boils so that he may heal.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery except by him who has practiced it in the art of medicine and in whose hands many illnesses have been cured; but instead experiment this once or twice on a patient, but then let them stop.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of cauterization for a hernia.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	We have observed the old cauteries of the roots of aristology for a hernia caused by cold humors infiltrating according to this manner: take from the roots of aristology a long dry root which is found, and let it be of the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then soak it in oil and heat it over the fire, then cauterize with a cautery at the location which is between the continuation of the furcula near the neck; and with two small cauteries below the armpits, one slightly declining towards the part where the beard grows, and two cauteries above what declines between the fifth rib and the collarbone, declining slightly to the parts behind; and let there be a cautery at the middle of the chest; and another cautery at the location which is between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on the sides of the chest below the armpits.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not put your hand on the cautery, but rather hold it in front of you in plain view.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient writers say that there are some people who use a cautery made of iron similar to a needle and they ignite it and apply it to the space between the ribs until they reach the apoplexy and the pus is discharged, just as we have said about the apoplexy in the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But with this piercing by cautery, there is no fear, for when it happens in the location of a fistula to which there is no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the ulcer.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the illness of the ulcer with what we have said about treatment in the division and do not delay your treatment, then the cautery on it is according to three methods, all of which are correct, one of which is that you make three cauteries or four depending on the length of the ulcer according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery, the thickness should be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be the same way we have described in the cautery of the liver alike.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not put your hand on the cautery, and let the patient be elevated above his head.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you ignite the cautery having two turnings, the cause of which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of muscle, and elevate the vein which is at the end of the ulcer through which passes the jaw of the left patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that you elevate the vein according to the length of the body so that the cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then insert the two turnings, ignited, into it through which you penetrate the vein from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then pull out the cautery; and so there are four cauteries made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three turnings.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the cautery once it has stopped bleeding for several days, for it is better that the other causes precede in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cauterization of hydrocephalus.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	A cautery is not cut in hydrocephalus but rather in the anus properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure hydrocephalus with the methods of treatment we have said in division and do not delay your treatment, then what you should cauterize are four cauteries around the anus and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the ulcer, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the vein.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then let the cautery bleed openly so that it bleeds for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient of curing after the cautery with that which it may be for so that two intentions are added to him and healing is encouraged by him.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be key-like according to that which is above it preceding, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to what precedes it.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of the cauterization of feet and of the thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are apostematized in hydrops and filled with yellow water, then you should cauterize the feet on the instep of the foot in nocary which is between the auricular and the annular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not turn it; and then elevate your hand and do not return it at all, for the yellow water will exude.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cautery according to this shape: and then make two cauteries on both thighs, and in each thigh let there be made a cautery with the end of the cautery-knife.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one from below and the other above the middle part of the thigh; and over each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the wound bleed openly without curing for a long time so that some water exudes from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure them with those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the cauterization of a body of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When a body of the belly is from rubbing and from moisture so that the digestive and retentive virtues are impaired, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, and it is cured with those methods of treatment and does not delay, and sometimes the patient suffers a cautery from an exhiberant virtue, then cauterize it with a large cautery on its stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries around the anus subtly, with a key-like cautery subtly; and with a cautery over the anus over aloee greatly, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the humidities are abundant and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize it over the penis and over the intestines, and tightly close two cauteries over the stomach near the inguinals, for this is a perfect cure of the rejuvenation of which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When it is in nature to have ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick humors rubbed or of corrupt humidities and they are cured with that which we have said in division and do not delay your cure, then cauterize them with three cauteries over the pus below the small vertebra of the back triangularly, and with a cautery above the navel through two punctures.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the stomach of him is rubbed and his food is not digested and his face is sometimes apostematized, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and with a cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the ulcer with a key-like cautery, and let the cautery bleed openly for some time, and then cure it so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the cauterization of an eye near its incision.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you excise an eye, then ignite the cautery which is assembled like a needle.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that ignited into that excised eye, and let your hand be over it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do it once or twice, for if there are several, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and then cure them with that which corresponds to them in the gums so that they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the anus, it is better for rejuvenation.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas which are made in nature in the openings of him.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work which we have recounted in its place and the patient is terrified by it, let him be healed with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore when you see a fistula in nature and it is old, with rotten water and corrupt humidities, and therefore that which is best to do is to pierce it with a subtle needle, and then know the quantity of its depth according to what we have said before.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cautery which resembles a needle.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place that burning cautery in this fistula, and according to the amount it penetrates.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat on that cautery until those corrupted humors are burned up once or twice or three times according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning a nerve or vein; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or hernia, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you are certain that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the wound where it was done.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the wound is sealed and the materials removed from it and remain like that for a long time, then know that it has healed completely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating into its bone or that its bones are corrupted, or that one of those causes for which a recurrence will come to mind in that place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of cauterization of the sinuses.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the sinuses there is pain from rubbing or from a great windiness and because of this the patient's head is hurt, then it is necessary that you cauterize that above the sinuses with a cautery needle of which you will learn by memory.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And then quickly cauterize it again a little bit lower, so that three cauteries will come out lined up, and therefore there will be more behind in succession.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When debility and softening occur in the bladder due to rubbing and humidity such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it in the lowest part of the pus-filled bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hair begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the pus; and cauterize it with a cautery in the lowest pus-filled part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let it be a needle cautery as it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cauterization of the hernia.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is rubbing and humidity in the hernia, and because of this impregnation is prohibited, and its menstruations are corrupted, and they are delayed in being provoked, and pain occurs due to their retention, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lowest pus-filled part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let it be a needle cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of cauterization for the dislocation of the elbow.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist humors are infiltrated in the part of the elbow, and this is caused by a dislocation of its joint, and the sign of it is that the bone protrudes over the other when they are compared between each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is blocked in where it was bent.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient above the part of the elbow with a circular cautery needle, just as you will have discovered by feeling in the circuit of the part just as it is bent, and so that the part falls into the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery of which it was preceded be the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize it with three cauteries with a large olive-shaped cautery needle.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be done according to the quantity of the spiciness of all the thread; and then heal that which was done until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes in the part of the elbow and this is caused by rubbing and humidity, the patient is cured by what we have said and does not confer, and it is old, then it is necessary that you release the patient from gross humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: or cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	They go according to two known manners, of which the one is that you cauterize it above the part of the ankle with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and do it on those good and deep.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if the cautery is olive-shaped or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes let the cautery be in the middle above the head of the elbow so that there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which its form is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow, so that it is a containing circle and burns the spiciness of all the thread.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cauterization in sciatica when the pain is attached to the elbow and it is not extended into the leg.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the leg above the place to which the pain goes; and with one cautery above the ankle in four places a little from the hairy part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery cuts, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the spiciness of the thread.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain goes so that it is extended into the place between the fingers of the feet, then cauterize it where it goes in with cautery for three points or four or more if it hurts there.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the pain goes down to the knee of the leg, then cauterize it there with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterization that you do not finish with the cautery until it burns nerve or large artery, and that because of this there is much harm to the patient or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have seen one of those which they cauterized on the ankle and finished in the cauterization, and fire filled up inside so that a tumor was achieved in the leg, and it perforated and corrupted all the leg.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then a strong solution of the belly occurred, and then death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts equally, then cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise men said in the cauterization of the elbow that this is the manner of the cautery: make it like a nail circle, of which the circuit is the length of the palm; and let its holes be according to the thickness of an almond or a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle let there be another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of the thread of the finger; and let those circles be bent in two parts; and let the length of those be a thread or two threads, and make it in that margin of iron decently bent in the circles; and this is its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it is ignited in the fire so that it becomes hot and scatters sparks, and then it is placed over the part of the elbow, the pain lies over its side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Then cauterize it with three cauteries around in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And let that be left for three days; and then plaster that with a poultice and leave the wound open for several days; and then heal that with ointment until it is cured.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Al-Buqaysi's days: Oh sons, we have used this type of cautery sparingly due to the terror instilled by those who guard him, and because we have found few who are willing to watch over him.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But of the good cauteries that he endures, and finds the place on him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But the cautery with medicines that burn, you will make two circles having an awl pierced in which is inserted the tip of the iron door; let the length of the parts in the nature of them be two walnuts or acorns those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each one is the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and they are open below and above, and they are held together according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place the part of the armpit of the patient on his side, and press your hand over the part of the armpit; then take some water and pour it between the two circles, and let its quality be with the fire little by little, and hold that for the quantity of an hour, and let the patient endure the biting and the squeezing of him - for he will endure that biting as if from fire - until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and wash the warm water all over the armpit.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And let that be left for three days and place a poultice over it until the blackness of the squeezing is gone, and let that be left for some days, and then pus will flow from him; this is last in healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with ointment until it is cured.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the thigh or leg, make him stand in water according to how it is made in the armpit equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of warm water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take an ounce of alkali and a non-extinguished part of both in one part, grind them and place them in a new pot in which the bottom is pierced with a small hole, according to the quantity that goes into him.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place below the bottom of the other pot a pot glazed inside, and pour over that alkali and live embers of warm water which covers those by an inch, and then squeeze those with your hand by good compression, and let the hot water drip from him into the lower pot.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then collect all that water and pour it over the other live embers and another renewed alkali, because that sometimes rises with great force, which is administered in very active doses in medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because that operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medicines with which wide cauterization is made, such as theriac and honeyed vinegar and soap embers mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And a man of the olden times recounted the operation and the cure with which it is cured the pain of the armpit and sciatic vein, and he magnified that much indeed, and said that it did not need any other cure, and that it is healed by one application like a blister, because it enters deeply in a bath and perspires, and then it goes away.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And let it be taken from the root of a certain plant, and if it is not obtained, let it be taken from a recent fig, and let that be ground with a little salt and placed on the armpit or thigh or leg where there is pain, and let it be bound up.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let that be left for the amount of three hours or for the quantity that the patient tolerates the biting of it.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in a bath and when his body is heated, take him out into the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it does not matter if anyone uses cauterization with these medicines unless there is also an evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Mays Ja Escorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a goat's tendon, it benefits him much; and let the cauterization be done according to this way: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the instep and the heel.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry goat' tendon and inflame it with fire until it is made charcoal; and then place it over the wool and let it be left until it is extinguished.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat that, and do not cease doing that until the biting sensation reaches the armpit and the pain ceases.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this way of cauterization is called the cauterization of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .Xlii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cauterization for pain in two.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain is in the back due to various causes, such as from chill or from piercing or from excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, from infusion of wet and friction.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization is not done except in this sole case which is made by effusion of wet material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	So when evacuation of the patient is done with fitting pills and like that, let them be made over the back where there is pain in three lines according to its breadth, so that you start cauterization at one end of each line towards the other, according to the amount tolerated by the patient and the strength of him.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let cauterization be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a mid-clavus cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .Xliii.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cauterization at the beginning of gonorrhea.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this malady occurs in young children, and its sign at the beginning in children is that they experience stricture of the urethra in the penis during urination as well as erection and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And they feel tightness at the last vertebrae of the back and of the loins which begin to rise above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And then when you see that and want to prohibit it, let it be cauterized with a cautery which is circular according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	take the cautery over all parts of the vertebrae evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the circuit of the vertebrae with a pointed cautery by two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	Let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then heal the place until it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware that cauterization is not administered in gonorrhea which is made by spasm of nerve.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .Xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joints are made by wet humors which infiltrate each part of the body, then when pain occurs in the feet, it is usually called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore if gout caused by friction is healed with the way of cure and the pains are not gone away, then cauterize it.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you shall cauterize that especially after evacuation around the circuit of the joint of the penis with many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let it be olive oil of which this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary that points be made on the surface of the penis, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains enter the testicles or to the other joints, and it goes many times, then cauterize that on each testicle with three cauteries or four on all sides with this olive oil cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to perform cauterization on the patient, then it is necessary for you to cauterize them with a pointed cautery instrument without applying too much pressure with your hand before doing so, and only around the area of the vein.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain extends from the joints into the stomach and intestines, then administer the cautery as we have described in its respective chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the hands and is called sciatica, then make points on the circumference of the fire vessels as they revolve, puncturing in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if there is remaining pain in the fingers, then puncture on the circumference of the fire vessels on each knuckle and on the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain extends for several days into the hips or muscles, then cauterize each of these parts all over.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not discharge the patient from good regulation and reception of medicines, for if there is good regulation and phlegm is discharged with this cautery they will recover, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization of broken bones.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a rupture occurs in the angles and the intestines are pushed forward out of their cavity towards the genitals, and this is how it usually starts, then you must order the patient to stop eating for the day and use healing remedies so that the rupture can descend from his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient's back with your hands over his spine, and order him to hold his breath as you examine whether there is a hole or the intestine or hernia has appeared.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return it with your fingers and touch the rupture on the bone of the hip, indicating the end of which is similar to a half-circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then ignite the cautery, whose shape is as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes red and blisters form.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient' s thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery on that indication with your hand holding the cautery straight, and apply it there until you reach the bone of the hip within the muscle; and repeat with another application if you do not achieve this on the first application to the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the position of the intestine during the cauterization so that you do not burn it such that it brings death or another serious illness to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you apply the cautery and do not reach the bone, your procedure will be incomplete.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And know that the cautery for children should be thinner according to their size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then treat the area of the cautery for three days with wine until the scar of the fire has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with other remedies until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on his back for 40 days until the area is sealed and healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And know that you should regulate his diet according to the length of time it takes him to heal, so that the rupture does not come out again due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when he wants to get up after 40 days, then administer a decently made ligature and have him wear it for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And he should be rested from work and the consumption of food and drink, and from violent movements, for when he uses this healing regimen entirely he will recover.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And now I will describe the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want me to translate, then cauterize that rupture with a red hot cautery according to its quantity, and it is what has come out from the vein; then treat that as we have said, and it has not been adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And now I will say some first principles that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is touched by probing:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and it is drawn as a line that goes through the length of the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of torture.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When there is pain in some parts from bruising or impact, and the pain persists for a long time and does not yield to any medicine, then you must cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be performed on all parts according to its magnitude and smallness, its strength and weakness, the location of torture and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if he is healed by the first cautery, it is good; and if not, then do the cautery again; for usually those pains are caused by punctures of a member near that member, so that you must cauterize them in order to heal the patient.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The lepers sometimes receive cauterization for great benefit, and especially if the leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize him, consider whether the leprosy is dry and as that which is healed by what we have said in the division, not this one, and be afraid of the patient that the corruption spreads through his whole body and all its complexions, then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: with one in the middle of the head, and with the second lower down on him, above the forehead; and both over the horns; and with one behind, on the nape or back of the neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, your hand with the cautery lightly on the bone until a small impression is made, and from him are displaced the scabs, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from him; then cauterize over the pus according to what has been prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize him with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and with a cautery on the end of the nose, and with two cauteries on the two sides of the nose, and with two cauteries on the two sides of the neck, and with six cauteries on the spine of the neck, and with one large cautery over the spine near the armpit, and with a cautery on each shoulder blade, and with two cauteries on the knees, and with one on each ankle, and with two cauteries on the hips, and with one great cautery over the spine, and with two cauteries on the shins, and with two cauteries on the tendons of his arms, and with one great cautery over the tendons of his feet, and with two cauteries on all the joints of his hands and feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves which are upon the heel so that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the hip and with another over the mouth of the stomach, and with another over the tongue.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that when you bring the cauteries closer together, they benefit more and are more effective; and know that the patient does not have pain from the cautery, but as if his body is stupefied.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And those who have great or few cauteries according to the parts and joints as it is preceded by the spices of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the cautery with flour of bran cooked in honey and with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Here begins the forty-eighth chapter.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of the cauterization of a stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is paralyzed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then you should cauterize the paralyzed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the thickness of the vein a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes there is cauterized a stupor which lies in the hands and feet, and in the vertebrae of the back, and see the course of the nerves which move that member, and the stupor is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume about it unless he is skilled in the anatomy of the members and in the going out of the nerves throughout all the body moving.
Capitol .xlix.	Here begins the forty-ninth chapter.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cauterization of leeches which are morphea.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When leeches are ancient and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you should cauterize them with a little hot cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the vein until the whiteness and color is removed and the color changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with bran and lentils, and rose oil, and leaves of arnica, and pigeon blood or blood of a wild goose, each one being a portion and all being mixed together, and then let it be bound up in a cloth and placed over the spot until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Here begins the fiftieth chapter.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of the cauterization of warts.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When a wart begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a ring cautery around its circumference as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it; but I have not seen this, because I am afraid that it would be ulcerated and I have seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more appropriate that it is cauterized around its circumference with a ring as we have said, or with sharp cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Here begins the fifty-first chapter.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of the cauterization of tumors.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When a tumor is delayed in its maturation, and also because of the superfluity it produces that, or because of the condition of the patient, when he is old and decrepit, or few-blooded, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the tumor; then cauterize around its circumference with small sharp cauteries; and then let it be lanced so that it will hasten in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to pierce it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape of it: and apply it in the middle of the tumor so that it penetrates the vein.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is in a place which is lower down, so that the body of the arm is lifted up; then treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Here begins the fifty-second chapter.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cauterization of corrosions.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a corruption that walks in the member, which corrodes it as if fire were eating dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see this corrosion in a place which suffers cautery from fire, then heat small nail-like cauteries a little, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place in which the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then cauterize it all around so that you eradicate all the corrosion and not leave any cause of it remaining.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then let it be bound up for three days, and apply over the cauterized spots a poultice of soft liniment so that the scars are all eradicated and all the corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then treat it with ointments that engender flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh does not grow there and is healthy, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which was removed in the corrupt places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated sometimes with sharp medicine, for that is halfway to cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But nevertheless cautery with fire is the purest youth-giving remedy.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have also said the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you will have need of it.
Capitol .liii.	Here begins the fifty-third chapter.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of the cauterization of warts and of the others like them.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times there appear beneath the feet of the sick person who is called a claw, and it is a great cause, deep-seated, which pierces the foot; and cautery of them is according to two manners, namely cautery with fire and cautery with water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cautery with fire is that you ignite the cautery bent like a pen of an owl, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the claw all around, and it has fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then apply that ignited cautery over the claw, and then turn your hand with the cautery around the claw so that the cautery reaches the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Then let it be bound up for three days until the arm begins to move.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then poultice it with mallows bruised with salt, and apply the poultice over it for one night, for that will eradicate the roots of them.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the spot with an ointment that engenders flesh until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it is not converted, and many times it occurs in the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then take a quannula of lead or iron or of an owl-pen, and apply that over the claw; and then pour into the quannula a little water, and hold your hand there and turn the cautery around the claw so that the water reaches the depth of the claw.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do them all over the body, coming from within.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then treat those warts whose roots are eradicated with that of the ointments which engender flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Here begins the fifty-fourth chapter.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cauterization of tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When it comes to a tremor through rubbing of the nerve or through fever from rubbing, or through another cause like that, then take that you cauterize that with four cauteries, or with v over the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and cauterize in the feet of him, and on his stomach with a cautery of olive oil.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And if the tremor of him is relaxed and the health of the sickness rubbed, then it is good; but if not, repeat the cautery in those places where the rub is made.
Capitol .lv.	Here begins the fifty-fifth chapter.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cauterization of white spots on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body white spots appear and pustules are split open which are made of coarse corrupt materials, therefore take when it appears that there be cauterized over all head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with a rod of mirtle, the end of which is extended with fire; or with long razors, or with a cautery lentecular.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes cauterization with garlic is applied at the beginning of expulsion according to this method; and they are not believed, and the superfluity is disrupted by doing those things, and healed from those things.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But it should be done with proper evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cautery for the flow of blood accidentally by incision of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Sometimes there is a flow of blood from an artery that is cut through the wound, or through the incision of an abscess or cautery on the limb, and sometimes they appear similar, and it is difficult to stop that flow.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	So when it happens to someone, then you should cover the orifice of the artery with your hand and place your finger on that orifice, and sometimes push that finger inside until the flow of blood is stopped and does not come out again.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place on the wound some large and small olive-wood coals, many in number, and blow upon them until they are very hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take some of those coals, either small or large according to the place and wound in which the artery is broken, pushing them quickly into that vein as soon as you have removed your finger, and hold them there until the blood flow is stopped and that artery is bound up and restricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and tighten the cautery, then take another cautery which has been prepared in the fire, and therefore do not cease doing this one after another until the blood flow is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful that you do not burn the nerves that are there, and that no other evil comes to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict the blood in those cases except by one of four methods: either by cautery as we have said, or by extraction if it has not been extracted; for when it is extracted, its extremities are burned and the blood flow restricted; or by being tied with a thread or ligature with strong pressure; or by having remedies placed on it which have the virtue of restricting the blood flow, which should be pressed with a bandage with decent pressure.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who applies decent restriction to it by ligature and pressure with a bandage, or by the position of burning causes and similar things, does not confer anything but harm.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present, or medicine, then open with the tip of your finger over the orifice of that vein as we have said before, and understand that it should be pressed with great pressure on him until the blood flow is stopped from the upper part of the wound; and do not remove your finger from over the artery; and sprinkle over it water which has been rubbed with something very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened; and then stop at what needs cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and piercing and puncturing and phlebotomy, and of wounds and their likes.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words from Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter of all diseases in which cautery with fire is convenient and suitable medicine, its occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for it and the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters from the superior part of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we will now proceed in this chapter in that way, so that the seeker may be eased; and then on what he has demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before we begin that, know that in this chapter there is something of terror which is in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And be careful about it, for in the operation which is in this chapter there are many times cat evacuation, which is by blood, by which life is lost through sprinkling on the vein or incision of an abscess or opening of a wound or piercing of a stone or similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And they are all accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the end death comes to them.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this does not happen to you, for many times it happens due to the manners of men with their many manners of diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And there are some who go astray because of their disease and die because of it, and also because of the vehemence of that with which they find themselves in their disease, and because of the length of their disease, and because of the illness itself which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And there are those who give it to you in their sleep and say so, hoping for health from that, and whose disease is harmful to them.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not consent to anyone who comes to you in this way; and your caution should be greater than their cunning and your greed; and do not presume any cause about it except certain knowledge which verifies it from you, and to whom a praiseworthy outcome comes.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use it in the cure of all your illnesses from prediction and indication of that to which health is converted; for in that there is aid to you regarding acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God directs your understanding and does not keep from you his direction and protection; for that is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to that which precedes in the chapter on cauteries, of the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be eased for you what you demanded and of which you had need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water which is contained in the heads of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease sometimes happens to children after childbirth when the mother raises her child's head in her arms.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes because of a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this disease except in children; and to all of them whom I saw the death came upon, and because of that it was known to me as happening in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head was always enlarged because he could not breastfeed due to the size of his head; and yet the moisture increased inside him until fire came upon him and killed him.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either accumulated between the brain and the bone, or it is accumulated below the bone over the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For if the operation in him is that the moisture is between the brain and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should open in the middle of the head with an incision in the width, and let the length of the incision be two fingers so that the moisture runs out; and this is the form of the spatum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two incisions here according to this way:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is below the bone, a sign of it is that you will see the seams of the head open from end to end, and the water is expelled when you press it with your hand on those openings; and it is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You should open in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this way:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then pull out all the moisture; and then tighten the incisions with bandages and plasters; and then anoint it on the fifth day, and strengthen the skull with oil, and cure the wound with ointments and poultices, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture so that the limb may be comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	There is another method of incision that considers the size of the abscess and the collection of pus, as sometimes it is larger at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right or left side; so pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the collection of pus, and finish according to what you think is best.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And be careful not to cut the artery and cause a flow of blood and kill the patient by that flow of blood through the evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called aural arteries.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When it comes to a boil or abscess on the ears or feet, and it is old, and there is no response to the treatment with medicines, then the best cure in this case is to make an incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then, when you want to make an incision where the patient is affected in his head, and approximately rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become apparent, and then tighten the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the pulse is, and the places above each side of the ears are pressed down, and they are hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then mark the artery with a needle, and make an incision on each side with a knife so that it comes through the bone, and do this all around the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the knife below the artery and cut through to the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be about two fingers wide, for when a vein is cut, blood rushes out in pulses, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the touch, then measure from the ear the quantity of three fingers, and mark with a needle, and cut into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which comes out is the amount of wine an ounce. And very little comes out from him, more or less, and all that is according to the amount that appears in the strength of the patient and the filling of the artery in him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the wound, and therefore if anything remains on the bone that can cause a headache, then cut it out so that an abscess does not develop.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with small feathers and strips of linen cloth, and cure it within until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When some people suffer from old migraines or abscesses in the temples, due to cold humors and qualities in the eyes, or old, violent headaches similar to those, and are treated with medical remedies without success, then we have found that extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as I have shown is effective.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of operation and extraction of these is that the patient turns his head to them; and understand the artery in the temple, for it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden in some people by the force of rubbing.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then tighten the neck of the patient with some cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or pour warm water on it until you see the artery clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the knife, whose shape is as follows:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you scrape it gently with that until you reach the artery; and then extract it into the upper parts as far as you can, pulling it out of its sheath and uncovering it from the layers below it, in all directions.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with a thread, and make an incision of it from that one part according to the amount by which its ends are lengthened and tightened, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not cut, it will not flow.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then discharge blood from an ounce. within three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then tie it in two places with strong double thread of linen or cords lengthwise, and do not cut it before the hardening of the wound occurs and cause a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut the superfluity which is between two layers; do this in that hour or another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize it with a cautery within the bone with a scalpel so that its ends are cut, and it will be in place of that work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do this when the patient has no fever or a cold complexions, for cauterization is of those causes that help to dry up moist humors, and therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then extract the arteries that are near the site of a previous wound, and let them be wrapped with powdered linen decently made, and then cured with dry medicines that make the flesh dry and with poultices until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you operate another vein appears from the artery, then you tie that blood with a thread, or cauterize it, or scrape the site of the wound, and tighten your hand over it so that the blood is restricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present to you, then place your finger over the site so that the blood is coagulated, and moisten the area with very hot water rubbed vigorously until the pain subsides, and tighten according to how it feels.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is easier in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize it with this cautery having two points, because you have marked the two sites with a needle, and then burn each one, with fire, until they reach the bone and cut the artery into two places, so that it is lengthened between its ends, for it is not consolidated at all by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And you wrap the site with a cloth so that it is cauterized.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if it is milder heat than two points is better, for if it is sharp with two points it approaches each other rubbing, and do not cut into the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore when there is any thickness in those, the heat of the fire is held in those and the flesh is cut more gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between two points be the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter IV.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment of acute and sharp pains in the ears.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are sharp pains and the veins on the top of the head are visible, and medical remedies do not help in that regard, and the face of the patient becomes red and he feels walking as if ants were crawling on him, and his ears are tired, and the heat is intense within him, and the eyes are exhausted by the intensity of tears, the old ones are cured by this operation with a sponge.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to shave the hairs on their forehead, and then inscribe three equal incisions on the forehead, evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure reaches two digits: let the first fissure be evenly spaced according to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little finger beyond the movement of the eyelashes which are in the tear duct, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the incision on either side of the arches, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three digits, adjust it.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of prepared sponge or dry rags to stop the bleeding with which you dried the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then insert the spatula of two sharp ends, and this is the shape of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	It begins at the temple and goes towards the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the membrane which is between two incisions with the scalp, and then do the same with the incision on the other side into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then place this spatula and insert it into the first incision again, but this time use another instrument called a cutlar, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp side towards the membrane and the blunt side towards the bone, and move it around so that it reaches the middle incision, and cut with it all the vessels which descend from the head to the limbs.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Let the incision continue up to the membrane, and then do the same in the middle incision up to the other incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when blood comes out in equal quantity from both sides, squeeze the places of the clotted blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then place in each incision a piece of cotton wool, and place on it powders mixed with wine and oil, and pour onto it vinegar so that no ulcer forms.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day loosen the ligature and administer a great effusion of tepid water, and then dress the wound with ointment of basilicon mixed with rose oil and other things so that the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	CHAPTER 5:
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment of ulcers by cauterization and of the ulcers which descend from the parts inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the cauteries are done and continued, and one sees the ulcers of the patient become smaller, and the protection of them is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and because of that the hair, and in the brow there is acute pain and intense pulsing, then know from these accidents that the matters and cauteries do not come except from many veins in the parts inside.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for them is this: command the patient to shave his forehead, and then inscribe a fissure in the middle of the forehead, a little according to its length (and begin with the fissure of the left temple going towards the right temple; and let the incision be made into the bone; and lengthen your hand from the eyelashes of the temples which are bitten because of chewing), so that the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry up all the blood with sponge or dry cloth, and then stuff between the two lips of the fissure cotton wool or lint.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then sprinkle on it powders mixed with wine and oil so that there is not formed an ulcerous cautery.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen it and see that the ulcer has become smaller, then know that one should wash the bone so that the meat begins to form on it, and then treat those with an exsiccative regime which causes the meat to wither away, just as if one takes two parts of wheat flour and four parts of gum mastic and mixes them together into a plaster and applies it to these wounds of the flesh at birth.
Capitol .vi.	CHAPTER 6:
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment of what cauterizes in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The whole cause which cauterizes in the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral stone or causes something like stone, just as iron and vitriol, or it is plant just as chickpeas or beans, or it is volatile just as water and wine and their likes, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when stone cauterizes in the ear or other cause similar to those causes which do not form a growth in the ear, and hold the ear to the sun, and if one sees the stone, then distill on it some cause of violat oil or sesame oil, and then administer its distillation, and make them sneeze with snuff, and plug the nose because of the sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place in the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and lengthen the ear to its parts above, for many times it is bored by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not bored, then administer its extraction with the subtle instrument called epicyclical forceps, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is bored by gesti, let it be; and if not, then administer its extraction with the subtle hook of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not bored by that, then make a cannula of ram and insert the tip of the cannula in the hole of the ear and close over the opening of the cannula with wax and softened oil so that there is not open except the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract it by strong吸引力, for many times troops have been found with this.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not bored in this way, then take hollow alum or of the type prepared with which the ears are compressed with a little quantity, and place that on the end of the ear, and then wind cloth around it decently placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then draw out the ear from its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not bored by all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut to such an extent that there ensues ulcerous cautery or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut it is that you first make the patient's vein of the septica vein and extract its blood according to the nature of it, and then do that in such a way that there are not two veins in the place where one has been pricked before him, and convert the ear towards its parts above, and pierce with a small incision in the root of the ear because of the grayish color of it at the point which has been pricked before.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be in the shape of the moon so that it reaches the stone, and if the stone is found, hold it with instruments; and then close the incision at that time with speed, and treat it so that it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause cauterizes in the ear is one of the fats which grow and are swollen, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not obey your command, then take the slender tweezers according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer with that the incision of that fat which has fallen in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think that it has been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place that in many pieces, and then extract those with forceps or with subtle tweezers, or with incision just as we have said, for the extraction from it is eased.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But when the water which is entered in the ear causes sneezing at the beginning, and fill his ear with some cotton wool, and pour on that ear in which there is the water, and if by that it is bored, let it be; and if not, then take thin stones like fingers according to their length, and heat those in the fire a little, and the patient inserts one of those into the hole of his ear and sucks on the one from which there is the water, and press with another stone over that stone which is in the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not cease until all the urine has been expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the urine has been expelled, take a piece of paper or linen and place one end in the urethra and extend the other end towards the fire until it burns, the length of it.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put in another one and do this as many times as needed until all the urine is expelled, and apply this also with a catheter as already described.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of an object which has entered the urethra, if it is a small object, remove it as we have already said in the section on division; but if the cause is due to a large object that blocks the flow of urine, then use forceps and tongs, and the cause of this is usually a foreign body lodged in the urethra.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of a worm that has grown inside the urethra, if you cannot cure it with what we have already said in the section on division and on the treatment of discharges, then you must look at the urethra under the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see the cause of the worm, then remove it with forceps or fine tongs; but if you do not see any cause, then take a catheter that is narrow at the tip and wider towards the end.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Insert the narrow tip into the urethra according to how much the patient can tolerate; and then suck strongly with your mouth several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you cannot access it due to resistance, then stop and close the opening of the catheter with wax as we have already described; then administer the distilling remedies which have been used before in the treatment of worms, and find this also in the section on distillation remedies.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And use this instrument to pour the medicine oils into the urethra; this is how it should be made:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it of silver or brass, narrow at the tip and wider above, with a small hole in it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And then stop it up with a plug so that it fits snugly into the opening of the catheter where it is needed.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take a reed and wrap the end of it with cotton, and then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument, or juice from herbs, or anything you want to use from these medicines in the catheter — and that is how it should be used in the urethra —; then insert the reed with the cotton above it and squeeze with your hand that end of it gently until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what has been inserted in the urethra should be warmed slightly with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause which you distil in the urethra is not too strong, because the medicines for the urethra do not tolerate it.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7:
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of inflammation of the urethra.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children are born with an obstruction in their bellies which is not punctured, and this also happens to some adults, with inflammation in the middle of the urethra due to a blockage or from pushing against it; and this inflammation sometimes occurs at the opening of the urethra, and sometimes deeper inside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the middle of it, which does not allow urine to pass through, is a more difficult condition to cure.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And if you succeed in allowing urine to pass through, look at the urethra under the sunlight and examine it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if you see swelling, open it with a thin spatulum of which this is the shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it is narrow, with one edge sharp and the other not; and let the spatulum be made of two sides of lion skin so that it does not harm the urethra.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the inflammation is due to flesh grown in the urethra or in its middle, then cut it with fine tongs and pierce that spot forcefully until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the inflammation is in the middle of the urethra, take a thin reed made from lion skin and warm it slightly with fire, then insert that into the middle of the urethra.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore, if you feel swelling due to the difficulty of urination because of obstruction, relieve that pressure easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the urethra.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a bandage around the urethra according to the width of the opening which you have wrapped with Egyptian liniment; and do this for several days until you are sure that the plaster has dried out; or take some ash and dip that in water and sprinkle it over the area, and if you see that the urethra is already swollen, then remove the ash and replace it with another kind of ash which you have wrapped in a cerot made from rose oil, until the swelling subsides; and then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if bleeding occurs, then immerse a sponge or bandage in warm water and place it over the urethra, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is described in the section on distillation remedies.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8:
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the cure for athezil which occurs under the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athezil which occurs under the eyelids of humans sometimes produces moisture, and sometimes it is dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must have them pulled by tweezers or tongs, and tear them with a spatulum made from their roots, and then place it over the spots after they have been crushed.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if bleeding occurs with pain, then cauterize them with a small, thin cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to make incisions and cuts several times until all causes of those roots are removed; and when they have been cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9:
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	On the cure for grandeyssa which occurs under the eyelids of humans.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times it occurs under the eyelids of humans due to some cause which is similar to grandeyssa in its strength and hardness, and because of that, grandeyssa is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture under the eyelid on top and underneath.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the appearance of it is that you must consider if the grandeyssa occurs in it due to something appearing from under the eyelid and is swollen all around; and the cause of it is cold.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, pierce it with a slit through the width, and then scrape all of that gently until it is released, and then close that with tongs and cauterize it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not equipped for the incision of it if there is no penetration of the eyelid with a small cut, then this will not be noticed in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from that because the eye restores it and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the grandeyssa is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid under its surface, then open it and close that grandeyssa with tongs, or you can cut it, and press all around it, and if the eyelid due to incision is elongated, then this will not be noticed in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then begin by washing the wound with salty water, and heal the area with an ointment that will promote healing.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment of a ulcer on the eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	A ulcer is a grayness that is engendered in the membranes of the eyelid, and it mostly affects infants, aggravating the sight of those and causing pain to their eyes; and they cannot bear to look at the brightness of the sun because of this.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you will see these children always rubbing their eyes, and sleeping on their faces; and the eyelids of their eyes are moist, covered in inflammation, and there is a sign of swelling within the eye; and when you press on the area with your finger, you feel the swelling within.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And a certain kind of bandage is put on the patient who rests his head on your lap; and you drape cloth over him and make heat from it, and make a circle according to the quantity that contains arterosclerosis from all around, and then place that upon it and press with your fingers all around so that the swelling is reduced in the middle of the circle, and then open in the middle of that moisture with a spatula inserted through the slit, and the slit should not be larger than the one made in flabotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the first stage, be sure to cut all the way through to the artery so that you reach the swelling, for in most cases the swelling comes through the slit as a white grayness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that with tweezers which you have wrapped between your fingers at the outside edges and twist between the right and left hand so that it is pulled out.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be sure not to press into the slit with the spatula so that you do not reach the eye and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not see the artery at the beginning of the slit, but you can press into the slit a little with ease so that the artery comes out; then extract it as we have said; and then moisten cloth in water and wine and place them over the area and hold them tight with a bandage.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so some put salt and place it in the cavity of the slit so that what remains of the moisture comes out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the area so that it is cured.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an ulcer occurs in the eye, then heal it with soft bandages until it is cured.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of ways of touching the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eyes there are hairs that are pushed downward and are pulled out, then those harm the eye and cause ways of illnesses as well as continuous tears and inflammation of the eyelids and membrane, which is a cause of destruction of the eye called tactinir of the eye, and it can be cured in four ways: by cauterization with fire; or with an acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery; or tactinir is caused by incision and suturing; or by cannula, as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Then have the patient rest his head on your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it turns, all is well; if not, insert an awl into the slit where the pus is below the eyelid, and let the awl go above the hairs — close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow — close to the hairs, and draw out the pus towards the top of the eyelid, and turn it with your finger.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then open the slit within the eyelid below the hairs with a spatula inserted into the tear duct from above into the lower tear duct; then extract the pus and place small pieces of cotton or cloth underneath the eyelid, and then bandage over the eyelid with a tent so that it forms the shape of a leaf of mirt.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But let the shape be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for this is diverse in men, for some there is a great quantity that is inserted into the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is inflamed.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then open with the spatula over the two lines that you have drawn, and begin from the tear duct from above into the lower tear duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your slit is close to the natural hairs, as thick as a king's hair.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then insert the needle into one of the two angles of the artery, and then scrape away all the inflammation, and then close with a stitch the two lips with gum or fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and attach what overflows from the hairs above two eyebrows with some causes binding, if you wish to do so, and otherwise it will not be cured.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Then let the stitch of the hairs be loose within three or four days, and then heal it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, remove the bandage after the stitch, and heal that with something that dries and constricts, for the eyelid is raised because of the sealing of the bandage and the inflammation of it; but a stitch is better. So therefore we say these things about taxinir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But let there be rest on the patient, and it is a good operation, and let there not be fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	There is another way in taxmir, and it is that you mark on the eyelid the shape of a leaf of mirt, and then raise the eyelid with three hooks separated and gathered according to this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if that is not possible, let the hooks be held, and if it is not straightened, then take an awl in which there is a thread and insert it into the middle of the shape, and insert the other end close to the tear duct, and press between your fingers the hairs with equality, and then with those raise your hand with an equal raising, raise all the area over which it is marked as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then close the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and heal that so that it is cured.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an ulcer occurs because of your incision or slit, heal the ulcer with ointment and bandages similar to it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some times it happens to the eyelid that its hairs are turned inward, so then use what we have said about incision; but a stitch in every case is more natural.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Taxinir with cannula is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you turn the eyelid and split the figure that is within according to what has been described; and then with skill make two cannulae or two thin probes of which their length is according to the length of the eyelid and their width is less than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already split at the ends of some of these parts where you have threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then gather each one with subtlety under what overflows of the eyelid of the eye, and press the cannulae in some places with strong pressure, and let it be for several days, for the eyelid because of the pressure will die and become black and fall off when you remove it.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then cut it with tweezers, and then heal the wound so that it is cured.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when it is healed, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two cannulae which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of raising warts by the hole with a needle when the wart is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the warts are unnatural, hard, rough and painful to the touch, then the operation to be performed on them is to take a thin needle and pierce it into that sensitive spot of the wart very gently, and then tie off its extremities with thread very gently.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the thread be about the size of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then tie another thin thread beneath it quickly, and knot the ends of that one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then let the patient hold his head in your lap, and be near the sun so that your work is revealed, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the wart which has need of skill, and let it penetrate the eyelid rapidly while you pull that one above the natural wart out.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the wart up from below and insert that into an ointment, and let there be one or two or three warts, and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand away so that the wart is forgotten with the ointment in the eyelid with the natural wart.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is drawn out with the ointment and the wart is not extracted, you shall draw out the ointment to the sides below with the thread which you have tied to it so that in being drawn out, the ointment of the tract remains above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And wipe that with the vision of the eye, for then you will extract the ointment and the thread, and let each one and close the eye, and leave the clot for two or three days so that the wart adheres to its place and grows over good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the wart is more short, then take a long hair from one of the natural hairs and let it be elevated with that, or let the thread enter so that it is drawn out to some length, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the cure of a wart which comes in the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When a wart comes in the eyelid, and is contraction of the eyelid when it is drawn inwards to one side or the other, through bad consolidation of plague or of scars or of cauterization, and is called leporine, and this wart is either natural or accidental, and is made through consolidation of plague or of scars or cauterization, or through likenesses to them badly cured.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The way of the operation on it is that you split that consolidation and separate its lips, and place in it what is between a fold of linen cloth, and tie those so that they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not think that you use cure of it from the causes which dry up, constrict; for if you do that, it returns with pustule worse than at any time before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of causes which soften like fenugreek, and moisten with the water in which there are roots of it, or ointment dyaquilon, which should be liquified with some of the oils, and immerse in that the fold, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the secret of your cure is that you pierce with complete skill so that it is not consolidated according to its form at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said, is not but some rectification of ehalixacrati which does not return the form of its place according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of a wart which is made in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This alxacrati which is made in the eyelid below, which is named veritably alxacrati; and it is of one natural, another accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is made through plague or through split or cauterization or through other likenesses.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation on it is that you take a needle in which there are double threads, and place that in the flesh, and let it pass from the tear duct on the left into the tear duct on the right, so that the thread comes to both extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh to the sides above with the needle and sew that with the needle, and insert with spatulum ample.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so if it returns the shape of the eyelid according as you wish, well then; and if not, take the needle and place that in the split figure, and with that turn the eyelid, and split the two fissures on the sides of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the extremities of the two fissures be of two angles of the incision which you have made so that they meet, and be made of them an angle between which when they are gathered together is made figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then stitch the flesh that by the quantity it is the side of it acute below it, that which closes the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then sew those parts separated and heal them with what we have said of the medicines softening and of the poultices so that they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if alxacrati comes through split or suture or cauterization, then you shall split with a flat split over the hairs of the eyelid according as it is preceded.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the poultice between two lips according as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech of the cure of alxacrati when it is above or below, let there run in it operation according as it is prepared from the form of alxacrati, and that is in form of many differences.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise artisans prepare skill in every way which is possible to them so that they make return the figure to the natural form or near it, and the patient according as it suits him of the operation and of the instruments in the greater dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many men in whom the eyelid is solidified more above with the albumen of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of its movement and of its natural works, then you insert the extremity of the needle below the eyelid, and elevate it upwards, or extend that with the nail.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the adhesion with spatulum subtle which does not have the sharpness of the incisions, having obtuse a little so that the patient is not disturbed after the operation, and remove the spatulum that it does not hurt the eye by its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision which cuts out that adhesion with facility so that the eyelid is returned according to its natural form and that all the adhesion be healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put in the eye salted water with which you wash it; or distill in it zunia dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of linseed, and place over the eye wool infused in albumen of egg, and on the third day use causes consolidating so that it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of nail and of eminence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is according to two manners; for it is nervous, and is similar to hard chaff subtile; or it is not-nervous, similar to white moisture congealed, which when the iron touches it, or it is forced to take by needle, is cut off and the needle is not placed in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin unless from the tear duct major so that there goes little by little covering the view and forbid light and the movement of eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of proceeding in the examination is that the patient inclines his head to you, and then you open his eyes, and raise the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the fingernail with tweezers and extend it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert into it a hair of horse or bullock or cow, or similar, or strong bile, or double the end of the needle little by little and push that into the nail, and pierce with the needle the nail; and extract with bile the nail; and extend that to the parts above, and with the hair scrape the sides of the nail which touches the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you follow that with the hair into the back of his eye.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you insert the remainder into the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and cut the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that through its incision it does not cause continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the nail with the sole tweezers extended or with bile, thus as we have said; and then is scraped with a spatula lion whose form this is:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the cornea and that it cause rupture in him, and that the pupil be perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then the incision releases into the eye a little trimmed salt or made of cinammon, and let that remain until the next day; and then cure that with water that covers it so that it may heal.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle into it, or it is not pierced with the tweezers, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed thus as an eye, and is described in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to split that, then open the eye of the patient and take a fine spatula lion with file sharpened according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rarefied and withdrawn and it has taken root in the eye, then distil from your mouth into the eye made of cinammon or with fine roe or with trimmed salt, and cover the eye until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until all that is of it is removed, unless a cautery wound be in the eye, for then you cut that and cure at the beginning the apostema until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The membrane of the tear duct, if noted in the eye from great harm, is suspended with tweezers; and insert that from one part, and do not finish the incision so that it does not cause flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distil into the tear duct fine roe or made of cinammon until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of incision of algusardenic and what is born of flesh pressed in the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of some people there is born red flesh and it lies on top covering the pupil, or drawn near or stretched out upon the eyelids and strongly press the eyelids to the parts outside and it is attached like a bullet wound.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation on him is that the patient inclines his head to you; and then open his eyes and collect all of that flesh with convenient tweezers for that, and hold that with a forceps or basket; and then cut the flesh at the beginning until it is all finished with the scissors, and be careful of the eye not to injure that after your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be with which you cut those or with a spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which ashbell is collected according to the form of it; this chapter will tell you.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then when your incision is completed and all that flesh is withdrawn, then fill the eye with trimmed salt, or distill into it red powder and similar to it of the medicines which are corrosive, and place over the eye outside a piece of eggshell until it is secured from cautery wound.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause of algusardenic and there is lordotic wound cautery, and you fear cautery wound, then cut the eye and cure that wound with what releases that wound; and then repeat on it the operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh which lies upon the eye of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But however you see that all cure of the eye is done by natural or accidental way, doing with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations unless you see that this member suffers those operations.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of collection of ashbell in the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Red veins which are tested upon the eye and prohibit its operation, and they darken the eye over the course of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the eye in which there is ashbell is strong and in it there is not another disease than ashbell, then collect that ashbell.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to incline his head to you, and then suspend those veins with one tweezers or two according to your prudence; and let that pair of tweezers be of fine double according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or so two pairs of tweezers gradually inclining one to the other according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then let those veins be collected with fine forces, with subtlety, and wipe the blood now and again, until you see those veins are withdrawn from the eye and are rolled up;
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not injure the eye with the end of the spatula; and if your operation is on the left side before the sun, and keep it firm in your operation and do not pierce except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then distill into the eye fine green or roe so that with its sharpness it may corrupt what is withdrawn of the ashbell.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to collect all of that in that hour, then you plaster all with what releases his pain, and let him for several days until his pain is calmed and he is secured from cautery wound.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat on him according to the manner in which it was healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the tweezers:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reduction of arizati to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you heal arizati with cautery or with acute medicine burning according to the previous narration of it and is not healed, then do not put anything in it except that you open the wound because of its maturity, and extract all the humidity which is in it and the pus until its bone is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is uncovered and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is formed of rough iron and let the end be rounded thus with a file or ground with a pointed file (thus as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the rotten part of the bone and then roll that between your fingers and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is rasped.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And let that be done several times, and then restore the part with astringent and styptic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the place is consolidated and there is born good flesh in it and the body of the wound has been separated from the sania and he has stood for 40 days, and is not renewed nor cauterized nor happens to him accident, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is not in him to open the fracture in the shape of a nose, and according to this manner: and you uncover according to bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and with sir discovered the bone, then you take traction according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the extremity of him be triangularly ironed, and his shaft be first extended within the extremity thus with force as well.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that against the bone, and let it be close to the tear; and lengthen your hand a little from the hole, and approximately rotate your hand with traction inside so that all of the bone penetrates, and he feels the patient through his ass that atroba wind to exit through there when you place your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the site with astringent medicines, drying as you have been taught.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the flesh and the site has hardened, then the matter which flowed out of the orifices is returned to the nose; therefore here is pus upon the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of reduction of the eminence of the hole.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hole eminences by its totality and not happens in the movement any damage nor decrease, then you must loosen the patient, and let him follow, and let him pause wind in his neck without scarification and suck through good sucking; and then place over the hole liniment which should be made of astringent and aloe and myrrh and sandaraca, and then strengthen the bandage over the hole with soft words.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the words is that you take pieces of linen cloth, and each piece be doubled in four folds; and make from those words.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over another according to the quantity of which has the hole necessity.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen over those with a hard cloth with strong stricture; and iterate the ventouses with sucking without scarification; and stop the ventouses and let him the hole tight both day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if meanwhile the ligament is softened, then you must that it be very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the bandage both day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the hole already reduced, good is; and if not, then iterate the bandage with the words and the stricture and the ventouses until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the eminence of the tunica uvcea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When disruption in the tunica uvcea, and is eminent and processes out the eyelids thus with a grain of sand, and it is orrazada the form of man by that, and want to that incision, then the operation in him is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle in the root of the uvea of the part below in the part above, and then place the needle another in which is thread double of the part of the tear, and make that penetrate and let the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the site of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that word.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place over the hole wool infused in white vinegar and let it into that the thread falls with the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the hole with that which comforts that within which the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some few times gather from all party with circle of cloth within the hole adjust eminence great, and then be perforated by the spatula subtle that comes to the preon of the hole, and run the humidity albugineous, and descend the hole and in so far.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of cure of alconati.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness that is called alconati is not but putridity which is adjusted in the hole like water descending and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the manner of doing in it is that you make the patient sit on the seat prepared and straight, and then take his head in your hands of two parts and hold him so that you see the putridity coming to the parts below, and then be dried and not descend, and be obscured the light, and the patient see the causes thus with vision.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if not prepared the descent to the putridity with that which we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and then take spatula subtle and fen him over the panniculus cernent a little from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea in the crown (into the hole whet), until the putridity is pushed out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it is pushed out, then you distill in the hole water tail in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then be cured by the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 23.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of water descending from the hole.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the species of the water in the division and which suits to pierce with sermo declaring, then that according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you make him sit between your hands upon a pillow and tie his hole up, he tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place close to the eyelid of his hole your left hand, if the hole in which is the water is the left; or with your right hand, if it is the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take almighty, if the hole is left; or with your left hand, if it is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the extremity of almighty close to the crown for the thickness of the thread in the white of the hole from the part of the lesser tear, and then press almighty with force and rotate your hand by that.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate in the white of the hole and feel that almighty is already come to seen cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And let it be the measure of the way of almighty to the preon the measure of the space which is of the pupil within the end of the blackness, and is the crown of the hole; for you will see with that pupil with the vision of the hole by the clarity of the tunica cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place almighty within the site in which is the water, and then you pull it down a little and another, and therefore if the water descend so, then see the patient that on which open his sight so soon, and almighty in his hole.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest a little; therefore if the water is descended, then you rest that another before almighty be pulled out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And therefore when it is dried and not descend, then you extract almighty with facility, and rotate by that your hand a little to little, and then dissolve in the water a little of salt clear of gemma and wash the hole within; and then place outside the hole cotto or stopa or wool infused in rose oil and vinegar with that the hole.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But us and those who so of our time pause over that eaten by white vinegar.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if not obeys to you almighty to the instrument of the hole by its hardness — for it is thick one of the men of which the hole is hard word  —, then you make him sit the patient that on which eat by white vinegar.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce by that conjuncture, and do not finish your hand in the hole, and it is not unless you make way to almighty site subtle.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then enter almighty according as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And the completion of your work, it is prepared for the patient's sleeping place, made in a dark room, in which he sleeps on his back, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in nature for him so that it is clear his nature, and not harm his head at the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And be the bandage according to his disposition within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And properly loosen that in that dark room and expose the wound to view, and show him some causes, and then return the bandage within the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And not think that you do this in the time of healing or immediately after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Have care that you displace it so that the water can gently flow through the pipe with ease.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if it happens to be a boil, then loosen the bandage before the seventh day, and rectify that with water so that the boil will subside.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you cover his sight and place over his face a mask by which the movement of him is restrained until he is for several days in that dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then it should be gradually transferred and conversed about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in some cases it is not necessary for the disciple to see some things, and then you are anxious about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And now it has come to us from some of those who are in the Artach , and some say that they made fire in Ayrac Magdaam by which water is sucked.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But indeed I have not seen it in our land, nor is it read of in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of Magdaam for which there is one upon those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or steel properly, and their ends be with this subtlety triangularly, the acute end thus with that is the shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure of a wound in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are grown diverse meats joined of which is some cause that is assembled to scorpion of mots, or polyp, and this illness is called polypus because it is like that peep represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from him it is cancerous meat, scaly, of dusky colour; and from him it is that it is meat of lion not of dusky colour.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is in these meats not fraudulent or cancerous, do so the patient open between your fingers and placed in the sun, and open the nose of him, and pierce the tip of the finger in those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that to the forepart, and then you will see that which has been understood from those with a sharp instrument of the one part into which you know that all the meat is removed; for if there remains in him any cause for which the abscission is possible, then you rate that with one of the subtle instruments with facility into which he has not remained any cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it is lorded over with blood or there is a boil, then you place to him that which you will; or if it is of the malignant boils, then cut and cauterize that into which bleeding is abscinded and all the caves are open.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then it shall be removed from the nose, when the incision is made, with wine and water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and from it proceeds moisture into the palate, then you know that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate according to that which you do, then you know that inside him is meat in the pus sub-bones of the nose to which no abscission has been arrived.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore then do so you interpose bile to him of which there is any grossness, and in him move mots, nuts, and pause between each nut the quantity of the finger or less, and enjoin the patient and interpose one end of the bile in the nose with the ray or another cause by which it is possible to him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after that which has been done, let him throw his breath into that which arrives at the canals of the nose, and be breathed over his gullet, for troops like this seem to do this action, and it is a slight cause to that which he wants to do.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two ends of the bile, one end that goes over the nose and another which goes into the nose, and then administer a scissor of meat with the nuts that are in the bile, and do so until you know that the meat is removed from the nuts of the bile.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then pull out the bile, and pause in the nose the abstraction of blood a sponge , and do so for three days or more until the gum has corroded all that which is separated from the meats.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a cannula of lead for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you find that the cure is exhausted, use that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to head-purger with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do so from silver or iron, which is like a little open lamp, likewise with a little hole, and the meat similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a cannula closed likewise with cane, and the cannula of the instrument to head-purger and be flat, uncovered; to which is handle in his arse, with which you have that when you heat in him oil or water that you want of the sucks and the causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these head-purgers are precious: take of castor fur, white balsam, ginger, and pepper long, saffron, spikenard, and epithimum, a drachm; Wine with which you will be infused with blood of bled and of cauldron, and there are made pills, and then be tempered a pill with water of tea, and then it shall be inserted in the nose of the patient lying on his back.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the yls in the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times it is born theyl in the ends of the nose, and is magnified and swollen for several days until what is stopped to him.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And because of that you insert that in the commencement of the appearance of him, and withdraw it altogether.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause over the place or cautery or medicine burning which is in the place of him.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the incision is delayed until it is magnified, then consider whether it is suppuration, hard, of dusky colour and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron because it is boil; for many times to that which you insert this suppuration becomes great malice on him who had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the boil is of the colour not dusky and there is incision possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and insert that without fear, and bind it around until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the suture of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the connection is dissolved by water or like.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there happens solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer in that operation unless in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore do so when also for some cause of those that you consider whether it is fresh water with his blood, and then join the two lips of the wound with suture, and then heal that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the wound have already been separated and each has healed, then you must scrape away any dead flesh from the wound so that it may bleed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then, tie the two lips of the wound together tightly and put on powdered dragon's blood and crushed aspen wood over it, then apply a layer of diafinicon plaster or one of the other consolidative plasters, and leave it on for two or three days, then remove that plaster and replace it with another, and leave it on until the flesh has healed naturally.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of the suture is to bring the wound together or with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or bring the wound together with thread in such a way that you and your assistant know how it was done.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come from both lips within the wounds.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times in these wounds between the lips of men you will find certain hard bumps resembling grains of ergot, and some are small while others are large.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must turn the lips inside out and cut into each of those hard bumps from all sides, then fill the wound with powdered sage until the bleeding is stopped, then wash the wound with wine vinegar and treat it with something astringent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of incision of the flesh pressed against the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Often there is flesh pressed against the gums, which the ancients called albus, so you must lift that up with a hook or what you have there, and cut it at its root, and let the pus flow out or the blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place powdered sage or other astringent or drying powders on the wound.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh comes back, cut it again secondly, and cauterize it, because then the cautery will not let it come back.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of reason of teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When there are rough, sharp sores on the surface of the teeth in the wounds and holes between the gums and also within the gums, some are black and are made yellow or green by corruption of the gum and the teeth are made loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore, you must put the patient between your knees and hold his head in place, and pull the teeth in which those sores appear and the causes seem like sand so that no cause remains inside them, and this removes the blackness and yellowing and others until they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if that is the end of what is in the beginning of the root, then that is good; but if not, then you must go back over the root on those teeth again and again on the second and third day until it reaches the final state that you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have many needs for various tools of different shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore the file with which the tooth is filed for the wound between the teeth is another type of file than that used to file between the teeth according to other forms, and you should prepare those types of files which you will see immediately.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You must cure the tooth of its pain by all means and delay at all costs in complete extraction of it, because there is no cause that exceeds the appearance of it when it has been extracted, for it is a subtle substance that is an obstacle in its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, then you must be certain which is the painful tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and it appears to be in a healthy tooth, and you extract it and yet the pain does not cease until the painful tooth has been extracted, because we have seen this through the operation of the barbarians.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you are certain which is the painful tooth and that you know it, then you must scrape around the circuit of the tooth with a spatular in which there is some virtue so that it dissolves the tooth from the gum entirely all around, and then pull it out by its roots with your fingers or with fine forceps little by little until you loosen it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then grab it tightly with strong fingers or strong pliers, and hold the patient's head steady so that he does not move, and pull the tooth according to the right method so that you do not break it or give the patient greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if there is a cavity, then take one of those instruments and put it below the tooth from all sides with ease and force the extraction of it just as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is cracked or hollow, then you must fill that crack with a piece of cloth and squeeze it with the end of a thin rod so that it is not broken when you tighten it on it with your fingers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you must open it widely with a scarification around the circuit of all parts of the gum and be very careful that you do not break it or tear it apart, and return to the patient because the first pain of it is great.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity in the extraction of them, for they do not follow what we have recommended; because many times they bring great illnesses on men which are very difficult to cure, and their roots are all worn away or some of them, or that you extract it with certain bones of the jaw just as we have tested.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then the extraction of it should be washed with wine cauterium or vinegar with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if blood flows out of it, therefore, as we have said before, take some quantity of salt and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that salt does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and thin tongs with which the tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long, narrow-tipped and thick, so that they do not bend when you operate with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And let them also be as wide of handle in the middle so that when you tighten them they do not bend, they should be short in length.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And let them be made of Indian iron forged and hammered, and in their tips be teeth with which the others bite into each other and tighten with a strong descent, and sometimes the tips of those are the shape of the beak of an owl, so it is hooked, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of extraction of teeth and the dislocation of the bones of the jaws that are broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must extract a tooth that is broken due to some cause, then you should hold the wound closed with a bandage for one or two days until the wound is softened; and then use the instrument or forceps whose tips are joined together like the beak of an owl or hooked, the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Their tips should be made with pliers or a file.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey you with those forceps or tongs, then you should cut into the root and strip away all the flesh and put in the instrument called the lever, which is a short lever whose shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Let there be a small one of short thickness, and not so wet that it is not broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore if through this the vein is cut, it is good; and if not, use some other instrument of which these are the forms: The form of the first instrument is triangular in its extremity, and in which there should be some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should have a triangular and very fine point.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you are helped with this instrument having two spikes, and whose form is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which are used in pulling teeth; for it is done with this instrument which is like the jaw of a large animal, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular bent point, short or curved, and in which there should be some thickness, and not wet enough to break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another wisdom is that the instruments of the teeth move and are like other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the wise and subtle artist will find for himself many ways according to what he learns from the operation and various illnesses; for there are various illnesses which the ancients did not describe or use proper instruments for because of their different shapes.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth are broken, then the foot must be cured where it is convenient with some of those instruments and forceps which we mentioned in the extraction of teeth roots, and use the action for which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And some thickness must be applied little by little, and the hole held closed with the mouth so that it does not open or escape until all the bone is healed; then restore the area with appropriate medicines for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if it is a small fracture, then cut away the fracture and the blackness from it, and cure the area inside until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the cure of teeth protruding above others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude not according to their natural shape, and especially when they do so in women, and especially in older women, then you should consider: if the tooth is next to another tooth and there is no way of closing or binding it, then cut it; but if the tooth is next to another tooth, then drill it with this instrument whose form is like a pig's jaw, and which is made from Indian steel with a very fine point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your drilling should be such that you drill it for several days according to the hardness of the tooth, and that none of the other teeth are harmed.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the protruding tooth is worn away by grinding, then grind it with an Indian steel file whose form is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And all of it is made from Indian steel, and the point is very fine; and it is like small needles, and with the file which is used to make needles, the tooth is ground little by little over several days with ease, so that no other tooth is harmed or worn away.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then line it at the end, and cut it with a very sharp razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if the tooth of which one side is broken and cuts the tongue, then you should grind it until that fracture is flattened and rounded off, so that the tongue is not cut nor the speech impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of restoring broken teeth with gold or silver foil.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are knocked out and broken due to a blow or fall, and the patient cannot chew, and your cure with styptic medicines has not helped, then in order that they do not rot, they must be strengthened with gold foil rather than silver, for silver turns black and rots within a few days, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the foil should be so fine and thick according to how much can fit between the teeth; and the form of the repair is that you take the foil and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with two curves of the foil between two broken teeth, or if one or more are broken, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then repeat the bonding inside at the break from which you started, and strengthen your work with ease and skill so that none of it is broken.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your bonding should be such that you bond the foil so that it does not open at the roots of the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then cut away the excess foil with tweezers or pliers, and add those to each location with action, and cover them over and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the broken tooth, so that they do not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Then let it be bound thus tightly with thread.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or torn, strengthen it or those with another foil in the same way at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the repair of two healthy teeth and two broken teeth, as they are bound thus:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one or two teeth fall out and return to their places, and are regrow thus as we have described, and rot again:
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Then let it not be done except by a wise artist.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is appropriate to use some cause of cow bones, and it is made in the form of a tooth, and placed in the hole from which the tooth fell out, and strengthened as we have said, and remain and serve with that for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the cutting of the ligature which appears in the tongue, and prohibited speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligature which appears under the tongue sometimes naturally, or accidentally occurs due to a blow which has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient, and lift up his jaw bone which is under his tongue; and then insert that nervous ligament according to its breadth so that the tongue is released from its binding.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knotting in it, and that is due to the hardening of a blow, then you cut and split it according to its breadth so that you have split the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that there is not any fissure in the flesh of the jaw, and that you split only the membrane, and there is a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then let it be washed with vinegar or with sour wine, and then place the tongue in its socket, so that there is a wound which the patient does not close so that it is not healed again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if blood flows, then place a piece of charred wood over the hole; but if the blood stops, then cauterize the hole with a cautery which is appropriate for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be cured by the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a ranula under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes there occurs under the tongue an abscess which resembles a small lump, and it prevents the tongue from its natural movement, and when it is enlarged and fills the mouth:
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a dusky or black colour, hard, to which the patient does not respond with feeling, then do not touch it for it is rotten.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is white, and moist, then place the tip of the needle in it, and split it with a very fine point; and if blood flows while you are operating, then pause over it with charred wood, so that the blood is stopped.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your task, washing the wound with wine and salt, and treat it with another ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of an abscess from both ears, and that which occurs in the throat, and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When there is swelling in the throat, there are glands which are united like cotton, and which become enlarged and are called two ears; when you treat them with what we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dusky color, and of little feeling; then touch it not with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then touch it not with iron through the flow of blood; before you let that be matured, either you will pierce that or it will burst by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, soft and the root of it subtle, then that one is to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation upon it is that you consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has rested with complete rest or if it has diminished by any diminution; and then let the patient lie before the sun, his head in your lap, and open his mouth, and the servant take hold of his tongue with his hands, away from the instrument most noble of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it shall be made of silver or of bronze, and it shall be subtle like a needle.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore when you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and put upon that your instrument, then take hold of it and insert that into the hole outward as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another one is that you pull on some of the membranes; then incision that with an instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is like tweezers, except that the ends of it are curved so that the openings of each one is in the direction of the other, very sharp, and it shall be made of iron tempered hard.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not present to you, then incision that with spatulum of which this is the form: And it shall be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised one part, incision the other according to this manner of incision, and then let the patient recuperate from water rubbed on.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there ensues a flow of blood, recuperate with water of decoction of husk of pomegranate or leaf of mallow, and similar to that from the causes constrictive until the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes in the throat there are other abscesses other than those two ears; and incision them according to what you see and say in the incision of two parts alike.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I was once treating a woman of an abscess which was occurring in her throat; and that abscess was of dusky color, of little feeling, which had closed her throat, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, and she had prohibited eating and drinking water, and she was brought to the point of death unless she had stood for one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And that abscess had grown so much that it had made two holes through which pus was flowing.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore I cut the throat carefully and put in one of them a probe, and drew out that pus and a great part of it, and then I incision the other side from where I understood the other tract; and then I opened the mouth of him, and grasped his tongue, and then I put the probe into that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut out a great part of it, and there flowed from it only a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore the throat of that woman was completely opened, and she began at once to drink water, and then to take food; therefore I did not cease to incision that abscess many times for a long time, and an abscess succeeded in place of that one which I incision until it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore I had the throat of her cauterized and then sewed it up, therefore from that I walked around and did not know what God made of that one.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of incision of membrane when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh occurs in the uvula, and it is abscessed and is long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is at its lower part thick and round, then it is named buba.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is healed with what you have said in the division and your treatment does not confer, and then there occurs that the abscess cauterized is last from her and is subtle; and if it is to that length and is bloody, of dusky color or black, and is not to him sensible, then beware that you incision it for in that one is fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, then make the patient lie down and press his tongue with an instrument of which you have described the form, and then put the probe in the new one, and draw that downward and incision it with one of two instruments of which you have said in the incision of two parts.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And beware that you incision it except what is adjusted over the natural term for addition, for if you incision from it more, you will break his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two parts, and cure that one until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient was frightened by the incision of him, beware that you use gentleness in the cauterization of him without fear, and the manner of the cautery in him is only with sharp water; and it shall be that you lay the head of the patient in your lap, and then press his tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take of the water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and confer with that live cause, and pause that not thick nor subtle, and of that fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the end of it be hollow in which is paused the medicine as with the concavity of spoon of ray; and pause the instrument with the medicine over the uvula, and the patient let lie on his side so that flow saliva or mucilage of the mouth of him because no any cause descend over the throat of him and that it thaws that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then hold your hand with the medicine, and express that over the uvula for the space of a half hour until you see that to be blackened and dulled by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take thread and wrap that over the end of the ray; and immerse the thread in the medicine and insert the ray with the thread into a cannula of above so that the thread adheres in that cannula, and do that as many times until you accomplish what you wish of the cauterization of the grape, and then let it dry that for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if indigestions that repeat the medicine, repeat that, and then the cauterization cleanse in the circuit of the grape with thread immersed in wine, and cleanse with that what is in the circuit of it of the medicine; and be washed with rubbed water, and be cured with ointment, and teeth with remedies until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is more safe than incision and longer lasting in terms of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured by something more subtle than cauterization and incision; it is cured by sub-fumigation in this way: take calamus, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic thistles, camomile, bromides, and similar ingredients from among the herbs, and prepare all of those things, or some of them, in a bowl, and let them be submerged in agreeably sour wine, and let the wine boil; and let the bowl be properly luted, and let there be a hole in the middle of the bowl through which an appropriately-shaped instrument made of silver or copper is placed; it should be made of silver or copper.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the end of this instrument is inserted into the patient's mouth so that the steam rises to the uvula over the glottis, as the uvula becomes very fogged up.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And you should repeat this several times until it is dry; be careful not to perform this cure during the beginning of an appetite for food, because it will increase the appetite too much; rather, you should wait until after he has eaten something.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument available, then take a reed and attach some wool to its end, so that the patient's mouth is filled, because the wool prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the gullet, and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times there are adherences in the gullet or a thorn in the throat or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, you should extract whatever is visible there, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that what is in the throat will be revealed to you.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And if what is hidden in the throat is not apparent to you, then make the patient vomit before the food has digested in the stomach; because often the cause of an obstruction in the gullet is thrown up by vomiting; or the patient should swallow a piece of soap or a piece of lettuce stem or a piece of dry bread; or he could take a piece of dried sea sponge, and chew it hard while spitting out the saliva, and then press his throat with your hand, because when this reaches the place where there are thorns, they will come out.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Or take an eel and chew it with vinegar, and let it be inside the mouth and spit it out; or take a pig's ear and chew it and then spit it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if they are not dislodged by the causes we have mentioned, then use a lead instrument in the following shape:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And the point should be made with a plucker, and the point should be larger than the rest of it; and in the end of it there should be a concavity which you insert into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let him hold his head up, and be careful not to touch the bone of his throat, so that it does not push against the bone or the thorn, or that the doctor with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But let the patient himself put it in, according to his knowledge of where the obstruction is located and let him press down from above, and pull up the instrument with his hand, according to the amount by which he is prepared for it to be dislodged.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood clots from the gullet.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood clots are treated with what we have said in the division of cures by medicines and not by cauterization, then look to the gullet of the patient from above, as you press his tongue with an instrument which we recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore if you see the blood clot, extract it with a small needle or with very fine tweezers, gently and decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that, then take a hollow reed and insert it into the patient's gullet, and then place a red hot iron in the concavity of the reed, and do this as many times as necessary (as long as the blood clot is dead and comes out of his throat), and let the patient abstain from drinking water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a rag wet with water, and wipe his mouth with it; and do not spit out any of the water and let him sip the water little by little with his hand, because the blood clot will come right away when he feels the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not dislodged by what we have recommended, then sub-fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida through the instrument which we recommended in the sub-fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, as long as it is necessary.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another way of operating with sub-fumigation: take a bowl in which are burning coals and the bowl should be covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and fix the end of the instrument in that hole; then do the sub-fumigation; and let the patient close his mouth over the end of the reed, so that the sub-fumigation does not escape as long as you know that the sub-fumigation has reached the blood clot, because the blood clot will come right away.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not come out, then repeat the sub-fumigation many times; and let the patient abstain from drinking, and eat salty causes and alms, and do not drink water; and if this treatment is followed, then the blood clot will be dislodged.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which blood clots are extracted from the gullet when they are seen; and it is similar to tweezers except for the fact that there is some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	This should be inserted into the gullet, and its end is similar to a stork's beak, which is hooked, so that when it grasps something, it does not let go; therefore, when you press on some cause, it will not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the tongue in regard to obstructions and their sections.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Obstruction are of many kinds, according to what is remembered by us in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their penetration and sections by two methods: the first is by the nature of obstructions themselves; and by what we understand from moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is by the places where they occur: for example, an obstruction that accidentally occurs in the head is different from one that accidentally occurs in the anus; and an obstruction that occurs in a fleshy part is different from one that occurs in a joint; and each of them is treated by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some obstructions which do not need to be penetrated, but only the maturation of the pus in them or the completion of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	There are also obstructions which do not need to be punctured but only the maturation of the pus in them or their completion: or they are near a joint, for when an obstruction occurs near a joint, its nature is prolonged by the parts around it and it strongly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint; or it is near the main member, so if you delay its penetration until it matures, then it will corrupt the main member; or it is near the anus, so do not puncture it until it matures.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May you know the time of the piercing of the pustule, and that is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you will know that it has matured when there is a lessening of the pain and fever, and also a decrease in redness and pulse, and a sharp point to the head of the pustule, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you will know that the piercing has been successful when it occurs in the lowest place of the pustule and pus comes out from the healing of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the piercing should always be done along the length of the skin or body, if the pustules are on the palms of the hands or soles of the feet, and in places of the veins, nerves, or arteries; and, finally, in any place where there is no reflection; for in those places where there is a reflection, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the pustule is on fleshy tissue, it is better to let the piercing be done within it as it has been stated; for if you pierce that which precedes it, the body of it is prolonged and the pus flows out from it along with a lot of thick matter, and its lips are hardened and the depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some pustules should be pierced according to the width of the skin or body, depending on the necessity, or according to that member from which one suffers.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you must administer a small piercing on the smaller pustules, and for the larger pustules, a large and ample piercing or many piercings according to the variety of their sizes.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are others that are pustules in which the cord is hollow and has been cut, when it is done so that a pan is made from it, that is, as much as one can make from a horse's hoof, or from a bullock's hoof, or even more.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And there are those that are cut with a three-pronged incision, and there is one in which it is cut like the shape of a fern leaf, just as the pustules on the angles of the nose.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And there are those in which a round incision and a moon-shaped one is administered, and they are similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But if it does not happen like that with superficial pustules, then you must pierce that one with a superficial piercing, or a flat one only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the pustule is large and has already collected a lot of pus, pierce that one and do not be afraid to extract all of its pus at that time; first draw out some from it, then plug up the pustule until the next day, then draw out a larger portion, then do this many times according to its degree until it is fully drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of cold nature, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in weakness, for the animal spirit is many times resolved by the discharge of pus, and soon dies after, then you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore, keep this chapter with great caution, and when you pierce those pustules, wash the sores, and then consider if the sore of the pustule is little, or is a flat section, then you administer the remedies of lead or of red copper; and if the pustule is large, and its fissures are many, then you must pause the needle in each crack as they come out together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the pustule a part of the cord is abscised or you have hollowed it out all around, then you must complete it with old lead, or with thread made from linen or from lead cloth, just as when one treats pans or roots, without moisture; and strengthen that one on the third day; and then process and cure it with what one uses to heal sores.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if blood flows in the hour of your operation, then you must administer water mixed with vinegar and wine in which a cloth of lead has been soaked, and place that over the location of the flow of blood many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the flow of blood persists, then you must administer remedies and cures and powders which I have mentioned in many places in this book and its divisions.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the winter time, and the location of the pustule is the site of many nerves, then you must mix powder with wine and oil that is hot, and place those on the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you must place powders that have been moistened with water and oil or wine and oil on them; and let all of this be done until the third day, just as we have said, and then you must dissolve the pustule and wash it and administer to its cure whatever is convenient for it.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And that is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of pustules universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said about every pustule in which manner is the way of its cure specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of pustules that come in the cord of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the cord of the head are small pustules, and they are of the nature of joints which contain membranes that are to them attached; and their nature is varied.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them are bumps, and from those are those that contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those are ones that contain moisture similar to powder, and they resemble them in appearance; and from those are ones that are scaly and hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, just as when one extracts thorns, it does not contradict the artery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose shape you see here, the one which is called entremes, as long as you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if that which it contains is moisture, then split that one with a section according to its length by a superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin the section at line .B to line .G. Therefore, when the moisture has been discharged, then you will scrape that one from which that moisture was evacuated, and do not leave any cause of it behind, for returning many times, if any cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that with the sore, and let it remain until the next day, for by doing so you will corrode all that remains of that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply ointment on that one again and again if it needs it, until you are confident that no cause of that membrane remains; then cure the sore with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the pustule contains a fatty nodule, then you must insert that one according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	by section having the form of a crook, and cut the edges between the two lips of the section and scrape that one from all around, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane which contains that one.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your artery causes a contradiction, then do what I have told you before.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the pustule that is lapified by section and cure according to what I have told you before; and section on pustule that is lapified is pus-like, for it is of little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are some of these pustules in the head of some people in whom there is no moisture; and their cause is that one who has struck on a pustule in the head of an old woman and blocked the pustule with a hard, rough, white pebble, which could not be broken, and if he strikes it, it bleeds.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But with other swellings that appear on the head other than this one, which is not in this chapter, such as swellings that come to the heads of infants and behind the ears, the incision of all of these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And make the incision from the lower part of them so that the body is relieved from the disease in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then treat those with what is appropriate for that kind of treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the incision of scrofula which occurs on the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These swellings often appear on the neck and armpits and elbows; and sometimes they appear in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that appear on the neck, and many of them are engendered among themselves, and all scrofula of these is within their own tunic, and so with the nodes and swellings of the head, as we have already described.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofula are many; some of them are stony, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that which you see of good disposition in the Touching, of which the color of that which is manifest is similar to the color of the skin, and is swollen in all parts, and is not annexed by the nerve of the neck, nor by the veins, nor by the artery, and is not deep, then you should investigate that with a superficial cut of the part above to the part below the body of the line of G. between the line of B., and scrape that from all parts, and extend two lips of the skin with your fingernails, or with many nails if you have need of those, as we have said in the swellings of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be very sharp, so that you do not touch your hand with cutting, or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you cut a vein or artery and forbid yourself from your operation, then stop in the wound vinegar tripe or other powders which stop blood fluxes, and tighten the wound, and let that which rests be rested the acuteness of the swelling and let the wound be softened and begin to become pus.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire with your finger if there is any cause of the other little scrofula; therefore cut those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if in the root of the great scrofula is a vein, then you should not cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before, let that be lifted with strong thread and let it be left until it falls by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut that scrofula all the way through, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound and suck at once, so that no superfluity remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there has been superfluity due to the size of the scrofula, then you should understand cutting its root, and opening that and administering cauterization and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And of those scrofula that contain moisture, pierce that with a superficial incision where it appears to you the place of its maturity, and make an incision of that which is the bottom of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer cauterization, with ointment and bandages to those, so that it corrodes what is broken of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleansed, then treat that with generative flesh ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the incision of the pimple of the swelling within the throat.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients spoke of this incision in the epiglottis, and I have not seen any man in our land who that has been done to him.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the word of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men who have squintiness, so that the extraction of the epiglottis is avoided, as it is not made a cure so that all the veins and the major ones of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have swellings hot in the mouth or throat or two ears, when the disease is not in the gullet, there use the incision of the epiglottis to avoid the loss which is made by piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want this, let us cut the epiglottis below three circles of the circles of the epiglottis, or four with small incision for the breadth in that which is between two circles by quantity; let the incision be in the membrane, not in the cartilage, and that location is convenient to incision, because it is deprived of flesh, and the vessels of blood from him are open.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the patient is fearful, then let him extend the skin of the throat with his fingernail, and then split the skin so that he comes to the gullet, but avoid the blood vessels if he sees from those any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then cut the cricoid according to what we have recommended; and it is signified over the incision of the gullet by the flame which comes out from that which is from him broken and by the abrasion of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound remain open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore when the hour is healed in which piercing is feared, bring together two lips of the skin of the wound, and sew that only over the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then administer medicines which make flesh to grow within so that it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the sum of the word which we have recommended, exposure is not unless you see some of those swellings have oppressed the throat of the patient, and the patient has come into death, and his breath is choked, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes the breath over the location of the wound by any respiration, and he is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that command to leave the wound open until the wickedness of the disease is consumed; and the wickedness of it is for three days; and then therefore command to sew the wound, and treat that within so that it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And that which I have seen by my physicians is that one servant press a knife into his throat and cut in there a part of the pipe of the lung, and he was called to the cure of him, and choked the breath so as it is choked of the dead, and opened the wound and choked the blood which was coming from the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore he confessed that that had not cut a vein nor artery, and the wind issued from the wound, and he treated that within so that fire was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And I did not believe the servant unless he had put his finger into his throat, and then after some days he returned to the place of his dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now I say that in the incision of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of incision over swelling which occurs in the throat, and it is called hernia of the throat.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This swelling named hernia of the throat is great swelling according to the color of the body, and it happens in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And there are two types of gout, one that is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	The natural type cannot be cured.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	The accidental type occurs in two forms; one is like fatty nodules and the other is like an abscess caused by a nodule of an artery, and there is fear with that one.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not make an incision on him with a knife except in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And examine him and if you find it like a fatty nodule and not attached to any of the veins, then open that up just like the nodes and remove everything inside from the skin and bursa; but if it is examined throughout his entire being and it is cured by what remedy goes inside so that it may heal.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the sections of the types of nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many types of nodules, and I have already described all of their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And one should thus account for the difference between a nodule and an ulcer as long as there is doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that with an ulcer there is heat, fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity ceases; it is completed putrefaction, and then the fever, pain and heat cease as well.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with a nodule, there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains that which the lion has in its throat, a proper sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And they are according to the color of the body, and their origin is with a hernia, and they are made in such a way that it can be major or minor; and they are of two types: either fatty and containing moisture, and the colors of moisture are many, according to what I described in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when one arrives at the cure of nodules, he should probe and investigate it to its origin with an instrument that is called an introme, according to its form in the chapter that is next.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the method of investigation of ulcers and all nodules; take this instrument and insert it into the most moist part of the ulcer, and rotate your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the membrane.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then close your hand according to the size of the ulcer and extract the instrument and consider what has come out in its wake.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if moist matter of any color comes out, then open it up with a superficial incision as I have said for the other ulcers.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if you do not get moisture from the instrument's passage, then know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it out with an incision in the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	In the same way that it is taught, and suspend it with pins, and scrape away the membrane from every part with ease, and guard the skin or sac, if you can, on it, and extract that pus with the nodule.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation and it is not possible to extract that pus all at once, then take it in bits so that no cause remains within him.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Because if any cause remains within him, a little or a lot, the nodule will return according to the most.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some little part remains within him, then complete the wound with some powdered caustic and strengthen the wound, and place over it what creates an ulcer cautery, and cure it by another remedy until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large nodule, then cut its two lips and cure it with that which incarnates.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the vein is pulsatile or not, then cut and pour into that place a mixture of three parts vetiver oil and one part lye, and let it rest for two days or three until the mixture hardens; then return to opening what is broken in the nodule.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the necessary instruments for incision and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the intromes, and they are of three types: one is large, and of them is medium-sized, and of them is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introme is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium-sized introme is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small introme is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of hollowed-out copper, of pointed ends bent properly, so that the instrument pierces into ulcers.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are called albur, and one of them is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they are of three types: one is large, medium-sized and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experiment, its shape is:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium-sized experiment, its shape is:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experiment, its shape is:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	They are convenient for ulcers and exitwulas and pustules and sores caused by bones or other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, large, like a lion's tooth, with large needles with which the membranes are sewn, and they are made of rammon citrine, or of rammon or iron, or of silver, and the best ones are when made of rammon citrine.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black lead, and which agree that through them are openings in the cavities where there is a reflection, which are reflected by their elevation with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three types: some are long, and some medium-sized, and some are short, according to the amount of the width of the ulcer and the tightness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large experiment of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium-sized experiment of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small experiment of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of pins are of many types, and some are simple, which have only one curve, and they are of three types: large, small and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their bodies are pinched, and they are of three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them are pinched having two curves, and they are of three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have three curves, and they are of three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all those are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple pin, its shape is:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium-sized simple pin:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple pin, its shape is:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large pinched body:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium-sized pinched body:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small pinched body, its shape is:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large one having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium-sized one having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small one having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large one having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium-sized one having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small one having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of knives with which they cut and pierce nodules and ulcers, and they are of three types: one is large, medium-sized and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large knife:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the medium-sized knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small knife:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	And the edges of those with which incision is made are sharp and the others not-sharp, and they are not stopped in such a way, but to be done gently in the scraping away of nodules by fear of piercing of vein or nerve, and for them is healed the sore and gained tranquility by little due to the scorching which gains the excoriation of the ulcer.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of bandages, which are of three kinds: large, medium and small, just as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large bandage is:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a medium-sized bandage is:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small bandage is:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of wool and only look like silk with which it is made alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And is on the outside covered with a needle and thread and on that side it goes inside and out, as you want, just as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of sponges, which are hidden between the fingers on both sides of the punctured abscess and do not hurt the patient, and they are of three kinds: large, medium and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of them:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of cups with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are of three kinds: large, medium and small. The form of them is:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of yellow wax, round with some length, and thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And that these kinds of leeches are great, medium and small, because with them you stop the flow of blood with speed in necessity, and then when there is no medicine at first.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to stop bleeding in any part of the body, and only use them on fleshy parts, such as on the soles of the feet and on the thighs, and on the flesh of the arms, and on the breasts and belly and the groin, and similar to them in the fleshy parts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some of these instruments are made small like slices of figs according to this form; by which blood is stopped when it is done by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of the breasts of men which are resembling women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men are swollen because of the habit of sleeping as they begin to be hairy, and then the breasts become swollen and resembling women's breasts, and firm.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for whoever has this, cut them with a lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then scrape away all the swelling, and fill the wound with an embodied medicine, and then sew closed the two lips of the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines towards the sides and is softened by its weight just like a woman's, then cut it in two along its middle with two sections resembling a lunar figure, of which each contains the other because of their end, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form from line B to line G. And then scrape away the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and the fatness, and apply what we have said about the sewing and powders that are necessary in the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what must be cut for the uneasiness of the patient and for the flow of blood, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it corrodes what is rotten from the swelling, and then cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of puncturing abscesses that come below the nipple.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those abscesses which come below the nipple are of the kinds of scrofulas, hard, and they contain a bag which is sac-like.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of them contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be punctured with a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the contents of the abscess are evacuated, then fill it with old vinegar and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the wound is stopped and cured with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the kinds of knots and scrofulas is, then you cut it according to what we have said in the section on scrofulas with gnawing.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound is extended into something that causes burning pain, then apply to it a cautery according to what we have already said about it.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section of abscesses that occur through an artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken and the vein is collapsed on it, then many times abscess occurs: for when the abscess is through an artery, it is longly aggregated in the bowels of the body; and when it is forced into the abscess with the fingers, you feel a quack in it that there is stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And what is through a vein is round to the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section on this abscess is difficult, and especially in that which is below the armpits, and in the angle, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is large, therefore its cure by cautery is avoided, and that which is at the extremities, or to the head, must be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But for that which is from them by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut it in the vein with a long section; and then open the section with nails, and the artery, and free the tunics so that they are discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place over it an awl and make it penetrate to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to press on it in extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then puncture the place which is between two membranes with a needle so that blood flows out from it all that is in it, and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then apply cure to which is engendered pus within so that the membranes fall, and then cure it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess from the section of a vein, then you must hold with your hand what is possible to you of the abscess with the vein, and then insert the awl below the place which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and there will be in it double thread within so that you draw out that from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a fine thread according to what we have said to you in the thread of two parts with two extremities.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread is drawn out, then insert the awl so that it penetrates all the abscess because of the first puncture of the awl, and tighten your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its middle part so that when it is soaked what is in it, then you cut the superfluity of the vein, and leave what from it is tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then pause over it powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then apply the cure which is made with water and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 50 of the abscess which occurs by twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as abscess occurs in an artery and vein, and similarly abscess occurs in nerves when they occur in their compression or occur by superfluous beating, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made of them in the places of the helpers or of the talus, or in any place where the joints are crushed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a heavy pustule, and it is similar in color to the rest of the body, and there are six of them on his arms, and when they are pressed with force, the patient appears to be in a stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not a pustule located in the chest area, but rather below the neck, and he is sick all over, and he does not want to go forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, for those who have pain in their joints, it is not advisable to use a hot iron, because it would quickly cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But for those who have pain in the head or forehead, apply a spatulum on the neck.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if there are few pustules, then cut them out with forceps at their roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then open it with a knife, and remove the pus; and close the wound with stitches, and heal it so that it may recover.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 11:
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the incision of a pustule which happens to the jaw and happens in the stomach.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Some people have many warts on their stomachs and other parts of their bodies, which are called warts because they resemble fungi, the roots of which are fine but the tops are thick; sometimes their lips are also affected, and they can be either small or become very large.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one such person whose two warts in his stomach were very similar to fungi; their roots were fine and they were not different in color.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And sometimes the lips of these people turn inside out and split open, and moisture runs from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, when I cut into one of these, I found that it was about an inch and a half deep. The other was about an inch deep.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And when you cut into them, consider whether the patient is hot or cold, and if the color of the tissue is white, then cut it with a wide knife, and let it be cauterized in the fire, for many times the pus is expelled through the incision; and if blood comes out, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient is fearful and anxious, do not cut it with a hot iron; but rather take some fresh pitch, and spread it on that area, in the manner we have described; and let it rest for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then tighten the pitch around the thread; therefore, do not stop tightening the large thread around it until it is completely cut off and falls away by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the wart has a thick root, then cutting it will cause fear and terror, especially when it is in the stomach.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But you may cut only half of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then heal the wound so that the wound recovers.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware of cutting a wart which is dark in color, has little sensation, and seems to be very firm, for that one is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I have seen many such warts, just like cranes.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 12:
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of an umbilical hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Umbdominal hernias are caused by many things; or by fissures in the diaphragm above the stomach, and the tissue or intestine of which they are made goes into other openings; or by blood coming from a vein or artery in front, or by restricted expansion in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is from a fissure in the diaphragm and from an injury to the tissue, then the pustule will be of similar color to the rest of the body; it will have less pain, and it will appear at various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is from a hernia of the intestine, then its location will be as we have described before, with greater and more violent diversity; and when you press on it with your fingers, it hides away, and soon returns; and it becomes very large because of internal heat and violent effort.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is from moisture, then there will be pain, and it will not hide when you press on it with your fingers, nor be constricted or cut off.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is from blood, then the pustule will appear with dark-inclining marks.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is from fat, then it will be a heavy, large and hard pustule, and it will be according to a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is from expansion, then touching it will cause pain.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you should consider whether the umbilical hernia is from blood of an artery or vein, or from expansion; then you must not use the cure for it as we have instructed in the chapter where we spoke about hernias from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the umbilical hernia is from the intestine or tissue, then you must tell the patient to hold his breath and be standing upright; then touch around the whole circumference of the umbilicus, and then command him to push his stomach out towards your hands over his chest, and then cut the hernia open at its highest point with a wide knife all the way around where you have touched it with the tip; then extend the opening to the sides above it with a large needle; and then tie it all the way around with strong pitch or strong thread in a decent manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then open the hernia wide over the wound and put your finger into that hole and feel for the intestine; and if you have it caught or trapped by the ligature, then cut off the hernial sac and push out the intestine to the sides inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have caught the tissue, then take it with a needle; and cut away its excesses.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is against an artery or vein, then surround it a lot and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in strong pitch and insert two needles around the hernia in the shape of crosses, making them penetrate; then tighten the hernia into four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to, take away the needles and leave that place where the extended flesh is shrinking in and falling by itself; or cut it when it has become fine and is shrinking in, and then heal it with what covers it inside so that it may recover.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the umbilical hernia is from fat in it or moisture, then you must hollow out the pustule as we have said and draw away the blood or moisture which you find in it; then heal it with what covers it inside so that it may be consolidated.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 13:
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of a hernia.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about the kind of hernia and how it is treated with remedies, and that it is difficult to treat a hernia with an iron without causing an ulcer; we have also spoken about a hernia generated from the mother and the caution in treating it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia can be in a place where its removal is possible, like a hernia which is in the breasts or in the thighs and which resembles the limbs attached to drawing out all of it, especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, you must not come near it, for I have not seen any such hernia recover from that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it has been located as we have said, that you must precede and cut away the patient and purge them from black bile, then bind that hernia, if there is a manifest herniation discovered.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient with a preparation in which he will be operated on, and cut off all the nails of his toes; and then with a good sharp knife cut deeply into the tissue all around so that no cause remains from the roots.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow freely without stopping it; and then squeeze out all of it from the wound by pressing with your hand or an instrument that you can manage, according to which instrument is available to you.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you are facing difficulties with the blood flowing from a vein or an artery, then cauterize that area so that the flow of blood is stopped; and then treat it with another treatment so that it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter .liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the treatment for dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already described, in the division, of the species of dropsy and the signs of each species; of the treatment for it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the one which is cured with iron is only the species of "althitas", and it is not approach iron for the species of tympany or of iposarca because they are deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this species of dropsy timpanistre with medicines and it does not respond to your treatment, then consider; because if the patient is already weakened, or has another malady like another dropsy, as if it is in the chest or abdomen and similar to those, then beware that you do not treat it with iron, because there is danger in this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient has robust vigour and does not have another malady except dropsy, and he is neither an infant nor elderly, then the manner of operating on him is that you raise the patient between your hands and press his abdomen with your hand, forcing the water out from under the navel; and then take a hollow thorn according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two pointed parts long, of acute extremity like a thorn; but it should have in it some shortness little by little, so that during the operation you do not pass into the intestine and that you take it out.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from part of the intestines; because in that case you should lengthen yourself from the navel by the quantity of three fingers at the lower ends, on the right side of him over the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of dropsy is from a malady of the liver, then your section should be on the left of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if it is from a tumour, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And you must not make your section over the side that the patient wants to lie on so that the superfluities do not flow to that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce all around with the instrument and insert into that section, and raise your hand with the thorn between the skin and the bowels, and squeeze it out; and if a nail or a little bit.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the bowels so that the thorn reaches the desired place which is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take it out and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is like a slender silver tube; made of silver or of brass or of lion’s tooth, to which at the lower end there are two small holes, and on the sides of it three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and its end is notched according to the manner of a pen, like this:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it there is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately rises over the instrument, therefore it empties from the water in the momentary quantity; because if you empty more than that which does not happen in the moment, he will soon die by resolution of his animal spirit, or it happens to him five times that is near death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But it empties according to the quantity of his vigour and according to how you understand the dispositions of the patient from the vigour of his pulse and from its goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then take out the instrument, and it will retain the water which is the cause because as soon as it is retained by the skin which retains the thorn that is over the bowels, of which we have instructed you to pierce according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then return the instrument on the next day if he can tolerate it, and take out a little bit of water, and do this for several days with fear, and beware of error so that the water does not flow out except a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are afraid for the patient, and let out a great quantity of water, then treat him with sweat bath in hot sand, and expose to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach and the tumour and the liver; and in addition to the extraction of the water according to what I have recounted before.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter .lv.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the treatment for children whose places of urine are not pierced.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, some of the children are born from the womb of their mother and the top of the mixture is not pierced (or it is struck tight or it is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, there must be treatment with piercing of him immediately after he is born with a very fine thorn according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then put in the hole a small subtle nail of lead and tie it, and let him for three days or for .iiii.tre.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, he will be stopped up and urinate; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not put in the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not open this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But he of whom the hole is tight must be treated with a nail of lead as we have said for several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the hole is not in its place are swollen, the cause of which is that from those, he who is born and the hole is struck is at the end of the tip of the penis because it cannot urinate into the parts inside, so it raises the penis with his hand to the parts above; and there is no generation for him because the semen cannot come to the mother according to straightness, and it is a very harmful malady.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of operating on him is that the patient be bent over his chest, and then extend the tip of the penis with your left hand with violent extraction, and insert the tip of the head of the penis of the place of the foreskin with a sharp thorn, like this: or that you pierce any part, so that the middle of him comes like the head of the penis and that the hole falls into the middle place as it should.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware of causing blood flow in your operation because sometimes it happens; and stop him with it that you stop the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter .lvi.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the white which happens in the foreskin on the head of the penis and of whiteness and blackness and adhesion of the foreskin of the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Sometimes it happens to this white in the penis and is eminence of flesh which is harmful.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is harmful and another is not harmful.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-maligna, you should suspend it with a thread and cut it so that it opens entirely; and then put on it cotton soaked in egyptian unguent; and then he, treat it with unguent every day until he is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the ulcer is malignant and discolored, then you should administer cauterization near its beginning and reason.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the ulcer is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should treat the ulcer that is inside first until it is healed; then you can cure the outside part. For when you cure both parts at the same time, there is a risk that they will not heal.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if you have seen infections in the glans and foreskin that are black and rotten, then you must cut away everything that is discolored and starting to rot or that is already rotten; then apply a poultice over the area made from ground grape seeds and bran sifted through a sieve.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Then treat it with another ointment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is bleeding, then administer lunar cauterization in the following way:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	For lunar cautery is beneficial in two ways, for stopping bleeding and for corrupt blood.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the glans is eaten away and destroyed completely, then you should insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the glans (and this adhesion only happens in those whose foreskin is not circumcised; and it happens because of an ulcer or blister) you should cut with a blunt knife until the ligament is dissolved and the glans is separated from every part.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate them gently, then you should cut with a knife some part of the glans and foreskin, for often the foreskin, when it is thin, easily pierces through its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the foreskin from the glans with a thread of silk which has been dampened in water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And let it be healed with quicksilver until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter .57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the purification of children and of the cure for those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure for continence like other ulcers; but rather since it comes from our action and will, and its use is especially in children, it is necessary that we assign to it a better operation and easier path so they may more quickly return to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancients did not prescribe circumcision for any of their free people, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only that we have acquired through experience, which cause is that I have seen most of the physicians and surgeons use circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; they use cauterization with vinegar and incision with the fingernail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have prohibited all these ways and not found better purification with forceps or cauterization with vinegar than with scissors, for often the foreskin escapes above, for the foreskin has two tunics, and the one on top is removed while the one underneath remains; so there is great danger of another incision and pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And purification which is done by apothecaries, and is digital, that the surgeons use, does not secure the incision at the end of the male member, for it often goes into its hollow.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the fingernail, iron and corruption often result from your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and often it happens in such a way that it does not need purification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But from the purification that is done with forceps and cauterization with vinegar, I discovered the goodness, for the forceps are of proportional incision, so that the keenness that is above is like the keenness that is below; and therefore when you press your hand in proportion, and you insert it according to a comparison at one time; and compression of the vinegar is made in the shape containing the foreskin of the whole, with which there is no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way of the first operation is that you make the child stand mostly if he is one of those who understand a little, and do not do it unless you tie the vinegar in his penis only, and let him be until another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him happy in all those ways that are possible for you to receive his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make him stand between your hands, established and prepared, and do not be afraid; and hide the forceps in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see those or any of the other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into his penis and breathe on the foreskin, and draw it out so that the glans of the penis comes out, and then purify him of what is accumulated in it from dirtiness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the marked place with vinegar folded in two, and then apply the second ligament pushed up a little from below with good retention, and insert between two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the foreskin up a little and stretch out the glans of the penis; and let the blood flow a little at a time, for that is better; and pause powder over it and on the powder place cloth in which is spread mulberry-tree gum in rose oil cooked recently warm; and let him be over that until another day; and cure him with ointment until he is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for purification, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the outside tips not be cut and the inside ones be cut so that the branch of the claw is not cut, and let the length of both keennesses be like the length of two handles equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the mistake in purification is that often all the inner foreskin escapes or some part of it from the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you must stretch it from your finger in front of the place of the ulcer and insert it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then cut off that with a needle and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if they have passed three days and the ulcer that is inflated under the penis has not gone down, then you insert that until the ulcer is dried up with cauterization, and cut that off with ease, and insert it according to how you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the glans of the penis, for it will not hurt him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then cure him with that which the ulcer is consolidated from the powders of which we have spoken in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is cut off from the foreskin proportionately, and it obeys the parts above, that does not hurt him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But cure him with that which we have said until he is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter .58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by congestion caused by stone or by blood congestion, or by phlegm or by pus, and similar to those of which we have spoken about the ways of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and he feels retention of it because there is stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then let the patient be bent over his knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then you place the patient's feet on his back and lift up his stomach from below his back, and the servant pulls his leg as much as he can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	So then, when the neck of the bladder is constricted and the stone is expelled into the part behind, so that the urine is voided.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if that which we have said is not dissolved by water and the cause continues in the patient, then it is necessary to administer an extraction of him by instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: Let it be of silver and let the cone be thin, also with a reed of bird feather with a thin rod as long as a palm and a half, to which there is a thin tube at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of the emission of urine through it is that you take the folded needle and wet in the end of it wool or cotton with good lye; and insert the ends of the needle into the part below the syringe, and cut away with the nail scissors if there is any surplus of the wool, but insert it into the tube with force and with egg white and honey.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And let the patient lie on his back, and pierce his bladder with a piercing needle, and with oil of turpentine, and olive oil and eggs.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the syringe easily so that it reaches the root of the piercing; and then bend the piercing needle above to the part of the embelic; and then pull the syringe into it; and then pull it in so that it reaches the bladder, and that the patient feels the voided cause, and not according to this order, but the meat in which he went to tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the needle with the wool little by little, because urine seeks wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then expel that and cause urine carefully, and use the syringe; do not cease to do this and use the syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient receives some relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .lix.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with camphor and with similar instruments which are appropriate for it.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is ulceration or pustule in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or stasis of pus, and you want to distil water and medicines into it, then let it be done with an instrument which is called camphor, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But if in the end of it is hollow, then it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three holes: two from the one part, thus for urine;
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning there is a hollow place into which one puts what is to be infused; and it is according to quantity that one stops up that opening, without addition, so that when any cause is withdrawn from the humidities, it is withdrawn, and when it is expelled far out, with that one stops it up, and when it is expelled far, according to how camphor is made with naphtha in sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you want to inject moisture into the bladder, insert the end of clapcedra in the moisture and pull by that which is pushed out from above; for the moisture is drawn up into the hollow of clapcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of clapcedra into the piercing as we commanded in the syringe; and then pull the moisture with that which you pull it, because that moisture goes at once to the bladder, and the patient feels that.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Subtle form of clyster by which the bladder is clystpered, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or brass, the end of which is more pointed and resembling a small feather, and below a tube passes within it.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder of a person, and put into it the moisture which you want to clysterize in the bladder; and then bind that between two with strong ligature with folded needle, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the clyster into the piercing.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then squeeze your hand over the bladder with the moisture with pressure descending so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if the bladder is not at hand, then take a bunch of parsley and make a ring from it; and pierce that all around its roundness; and then insert a strong needle into those holes, as one revolves; and then add the ring so that it is added also like an egg, because you put in that what you want of moisture, oil and water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then hold that in the instrument and do by it as you did by the bladder, and express with your hand so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter .lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of extraction of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the species of stone and cure of it with medicines, and the difference between stone engendered in the kidneys and stone engendered in the bladder, and its signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about stone for which cauterization is done with hand, and incision;
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone engendered properly in the bladder is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And we will now tell about that with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore we say that stone engendered in the bladder mostly comes to infants; and of its signs is that urine which emerges from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in it sand; and the patient rubs his penis, and moves it many times, and then it is erected; and with this there are openings in it.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the cure of infants of that is that they attain 12 years; and it is difficult to cure in the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in the young it is easier for that which is between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that whose stone is larger and the cure is more distant; and if it is lesser, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore when we come to the cure of that, first let us cleanse the patient with a clyster which draws out all the fissure which is in his intestines; for that fissure some times hinders the emission of the stone from inquiry of it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then let the patient be pressed on his feet and groan in pain until the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or that it emerges from some place or another.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then let him do that between his thighs, while the patient's thighs are pushed down below, so that all of the bladder is made to incline downward.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then draw that out and all of that out from it.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore if you feel the stone in the space, then you stop at once with incision on him.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if it does not come down completely to your touch, then let you anoint with oil the tip of the middle finger, if the patient is an infant, or the tip of the index finger if he is a youth completed, and insert that into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And from the stone which you are standing next to, take out your dagger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gently insert it into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press gently with your dagger against that area and push out any air trapped inside through the opening that you have cut.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and instruct another assistant to use their right hand to stretch out the intestines upwards, and with their other hand to hold back the rectum which is under the intestines, at the location where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert a sponge, cut into a wedge shape like this:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut through the rectum and intestines, not in the rectal area but on the left side of the buttock; and make a crosswise incision so that the external opening is wide and the internal one is narrow according to how much space there is for the stone to come out without causing any problems, and no more, because if you push the dagger too hard against the stone it will slip into the rectum.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And be aware that some stones have edges and ridges, making them difficult to remove.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	Some are like a grape in shape, round, and easy to remove.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it has edges, cut along the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not loose, then you should either press down on it or grip it tightly with an instrument with a curved end and prevent the stone from slipping away; or insert under it a thin flexible instrument.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot grip it, then make the opening a little wider; and if you see any bleeding, apply powdered vitriol to the cut.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there are more than one stone, then at the start you should push your hand towards the mouth of the bladder, and gently insert it; and push in a little bit more if necessary; and do the same if there are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then you should not cut it too much, because one of two things will happen to the patient: either they will die or they will experience continuous dripping of urine, because the wound has not healed properly.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But you should try to push it out by pulling on it with forceps, or by pulling it in pieces with the forceps.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have finished your operation, then fill the wound with cotton wool soaked in aloe and dragon's blood, and stitch it up.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, over the wound to prevent any boil from developing.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then tie up the patient around their waist, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you untie it, wash the wound with water and oil, and treat the wound with ointment of diaphoretic and diuretic herbs until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if a boil occurs on the wound, hot and corrosive, and it seems like the blood is frozen in the bladder, and as a result urine cannot pass through (and this is known as the egress of blood with urine), then insert your dagger into the wound and draw out that blood, because if it stays it will cause putrefaction of the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply ointment of all kinds to it until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And remember at all times during the healing process that you should press both thighs and apply the medicines which are placed on the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and it is in the middle of the penis, and urination is prohibited, then treat it with what you yourself have discovered to be the cause of the incision; for troops wounded by this treatment are accused of having had an incision, and I have already tried it, and it is that you take a punch tool made of iron felt, of which this is the shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular tip, pointed, attached to a staff.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take the penis in your left hand and pull it down so that the stone does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the penis, pushing easily until the punch reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the punch with your hand towards the stone little by little, and when you have made the incision on that side, pierce it from the other side as well; for urine will immediately be absorbed.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand over the part of the stone that is outside the penis; for it is relaxed and is prevented from urination by the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not available to you for some reason which prohibits it, then take a hold of the stone from below with one hand, and with the other hand above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then squeeze the penis between two grips.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then pull it out.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then untie the ligature and clean the congealed blood which is made in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to tie the stone with a ligature from below, but only so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other ligature above, because when you untie the ligature, the stone will come out immediately, and then the wound will heal.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that reason when you tie the ligature above, you should lift the intestines upwards or allow them to fall back into place, and the wound will heal as we have said before.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A stone in a woman is seldom found.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if you see any such stone in a woman, then it is difficult to treat it, and it is prohibited for many reasons.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that women are very sensitive.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you cannot find a woman who will tell her husband when she is chaste, or is of the women who have married virgins.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you cannot find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision on a stone in women is different from the location of the stone, because it causes fear when cutting.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity forces you to do so, then take a woman who knows this art, and she will be hard to find.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you lack that one, then look for a midwife who is skilled in this art, or a woman who has experience as a midwife of women, or a woman who is an expert in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then have her present, and instruct her to do everything that you command her to do when she feels the incision on the stone; the cause of this is that if the woman is a virgin, then put your finger in her rear end and grab the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find it, cut it below your finger, and then instruct her to push down on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina and grip the stone; then place her left hand over the bladder, and hold it firmly in place.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find it, then gently push her vagina towards the openings below, causing the stone to rise up into the opening of the bladder; and place your left hand over the wound, holding it firmly in place.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then cut into that position on the halfway point of the knee down to the root of the thigh, from whatever side it is that he is lying on, and place the stone in that section, making sure that his leg is not bent under him by the stone.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then cut into that section, and if he feels the stone, then cut according to how much he knows the stone will come out of that section.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that there are many types of stones: some of those are small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and they have bumps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you know what kind to cut for according to where you want to cut.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flow, apply ground vitriol to that spot and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation until the stone is out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And you should prepare some of the instruments that are used in the extraction of stones in men, so that you are helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see blood flow and know that the bleeding is from the artery that was cut, then put powder on that spot and tightly constrict it with a bandage, and do not touch it again; leave the stone and do not extract it, for soon the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of the bleeding has subsided after a few days and the wound is closed up, then you return to your operation until the stone is out.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision on a hernia lump.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia lump is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane that is below the chord of the muscles containing the bowels, and it is named membrane.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the subcutaneous tissue that nature has prepared for it in the region of the bowels, so that there is another bowel; and it is the chord of the muscle between the white membrane we mentioned earlier, and it is not anything else but a hernia.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that happens to the muscles, so that material is poured into them; and sometimes it happens due to a blow made on the muscles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has many colors; the color of it is either inclining towards yellow or blood-red, or red, or it is black and foul, or it is watery white, and that is what is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows that this accumulation of water is in the white membrane we mentioned earlier are these: for if it is in the white membrane, then the lump will be round and declining a little towards length like the shape of a bowel, and it will appear on the muscle, because the moisture contains it from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the subcutaneous tissue, then the lump will be round with the end of the bowel and because of this one believes it to be another bowel.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the chord of the muscles and the white membrane, then cut under the center.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then test it on the lump with a needle tip from which the end is removed; and according to what comes out on the end of the needle, judge what is inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to curing it with iron, then we command that the patient should be phlebotomized if it is possible for you, and have his body bled.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then let him be re-bandaged over the hernia on any cause a little higher up, and put some bandages underneath it.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to follow on his right, who will extend his hand to one side of two inches above the chord of the muscles and at the beginning of the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad blade and cut through the chord of the muscles from the middle location towards the length, so that it is near to the point.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the incision should be made according to a straight line equally distant from the edge that is supposed to be of the membrane of the muscles, so that it comes to the white membrane encompassing it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And cut it, and observe, and be careful so that you do not cut it; and your incision by which you cut it by section should be hanging by the greater bowel and subtly scrutinize by the incision according to how much is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the membrane full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the membrane above the parts below it; do not touch the chord of the muscles encompassing it, and cut the membrane in whatever way that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut it in its entirety or in parts, and especially its sides more subtly, because if you do not scrutinize the incision of it carefully, there is no security that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the bowel processes from that hole of its chord in the hour of your operation, then when you will have completed the incision of the membrane, return inside it, and then join the two lips of the chord of the muscles with sutures, and then cure it as well as the other wounds, so that it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the bowel rotten due to another illness, then see that you ligate the vessels which are over the suspensor, and extract the bowel, and then cure it as we said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the moisture is accumulated in two parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part according to how you did it in the other equally; and if it is your opinion that there is one operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you will wipe away the blood, and put in the incisions wool soaked in oil or rose oil; and place over that another wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and expand it over the two muscles and the navel; and place over it doubled bandages and powder, and smear that with ointment which is according to this shape:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and then two bandages are tied and made into a pad of wool according to this appearance; and the extremities are bound with which they are pressed by the groin or with wet wool, and they are tied with constriction in the waistband of the trousers, and one extremity is pressed under the buttocks and the other is pressed at the beginning of the navel, and two extremities over two thighs and two extremities over two armpits, and all constriction is tightened in the waistband of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially by cautery instead of incision with iron; and it is that you take thin cautery and cut through the chord of the muscles, and it is ignited according to how we recommended earlier so that the white membrane encompassing the moisture is uncovered, and then you take cautery according to this shape:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is assembled like the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce through that membrane, and it is ignited so that all the moisture is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the membrane with hooks, and cut it with cautery, and scorch with thin cautery ignited; and cut it according to how it is possible for you so that you eradicate everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the bowel.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you should know that this operation is the safest and most remote from blood flow, and better than an operation with a section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if there is an abscess or blood flow at the time of sectioning or cauterizing, then you must treat any complication that arises from it with a cure that suits him according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then you should perform a puncture according to what I have recommended; and it is when this is certified that you must, based on what we have said about the significants, conclude that the hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you should have the patient lie on his back on a high bed, puncture the abscess in its lowest part with a spatulum, and make the puncture according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And the opening should be wide enough for all the water to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place a pad over the wound and press it tightly to let the remaining water flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat that area until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is a complication in the discharge of water during that time when you puncture it: and this is not done unless the white membrane at the opening of the wound causes a blockage and prevents the exit of water, then you should insert into the wound a needle or instrument with which the water is extracted from the hydrocele; or apply to the compression of the hernia a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you should know that the water will return and persist for about six months or so; and when it persists, then it should be punctured in the same way as before, for the patient will thus spend his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of sectioning on a fleshy hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in sectioning on this hernia, there is great danger of loss of life in the most favorable circumstances; therefore, I have seen its dismissal and saving through it better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I will remember the operation on that one and the properties of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in the parts of which the body is composed and are caused by various causes: either by acute acute excess, which is distributed to the body, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And its color is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain in it, and it is a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And when it is very cold, its color is dusky, and it has no feeling.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by a knot in the arteries, and by inflammation of those, thus after perception of it has occurred, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is caused by inflammation of the arteries is known from the dispersion of the abscess when it is pressed with the fingers; and it does not hurt when touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by any cause because of compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that in this species there will be sectioning on the other flesh; and you must insert the thread of the intestines, and stretch the membrane above them, and cut off the white capsule, and ligate them, and insert the suspensory more than you cut it from all parts of the membrane.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the membrane has already been consolidated with those flesh, then you must extract the membrane and insert it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion for any reason of the capsule, or between that which is between the vessels, then you must cut all that adhesion and insert it by a circular incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is flesh growth in the area of adhesion which is behind it, then you must insert all that is of it, and extract the membrane as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and treat it with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the cure of a hernia that is from blood vessels.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vein is an abscess wrapped in some wrapper similar to growth with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult by exercise and walking on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness, there is fear from that which is preceded by recall.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, let us give the operation according to what they do first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should have the patient lie on his back on a high bed; and stretch the suspensory of the testicles below; and hold the thread of the intestines with your fingers at the veins which are proved to be in the scrotum; and let him hold his hands tightly, and extend those with violent extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then insert with a sharp spatulum through a transverse incision in the right side of the vessels until they are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then cut off all that we have said in extraction of the artery which is in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then stab it with a needle in which there is a double thread, and hold that in the first of the places where veins occur, and hold another one which is stabbed subsequently in the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert them in the middle place by a straight incision according to the length of the body, and extract that which is accumulated of foul and putrid humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound with the cure of other wounds in which you want to generate pus for the vessels do not hurt.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if there is vein in all the vessels, then let the testicles be extracted or that the testicles because of this are cut off from the vessels, so that it is deprived of all nutrition from the incision of the vessels, and that they are withered, or that it is cut off for itself.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is by incision that ends in the capsule extended over the abdomen from the parts of the angles of the navel of the abdomen, because weakening the intestines of that rupture to any of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is of the capsule or of the incision itself, and there are these two species for various causes: impact, or by wounds, or by crying, or by elevation for some heavy cause, or by similarity.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and there is an abscess under the membrane as the capsule compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is that when it is by incision of the capsule, because at the beginning makes a violent pain suddenly; and there is an abscess apparently below, and this is by effusion of the intestine, and the body of it outside the openings of the capsule.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it is cast out with the intestine by the membrane, and this hernia is called intestinal stranguine.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by swelling, and sometimes there is a crack in the intestine, and here it is retained, and it causes great pain of the patient, and sometimes it causes worse pain when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the cure of the species of this illness with iron there is danger, for it must be avoided in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The manner of the operation for this is to command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand to the parts within its cavity if he obeys your instructions, and then he should be bent forward at the waist between your hands, and you should raise up his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then tie the cord which binds the testicles to the parts above, and cut through the whole length of the cords of the testicles; and place hooks on both lips of the incision according to your instructions for opening the incision with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if it is possible, make the incision according to how much you can manage to have the hernia pushed out through it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then cut away all of the tissues which are beneath the cords of the testicles, as long as you can see the hard white membrane covering each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you should insert your finger into the space that is underneath the testicle, between the white membrane and the membrane of the hernia, and cut away any adhesions you find there at the back of the hernia.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then pull the cords of the testicles towards you from outside, and while doing so stretch out the white membrane on top with your left hand, and lift up the hernia by the membrane to the edge of the incision; and command an assistant to hold the hernia in place as you dissolve any adhesions behind it using a suitable solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And check with your fingers that there is no cause for the intestine being wrapped up in the hard white membrane.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for it in him, then you should send him back to bed.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with a large thread of six threads, and insert it through the back of the membrane under the cords of the testicles at the incision; and pierce through both ends which protrude from the gallbladder so that there are four threads, and tie some of them together in a shape resembling a cross; and use the thread to sew the membrane of which we have spoken underneath the cords of the testicles with strong stitches in two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then wrap the ends of the threads and tie those together with strong stitches so that none of the blood vessels which nourish them can cause any pus to form there, lest an abscess develop.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And insert another row of stitches below the first row, at a distance from it of no more than three fingers; and by these two rows of stitches there should be left in the membrane underneath the cords of the testicles only as much space as is taken up by your finger, and cut off all the rest according to its roundness, and keep the hernia inside.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And pierce through the part below the cords of the testicles by an incision through which blood and pus can flow out as we have recommended before.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And apply a pad soaked in oil and place it over the wound; and apply the stitches we have recommended (and sometimes the white membrane is cauterized as we have said at the incision where there is fear of a flow of blood, for in some cases this happens), and leave the stitches so that they can fall out on their own.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if it is delayed, then it should be soaked in water and placed over the wound so that it falls out as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with the other method of healing wounds when it has healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of a hydrocele.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia I have not seen anyone who has been cured by the application of iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first thing is that it is done as we have recommended in the hernia which occurs with wine; that is, you should ligate the vessels at the incision there with ease, and then dry up the pus in the region around it as it drains out.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And heal the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the rupture which occurs in the groin.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the groin as we have said, and the region protrudes.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And there should be no cause for the intestines to enter the groin; and if they do, that is rare; and return them inside at every hour.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged, there is an opening in the membrane through which the intestine descends into the membrane; and this happens because of the extension of the membrane at the groin as we have said, which causes it to be stretched out and become soft and swollen, and an abscess forms and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And its cure is by cauterization as we have recommended before the description of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured by iron according to this method: and the patient lies on his stomach between your hands, and then you dry up the rupture of the abscesses which protrude with an incision according to its length within the space of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten up the white membrane which is underneath the cords so that it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take a bandage and place it over the protruding part of the membrane, and press it against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew together the two prominent parts at the end of the bandage around the membrane, and adjust them with stitches on both sides.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then tie off the end of the bandage, and do not cut into the membrane at all, nor extend the hernia, nor any other cause as we have said in the cure for intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then heal that with the cure of wounds, and when you have inserted the threads, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the membrane is contracted and the protrusion of the rupture is reduced.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, because pus is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the cords of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Sometimes the cords of the testicles in some men are softened because the flesh which is between them is softened, and they lack the necessary strength.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary in the cure of him who lies on his stomach according to his condition, and that all the softened cords which are on top of the natural cords be tightened up, and then sew together both lips.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut off in the beginning the surplus of the softened cords with three or four incisions and with a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the stitches; and then heal by the cure of the other wounds until it is healed and the threads have fallen out.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration in our law is forbidden, but it was remembered to me that I should mention it in this book; and it is not necessary for me to remember it except in two ways, one of which is for the sake of the physician when he is questioned about it, so that he knows how to cure it if it happens; and the other way is that we sometimes need castration of other beasts for our young ones, as with horses, oxen, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by strangulation or by incision at an opening.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But when it is done by strangulation, the way to do the operation is that we make the beast lie on its side in water so that his genitals are softened and are long and that they hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take your hand away so that they are resolved and do not appear beneath the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in a castration done by incision and cutting, you must hold the animal and squeeze the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then lift up the scrotum, and cut into each side with an incision so that two processes can be inserted.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then cut those so that you have excised them.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not let any cause be upon the body except for the subtle head which is over the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is done by compression because compression strongly leaves no cause in the testicles that the animal desires coitus.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter .lxx.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two types: the first is when there appears a growth in the cord of the testicles, in that which is between two testicles, the shape of a clitoris in which there are female-like genitals.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes urine comes from that which is in the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women there is one kind: and it is that the vulva of the woman on the clitoris is like two testicles of a man, a little bit smaller at the entrance as well as the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three kinds: two from men and one kind from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is so that you cut into those tight meats until the pressure of that escapes, and then cure those with the cure of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And for the second kind of men from which urine comes that is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation on him.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of léntine and prominent meat from causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lentige is strongly tightened over natural causes in that it is and becomes tight, and sometimes it is magnified in some women so much that it becomes like men's and goes into coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore you must have the superfluity of léntine with your hand or a needle, and cut into it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not cut all the way through, especially in the part of the vein, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then cure that with the cure for wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But prominent meat is meat that grows in the womb of the mother and fills it up; it usually comes out at the openings according to the appearance of a tail (and for this reason some first called it "tailed malady"); therefore we cut into it as we cut into léntine, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter .lxxii.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure for elephantiasis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Elephantiasis is when the vulva of a woman is not perforated or has a small hole.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental it is due to a malady which has preceded it, and it is caused by tight meat or subtle swelling or thickness.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the womb of the mother or in her ribs or in the upper part of her body or in the lower part, and it prohibits coitus and conception and childbirth, and it usually prohibits menstruation as well.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the diagnosis of it is made by examination of the midwife, if the swelling is apparent, then it is near the vagina; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that out with your fingers or with a rod.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the swelling is due to subtle swelling and it is near both labia, then you cut into it and burst it open.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is so that you pause over both labia and also pause your fingers indicating the space in between with both hands.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And let the woman be on her back, her legs extended, and then extend both labia with force so that the subtle swelling is broken open and the perforation is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it over the wound, and let it be for a day so that the wound is not closed.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the swelling is large and thick, then you cut into it with a spatule or with a blade of myrrh.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the perforation is due to meat, then suspend that with a needle and cut into it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And you have the medicines that make the flow of blood stop without biting, like ahacatia and dragon's blood and onions, bound with egg white from an egg.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead bandage so that the wound is not loosely closed.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for some days and administer cold water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then it will be cured by the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents happen in the mother's womb with other meats, and then you cut into them according to this way.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to an abscess in the head, then do not do anything to that abscess in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter .lxxiii.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure for hemorrhoids and of a tail and of red botul which happen in the vulva of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are the appearance of orifices of many veins from which flows a continuous flow of blood; and when they are old hemorrhoids and they are like thumbs.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of those and their signs, and tell them also which ones receive cure and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and thumbs when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear in the feeling, then in those there should be no cure with a needle.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the orifices of the mother over which there is feeling, then those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And let the woman be in warm water and then extend it with the fingers or with rough cloth, or cut into it with sharp instruments.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over those the flow of blood from one of the sprinkling powders without biting, like ahacatia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then let her feet be parched for an hour, and then place it in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then do that which is cooked in a mixture of hemp and pomegranate and walnut shells and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And take flour of barley and cook that with honey and sour wine and make a plaster with that over its back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is scanty, then boil it; and if not, attach two ventouse, and to the nipples its incision.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take wool and dip it in juice of yarrow or in juice of marshmallow or in juice of wild celery with cooked wine, and make a plaster with that over the wound; and then cure the wound with unguents until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But hard tail which is of rough guard, let you cut into that which appears to you according to what I have said in its incision.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter .lxxiv.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of accidental piercing of the head in the womb.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Here is the translation:
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already described these diseases, their kinds and symptoms, as well as their treatments in the previous section.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	Now I will describe in this treatise the kind of swelling that appears in the body when it is caused by humors, and if you want to know how to perform the operation on it using iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Now consider whether the pain of the swelling at its onset is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and see if it subsides when you press on it, then do not incise it, but treat it with something that helps to mature the humor until the acuteness of the accident passes.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Now you should make the woman lie down on her side with her hips raised and her back bent, and her feet placed at the lower part of the belly, and let her thighs be spread out, and place her arms below her ears, and hold them there with bandages in a comfortable position.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should stand on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the womb is dilated, the form of which will depend on the causes that will be discussed next.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	Now when you want to administer this instrument, you should lubricate the tip of the womb of the woman, and what goes into the womb from the instrument should not be larger than the size of the womb, and guide the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the size of the womb, then you should place powder on the texture of the opening of the womb so that the insertion of any instrument into the opening of the womb is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Now you should pour the liquid that runs through the instrument from above, and let the minister hold the instrument and rotate the liquid while the opening of the womb is dilated.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the membrane appears and is touched by hand and is soft and moist, then you should dry its head with a sponge on the tip of the instrument.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the humor is discharged, then you should place in the wound a sponge soaked in rose oil or an oily solution with some astringent quality; and place the sponge in the opening of the womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And insert a tampon into the womb, and over it a piece of clean wool soaked in water in which there are crushed mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it should be treated for two days with an ointment that is appropriate for healing.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the womb and the wound are washed with water in which there is a mixture of honey and water, and then with water in which there is crushed lilies or long aristolchia, and then return to using the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep inside the womb, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, but instead treat it as we have described in the previous section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat living fetuses when they deviate from their natural shape.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows the shape of the natural fetus by its description, and when you see the woman expressing herself from the lower parts and desiring to breathe the air, and being lifted up above what is on top of her, and hastening the exit of the fetus, then you will know that this position is according to nature, and it is the exit of the fetus above its head, and the second one with it or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore when you see these signs, then the belly of the fetus should be compressed so that the fetus descends gently as if it were descending over its head, and the second one with it, and it is cleansed of those superfluities with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But the one that is contrary to this part is not natural or praiseworthy, for when the fetus exits on its feet and its body exits before its head and its hands, or by its foot, or or its head and hand, or by its belly, and strongly turned towards its neck, and resembling the non-praiseworthy shapes.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all these causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I will show you all the figures of those, and what cunning is in them so that it may be understood by that and be placed upon that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus exits above its head by natural effort, and it is violent upon the woman and a difficult birth for it, and sees its strength already weakened, then do that, or let the women hold it, and evaporate its moisture with fenugreek powder and with oiled warm water.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then the midwife should insert her finger with a small sponge and split it with that finger, or dry that with her fingernail while she inserts the sponge into the opening.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman so that the fetus exits.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not exit, then let the woman be cleansed with poultice of psyllium and poultice of fenugreek with honey.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command it, the midwife, to be compressed and make it vomit with mild medicine; and take its mouth and nose for an hour, because the fetus will exit head-first immediately.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both hands of the fetus have exited at the beginning, then you should reduce them with gentle compression little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on her side and lift its feet up, and then rock the woman from side to side while she is held so that she does not fall due to the rocking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not bent back and the fetus is dead, then insert those and pull the joint of the fetus or hold the body by its hand with a cloth and pull it equally, for it will exit.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of exit of the fetus on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus exits on its feet, then you should push those up, and then turn the fetus gently, and then hold one of its feet and extend those gently little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it has exited between the thighs, then you command it to be expressed, and make it vomit with medicine, for it will exit if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not exited with what we have recommended, then return the fetus little by little to its original position, for it will exit with easier exit.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take the poultice of alder and dissolved gum, and beat them both in the mortar with good percussion, and apply them to the moisture of the woman, to the lowest part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then do that cut in lukewarm water, while you obtain the hypocondiums.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the lower parts of it are loosened, then do to it the fumigation of myrrh and apply that to it below.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have done the fumigation for an hour, then do that to rest on a pillow, and then make it vomit and open its mouth, and lift up the lower part of its belly with gentle compression, for the fetus will exit immediately.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examine the foot over his bones and his muscles.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the foot is examined in this way, then you gradually flex his muscles; and let the woman be laid on her back, with her legs bent down and his feet stretched out, and let those be seated upon the bed, and complete the flexion of his muscles.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press gently upon his abdomen, little by little; and extract what is under the feet of him between the ears, unless it is prepared in the part lower down.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the foot is not dislocated, then take his feet and move them with violent movements, and press gently upon what is above the hypochondrium little by little, unless the foot can be moved upwards.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then flex his muscles and twist the foot little by little, and command the woman to press out while the foot is dislocated.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Examine the foot laterally, while one of his muscles is stretched.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Let it be reduced by flexing his hand; but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and let her go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot go, then let her lie on the bed and strike his thighs with a violent concussion, and administer poultices which are made of mucilaginous herbs.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if delivery has come on, then let her lie on her back, and study the reduction of the hand, and flex the foot according to its natural shape, and make the woman sneeze and command him to press in upon himself while it is dislocated.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Examine the foot over his shoulder with his muscles expanded and his fascia stretched out behind his mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Let the midwife take the hand of the foot and twist it little by little, and let that be facilitated.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and how much it is flexed, then pause over the navel of him that which we have recom-posed of oil and mucilaginous herbs.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command him to flex his hand little by little, and when you have done that, then let her lie on one side and command him to be bent over on the right side, and then command him to be pressed in; and make her sneeze with a cold.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the fetus prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it comes out of the mother according to this manner, consider and then insert your finger inside that it may be evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over his face and neck, then insert that of the plum, so that it may not be retained and delayed.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then press the fetus into the parts within, so that it may pause according to how you desire, and command the woman to press in on herself several times, and let him be dislocated with easy examination, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that many times twins are born, and some times three or four; but that is strange and difficult to achieve; but the cause of it is nature, and they do not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, if they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by the navel, distinguish those between the ligament in the navel of each of them; And some times they are dislocated so that it is an easy examination, and sometimes they exit through a non-viable examination as we have recomposed it.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver and reach what we have said about the non-natural shapes, then you cure them as we have recomposed it.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife does what she does with facility and subtlety, and delay, and let it be prepared according to its shape according to how it is to him, bringing about health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb in groups of one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten, and I have indeed witnessed a woman giving birth to six all formed, whose cause was made through the measurements of the glorious wise ones.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all that while, let it be in the science of the midwife, how strong she is to that small thing, and then pause at that, with which she comes to that.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you cure the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not taken out, and you must use cauterization with a hot iron, then consider if the woman is of sound health and has none of the accidents by which there is feared loss over her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then let the woman lie on her back over her shoulder, and his head be bent down and his thighs raised up.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister must hold her by two parts, or let her be tied to the bed so that his body may not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mouth of his mother with oiled waters and a poultice of alder and of fenugreek and of flaxseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife takes his hand with those oils and poultices, and then flexes his hand with facility in the mother, and then places his hand upon the place where he can catch the nails of the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And convenient places for that: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to descend over his head, and then you catch the nails in the joints of him, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the beard, or in the armpits, or near the ribs, or below the hip bones.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descending is over his feet, then in the instep, or in the middle of the shins.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And let him catch the nail with his right hand and pause at the bend of it in that place which is between the joints of his left hand, and flexes his hand with facility and catches the nail in any of those places which we have said, so that he may reach the cause bent.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and catch another nail, or the third one if necessary, so that it may be an attraction together, and not an extension according to its uprightness only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be flexed to all parts, so that the examination of him is drawn away as it is done in tooth extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And let it be flexed between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of him is retained, then let the midwife anoint his joints with oil and insert a poultice and twist it upon what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the fetus is dislocated, then let the nails be removed into that place where it was pushed out; and do that until all the fetus is dislocated.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is extracted before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by flexing him, then let the drape be wrapped around it; and then extract it so that all of it is dislocated, and insert it into the joint of the hand or in the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do that you do in the other hand and in both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is difficulty in flexing him in examination, or he has watery swelling on his head, then let the midwife insert between the joints aspen with thorns and pierce the head and extract the water, or scrape him with an instrument which is named "scraper", the shape of which will come from the shapes of other instruments in the chapter which comes next.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the fetus is of a large head by nature, then cover it with a cloth, or take it out slowly as we have said; and then pull the bones out with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head has come out and is stuck at the chest, then it must be cut open so that the moisture in the feet can flow out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated or obstructed, then you must push the head in immediately as soon as possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the bottom of the belly is ulcerated or swollen, then cover it so that you pierce where the moisture in it runs.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is above its feet, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it towards the mother's mouth is lighter.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is stuck at the belly and feet, then cover it so that you pull out that with a cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the belly and feet so that what is in them runs out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are out and the head is turned, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then she inserts her hand in the air passage, and encloses the head with that, and pulls it in towards the mother's mouth, and then she inserts a finger or two into it and pulls it with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is obstructed by an ulcer which happens to the lip, then it must not be touched there; rather it must be treated with the application of moist warm causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on its side, then it should be turned if possible; and what we have said for the living fetus must be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it must be cut in the thighs and pulled out.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And be sure to leave no cause inside the womb.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure for ulcers which happen to the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if blood flow occurs, then use coagulants in waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have also seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus, and then another burning fire within it, and then the other fire was the living fetus.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to her long ago that there was an ulcer in her navel; and it was swollen so that fire opened, and she began to give birth to arms.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time, and the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed on her some plasters of strong attraction, and a bone came out of her, and then after a few days another bone; and I was very astonished that there were bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And so I thought they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I healed the wound and pulled many bones out of her, the woman remaining in the same dispositions, and she lived for a long time after that, walking with a little limp.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not consider this anything strange, but rather that in it there is knowledge and aid to what the doctor effects with his hand for cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	On the forms of the instruments which are necessary to pull out the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of the wound by which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of the strain where the lips are pulled, to which strain there are two virtues at both ends of two bowstrings.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However this virtue must be made more subtle by compression, and it should be made either of ivory or of wood of box-tree.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the breadth of each staff is two fingers and the thickness of each is a finger and a half; and in the middle place of the two staffs there are two settings of that staff which have already been fastened, the length of each is a palm and a half, and the breadth of each is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two settings are inserted into the mother's mouth so that it is opened by them when you turn the two said virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Other similar form, but more subtle and longer:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Let it be made of ivory or of box-tree according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of it there are two settings like a comb, and the length of those settings is a palm, and the breadth of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with them, then let her lie on her back with her feet hanging down, opening that which is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument just as you do with tongs, according to how much of the opening of the mother's mouth you want the midwife to do what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of wound which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impulsion by which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of compression by which the large head is contained:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is like forceps whose teeth are at the end, just as teeth of a vice with which it is opened and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of compression few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a finger having a thorn:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a finger having two thorns:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps whose teeth close, by which the head of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula having two ends by which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two spatulas broad:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when they are more numerous and prepared by the artisans, then it is easier for the operation and better for men because of its quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should not lack those instruments, because the necessity of them is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	On extraction of the placenta:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the placenta is retained after childbirth, then you should command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her sneeze with force, and if it is not expelled by that, cut it out.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a bowl and pierce the covering with a hole and stop that wound with herbs opening the mouth of the mother, as well as the calcium and rue and anise and camomile and dried scacade and cassia line and frankincense.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All those herbs or some of them are to be soaked in water in the bowl, and stop that over fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then stop a tube of reed in the mother's mouth, and hold it there while the evaporation comes to the hollow of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the placenta is expelled with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if that cure is applied and it is not expelled, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in mallow juice, and then insert that into the navel and probe with it the placenta, and when she has found the placenta, pull it out little by little according to how the mother does not feel strong attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before anything else, ensure that the patient's right and left ribs are easily accessible.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Then adjust the amount of attraction, for it will obey and avoid adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with a snuff and medicine from the oil with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not cured by all the causes which we have recommended, then beware that you do not tire yourself out with too much sucking, but rather anoint what comes out of the mouth of the mother with oil and four-drug remedy; for it will make that part soft, dissolved and cured.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it becomes rotten, there is a bad odour which rises to the head and stomach, and that harms the patient; therefore smoking medicines and suitable remedies should be administered to counter this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the ancients have already tried smoking with nase-tort and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument by which the woman is smoked, for retention of menstruation and secundine:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of glass or brass.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the thin end is placed in her vagina and the wider end over the fire, and the smoking is placed on the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And let that remain until the smoking is consumed and then repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For cure of a non-perforated child's anus:
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Young children and their anuses, if they are not perforated, become very thin and narrow.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then the midwife should enlarge it with her finger; and if not, enlarge it with a sharp spatula, and beware of touching the foreskin.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then apply wool soaked in wine and oil over it; and cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is blocked, then insert a cannula for a few days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it often happens that the anus is blocked by a clot or an abscess; therefore the clot should be cut, and then cured with what we have said about the cure and the lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For cure of the fistulas that cause discharge below:
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that cause discharge near the anus, in the space of the lower part, produce a hard lump from which pus flows out.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or many.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that lump becomes old and corroded by the putrid white or subtle pus, sometimes from some of these fistulas some penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what comes out of them by the exit and by windiness; and some have the patient of the exit, and often it comes out of them very strongly.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas sometimes penetrate into the bladder and into the length of the urethra; and some penetrate the joint of the thigh and into the knob of the hip.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And when you know that the penetrating fistula does not penetrate into the anus, then put your finger in the anus and insert a thin probe of brass or iron into the fistula when it is soft.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if it is hard, then insert into it a thin probe of lead or horsetail hair so that you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you feel nothing in it and there is no sign of excretion or windiness or anything coming out, then know that it is not penetrating, and then proceed to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the length of the urethra, then the sign of it is excretion of urine from there and prevention of it so that medicine can consolidate the place.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and there is pain in the course, then its sign is that the probe goes through there if it does not hurt in the bone, and pain in the course of the part; and there is pus from time to time; and medicine does not help it nor is it healed with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all penetrating fistulas there is not a cure of all, and the cure of them is difficult work of foolish physicians upon which they are settled.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is expected according to what you have described, and that which was seen and tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies on his back, and raises his legs up over him, with his thighs bent towards his belly, and then insert a probe of lead or iron into the fistula until you know the place where the probe goes through.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if he feels that around his anus, then let him insert your finger into his anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already pushed in and discovered to penetrate, also what you feel between your finger and that it stretches or flesh, then know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on it, for there is no cure for that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some say that it heals in some people.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the medicine by which it is expected to heal quickly in him is that you apply cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as it has been mentioned, and insert that hot cautery into the fistula until it comes out around the anus; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those stretched flesh have become dried like a reed of bird feather.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that with poultices wrapped in wool until all those flesh have dried up, and then cure it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, well; but if not, then it will not be healed at any time by another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe goes in but does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a stretched flesh or swelling, and the fistula goes to where it pierces the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will dry it with the probe, and it will be loose in the fistula at the place where the end of the probe goes through, and by the probe it is loosened and drawn out.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those flesh which are like a reed of bird feather, and none of the causes remain.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows from between you and your probe when you push in those flesh, then the milk that is and of the pus the sharp instrument is cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for cautery with fire tightens good flesh: so it is drying of those stretched flesh, and abscission of the blood the drying of the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that with poultices wrapped in wool or in cress within which the place is hot, and then cure the wound with hard flesh-generating and consolidating ointments.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And thus medicines in which there is constriction and drying; when then it is restored, then it is healed and does not fear repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula already goes through into the foreskin of the anus and is elongated from the superficial part of the body, then insert your finger in the anus and probe it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you feel resistance and between you and it is veil of membrane or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then there is no operation on him but according to the way of confidence and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This can be treated in one of three ways: cauterize it as we have said; cut away the skin around the wound and try to find the cavity so that you can enter with your fingers and apply treatment directly; do not cut deeply enough to damage the membrane covering the spine, and let the patient pass wind freely according to his will, so that the swelling in the anus will go down of itself. Then treat it as we have said before, so that it will heal quickly; or enlarge the membrane and open the pustules with a sharp instrument as you cut away the skin around the wound, or with a probe, and clean out the fistulous sores which you find inside by probing; try your best to cure the whole wound by cutting, and if the orifice above is not healed over, and the fistula still drains from near the anus, then it will heal more quickly.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is cured in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is near the edge of the anus, on the surface of the body, and around the margin of the anus; then take a probe with a pointed end, like a needle for piercing ears, and prepare it in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that fistula, wrapped in a piece of wool or linen, and then insert the probe into the fistula until you find its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if you feel resistance near the edge of the anus inside, then withdraw the probe from that wound; extract the end of the probe and tie the two ends together, and leave it in place for a day or two; and when you have pierced the membrane with the probe, tighten it around the piercing so that the flesh between the two ends of the probe is squeezed.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then cure the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrated, then make it so, in whatever way you are skilled, unless it damages the membrane, for you must not pierce the membrane; and then cure it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatula with which the fistula is split: one end is very sharp and the other blunt, so that you do not pierce what is unnecessary, as we have said.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	About stitching up hemorrhoids from which blood flows when they are cut.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	There are two types of hemorrhoids: some appear inside the anus like a bunch of grapes, and others look like a bunch of raisins.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	They are small or large; the blood flows from all of them at some time; they are inside and outside the anus, and at its edges.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those which are outside the anus are according to the season of less moisture; from these flows water like yellow bile or a little blood with continuous pus; they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment of that which is inside the anus is that you order the patient to sit down and squeeze it until the anus protrudes, so that the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you grab it and hold it with your fingernail or something else which you have; then cut off those roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the fingernails are not held in them because of their moisture and softness, then take them with rough cloth or a twig or woolen thread, and extract them with your teeth, and then pierce them and sprinkle some powdered herbs on the wound at the point of piercing, so that they may serve instead of cauterization; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Then cure them with the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey excretion, then cut the patient's anus with a sharp instrument so that it has a small bite; and let him be washed with water which is in the anus until he excretes quickly when he is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is looser; take them with your fingernail or something else which you have, and pierce them, and cure them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you see the cut, know that you should give them sutures in this way: take a piece of wool and insert it into the needle, and then extract the hemorrhoids at their tops; then make the needle penetrate the root on the other side, and wrap the two ends of the wool around the needle below the needle, and tie them latitudinally; then tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong grip, and withdraw the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them; cut one and not the others, so that the surplus blood flows from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerot over the anus, and let him rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let it remain until it is healed; when it is healed, cure them with ointment or some other cure until they are completely healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	They often occur due to dryness or nature's constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if they are old and the medicine does not help, then know that you should pierce them with the point of a spatula or your fingernail until they are moist, and let the suppuration occur above them, which prevents their consolidation; then cure them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you should stop those with a more violent bleeding than the first, until they no longer bleed and are excoriated; then cure them until they are completely healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of ulcers, which is key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that ulcers, which are key, and do not if the body is not red around the color of a nail head; they occur throughout the body and mostly in the lower parts, the feet and the fingers, and through these there is pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then know that it should be pierced where there is a circle around the nail, and held with forceps or something else which you have, and pulled out by its root; then cure it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize it as described in the previous chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But warts are small rough round pustules on the surface of the body; they often occur in children's hands.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its treatment is that you stretch and pierce it, or squeeze it with a needle until it pops out.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are eradicated from their roots both straight and crooked by the instrument which I will describe to you.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a carbuncle is a large pustule on the surface of the body which occurs in the armpits; when it is rubbed, it feels like an insect bite, and it occurs around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And its treatment is to take a cane of reed or of peacock's feather, and make it strong; then place it over the carbuncle until it contains the circle of the cane; then turn your hand around the cane so that you pierce what is in the circle of the carbuncle, and let him squeeze the canule so that he pulls out the root of the carbuncle.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, make this with a tube of gold or iron in this way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the part above the cannula be thin, smooth (so that it is not perforated), and wrapped so that over the said part the perception of it is abolished and the revolution of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the ant according to what is mentioned above in the cautery of atheyl in the chapter on cauteries.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	On the shape of the instruments that are administered to give surgery.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes surgery is done with silver or brass or molten gold or malleable; and sometimes they are made of those instruments small and large according to those to whom they are administered, for that which is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and of those whose anus is sore or painful, the cristiers of these should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The shape of a large and few cristiere:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above which is tied the pouch should be wide in this way; and there should be a distinction to it where the pouch is tied as well as the veins.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of it below, which is inserted into the anus, should be smooth (so that it is not open) very little, preventing subtlety; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side a hole, and the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays, and the thicker ones smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the pouch in which are placed the medicines of a beast's bladder or sheep's wool, and its length be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated with many holes as it is rolled; and if the space between the holes, the thickness of the said instrument.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those holes strong bile of raw bile which should be from twelve biles, or surround them with it; and when it is tied to him, the pouch, let it be tightly tied at the head of the cristiere between two distinctions with a strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and beware that it is not too cold or too hot.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should lie on his back, and raise his legs up and place under him a board upon which there are men or a lanceole; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with albumen of egg or with mucilage of fenugreek or of similar things; and then insert that into the anus with ease, and let the minister hold the pouch and squeeze it with two hands and press with force until everything within the cristiere is evacuated; and then remove the cristiere and the patient raise his legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that to come out, let it be as much as possible; and if he sleeps with that for a whole night, it is better for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you cauterize that in the diseases of a loose belly and its discharge, then repeat the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then let the cristiere be very thin and smooth, of those cristeres with which children are cauterized.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the cure of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already said in the division of the cure of wounds what suited the free one, and I say thus the cure of those with hand and medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that wounds are varied according to what they are made of and according to the place on which they fell.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which many times wounds are made are thus with a stone, or incision with a knife or dagger, or blow with a spear, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar things.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the wounds that are in the parts of the body are thus with a wound which falls on the head, or neck, or feet, or belly, or thigh, and similar things to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recommending the cure for some wounds so that you pause that reasoning and rule over the other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, for the recollection of the compound ones will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when it happens in the head a simple wound and there is no fracture, then consider: if it is with a stone or similar, and the tendon has only just been cut and it is a large wound and you fear an abscess on the patient, then you should apply a cautery to the wound and a fleubotomy to the temporal artery immediately, and not delay that; and remove from there blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other cause prohibits fleubotomy, especially if the blood that comes out of the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the fleubotomy be on the side opposite the affected part; and keep the patient from replection and wine and coarse foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prohibits it, then let him be lessened of food but not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place over the wound, if it happens to him an abscess, a hot poultice in rose oil or wine in which is mixed.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if he is certain of an abscess, then place over the wound if it is fresh with his own blood and the air has not changed that which I recommended earlier, then place over it, then small.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then place over the wound albus poultices until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or it is by incision with a knife or similar, and its lips are not drawn together by threads, then draw those together with sutures according to what I recommended for them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is uncovered of bone and pen, and there is no retention of it except for a small suspensory, then insert that and then cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by cutting in the place of tendon, and command the patient to abstain from foods in which there is coarseness: garlic and formen cow and similar things to them, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you see in the tendon putrefaction and it does not adhere to bone, then insert everything rotten and cut that, and then cure that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood might flow and it is not stopped by medicines, then tie over the artery, and if you find that uncut, then insert that with spathum, or ligature that; and if necessity compels you to do what we have said, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is coldness; for this you powder over those this powder, for when that has dried in front, the air changes it.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of aloes one part, dragon' blood two parts, and causticum not-extinguished three parts; let all be ground and sifted, and let the wound be filled with it, and let it be compressed with a good constriction so that it lies upon it to harden, and let the blood coagulate.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten that above with a bandage and let it be left so that it is not loose while the wound is unhealed, for otherwise it will not be healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes it does this on its own, when you are not in the presence of dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this treatment is also performed on large wounds when it is appropriate to apply it directly and the wound is fresh with blood, which has not been altered by air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them and especially in summer, then there is no intention to use this powder, but instead cure them with what we have said, that you apply some astringent ointments or paste made from barley flour mixed with water and honey; and also cure them with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if there is a broken bone in the wound and it is small, then you must remove it with tweezers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the cure for fractures of the head when it has been poisoned.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds in the neck:
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment and it is the same as for a simple wound on the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there should be no irritation but rather avoided by applying something that causes strong constriction, as well as cinchona and a kind of vitriol which is harmful to nerves and acts as a counterirritant.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And you must not apply anything hot to the wound, because the substance of the nerves is sensitive and its continuation is to the brain, which is the source of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with mild medicines, as well as causing washing with warm water, some poultice soaked in rose oil or not, and cauterization when it is washed with warm water and the other stones are removed according to this manner, and ointments moistened.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer sutures or cut the lips of it, and then cure it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if there is a deep wound or an infection in the lower part, then pierce it in the lowest place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is cut in the wound and blood flow is achieved, then stop or dry it, or ligature it, or cauterize it if necessity compels you to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the windpipe or throat is completely cut through and the veins of the neck are preserved, then you must sew up the edges of the wound on the windpipe without touching it; raise it up and return it to its natural shape, and then bind it tightly with a decent bandage, and let that be for several days; and then cure it with ointments in which there is constriction and excitation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has been made by pressure on bone, then pierce it and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all that you can; and what you cannot, let that be within so that the wound becomes pustular, and let the discharge of it be separated and the swelling around it be relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder which I have recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if a fistula is made in the wound, then cure it with that which its memory will come to you soon in this chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds in the neck or similar when made between the shoulders and is made by a spear or lance or similar:
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a thrust of a lance or spear and you see the depth of it, then consider that the wound is deadly if the victim shows shortness of breath; then know that the wound is lethal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its blood, then you must apply powder to it in the first hour and not constrict it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and that the victim is relieved, but rather apply attracting ointment to it, and loose it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not present to you, then you must place a sharp instrument in the wound's opening so that it sucks out what is in the humid parts; and let the victim sleep with their head over the wound so that what is inside it flows out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed and there are no signs of spasms or trembling of the heart or stricture of the chest, and you see the other good dispositions of it, then know that the wound is healed; and then cure it with poultices and with the other treatment until it is completely healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if its healing is delayed and all time it remains open, then know that a fistula has been made; cure it therefore according to its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is made by a spear or lance and is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then cure it with that which precedes sutures if it is large, or powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has made an impression on the bone and the fragments are separated from it, then you must twist the wound and cut to extract those fragments if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then let them be within so that the wound becomes pustular and the extraction of them is relieved.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds by accidents on other members, the treatment in cure is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of wounds in the abdomen:
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition which occurs in the abdomen is either large or small or punctured.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the large some times the intestine or nerve of the intestine is pierced so that there is intrusion and their suture is made very strong and very delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult in another way and you see that their reduction is more difficult if you do not cut off the intrusion of them to their place at once, for it opens up and becomes swollen so that the insertion of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is punctured because in it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult as is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four ways, but two sutures are common in sutures of other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures are proper to other wounds but rather are more proper in the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I will recommend to you each one with exposition and explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the intestine through it, and its reduction is made difficult, then it is in one of two ways: or because of the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine receives cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when that is so, you see that you warm it with a sponge or cloth moistened in only tepid water, or that you place it in water made warm, and cyperum, and spic, and embrocations on the intestine so that the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it does this with the substance which has constriction, and is better than just water in resolving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which there is a little vinegar and mallows, for by this it is relieved the substance of it with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument is not suitable for this cure, then split the hemorrhoids with a small instrument with which they are cut.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is not a cut, and there is no occupation to dry by necessity and deflation.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, see its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is acute and bent, and the other part not acute, and the end fine, and not be as fine as a spatula, but rather blunt a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible on it, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But if the hemorrhoid is large and is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should place his head and chest higher than his legs.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And likewise if the hemorrhoid is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pay your attention and your consideration equally to both so that the part in which the wound is be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer this for large hemorrhoids and for smaller hemorrhoids.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And for small hemorrhoids, use what is prepared for you, and make the minister hold it between his fingers, which have the hemorrhoid entirely in his hand and press its lips together, and uncover from that to that one side of the stitch, any cause whatever.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the way of common sewing: one that you take the needle, or count of needle according to the amount of the width of the wound; and let go of the end of the hemorrhoid of the little finger, and strengthen the needle one, and do not put oil in both ends of the thread, with two ends of the ligature which is under the hemorrhoid of the fingers within, so that you make it penetrate from that party; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the ligature, and so are made four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And strengthen with double oil around the needle, and several times from two parts together, and add both lips and the hemorrhoid by a decent addition; and let go of the thickness of the finger and put another needle in that one, and tie it up thus with oil as it was with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be between coarseness and fineness, for fine needles pierce gently into the flesh; and coarse ones are of difficult insertion in the thread, and therefore so that they be finer in fineness and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not that the needle be fixed in both ends of the thread next to each other, so that the flesh is not pierced gently and that the wound opens before its solidification.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they are not prolonged with sewing so that the wound is prohibited from solidification.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And pierce the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient when he sleeps; and you will place on the wound powdered expanders of all parts, which have the ends of the needles; and let it be until you know that the wound is solidified.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this kind of sewing with needles in any way is more convenient for small hemorrhoids, for it has in their sewing one needle or two or around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second sewing is common: and it is that you sew the four ends, of the thread and two ends of the ligature, in one go, with a needle in which there is oil wrapped both in fineness and coarseness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when with the needle you have penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that meted part from which you began, so that the oil withdrawn box of the most sublimated part to the wound, so that the sewing is according to sewing of cloth with which the cloths are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place between each sewing the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this sewing is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such sewing I healed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly, and it was wounded by a knife, and the rupture of the wound was more than a palm, and he had come out of the intestines around two palms from the intestinal membrane, and the rupture was in the middle part of the member; and then I reduced it after the intestine had been out of the wound for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was solidified in the space of 15 days or around it, and I healed him and he is healthy; and thus he lived for many years, and is in his senses.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle he was healed, for I did not cure him with ointment, but placed on the wound a piece of wool two times a day and an frequent ablution with water mixed with honey until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell you two kinds of sewing according to the account of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with sewing of the thread, and pierce the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And therefore when the needle penetrates in the thread and in that you pierce the rectum and in length of all the body, and let go of the end of the ligature in which you have pierced the needle; and make it penetrate from the other end from within to without in the other end of the anus.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetrate, then you make it penetrate another time in the meted end of the anus from within to without in the other end of the anus; and let go of the end of the ligature which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the anus.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate with that your penetration with which you make it penetrate in the anus in the end of the anus which is in the part of him so that all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And begin from this meted side and sew that with the end which is of the ligature in the other side, and pull out that needle from the thread which has penetrated, and then reduce it in that thread and tie the end of the ligature which is in the other side with this end of the anus; and pull out that needle from the thread which is of part of him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do that one time and another, and do that one time about another time so that you sew all that is out according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this way of sewing is that you sew with sewing of skin with which you sew the ligature, assuming that you sew the anus one time from the end of the thread, and let it be until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second kind of sewing proper which I say is from the word of Galienus, and this is of semen of him and by him composed, is that you sew it according to similarity with which they compose medicine, assuming that you add all part to its compared part to him conveniently by nature; and apply one end of him to the other end of him, and this is done according that I have composed.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Place the needle at the tip of the eye that is closest to the side of the wound, and make it penetrate into the inside of the wound in that sun, and tie the two ends of the thread; then twist the needle and make it pass through from the outside to the inside in the two ends of the ciphr.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then twist those knots and make some of the outside of the wound pass inside into the inside of the wound in the two ends of the eye that are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than common suture, and it is a suture of which I have given a description.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Walga
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some say that the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles; therefore you must put a needle into one of these, and begin with the insertion of the needle from what is below you, and make it pass into the other side according to the suture of those who sew skin to skin.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than that of the other places in the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment of medicine for plague is the judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And the cause is that when you encounter the plague recently with its blood before the air alters it, and return the intestine and cook it and arrange it decently, then place over it a carnative powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place over it certain unction which are to you present that they make hard stone and draw out the puss, and be consolidated thread and eye; and cure that thus as is the cure of the other plagues so that it may be healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then place over it immediately, for as soon as it begins to give off a stench, change that twice a day, morning and evening, ayssi how you are taught, until it is healed, for you do not need any other medicine in various dispositions when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the plague will communicate injury to the principal members, then take a lion’s wool and soak it in oil of suitable quality, or in roasted oil, and place that in the circuit of the places that are between the angles and below the armpits.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in his intestines, as many times as that happens, anoint that with black styptic wine of tebe, and especially if the putrefaction is come into the intestine and makes an exit piercing into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that that which is of the gross intestines is easier to heal than that which is in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing of the plague that occurs in it at all; and that is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it, and because of the magnitude of it that is in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of its proximity to nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if that which proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and you accomplish that recently, return it according to your rectitude by which you return intestines to health.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed to him space and is already made black or dark, then that you bind that with thread over the place which is blackened by it, in order that there come flow of blood, for in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert what is under that ligament, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from below the plague hole over you, in order that upon you be alleviated the attraction of him due to the sinking of the fabric and emission of the stench of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Description of the plagues when they happen in the intestines.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption happens in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in certain men, because he had seen a man who was plagued in his belly by a spear thrust and the plague was on the right side of his stomach, and the plague was old and made a fistula, and it was driven out from him and ventositat.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then he pursued the cure of him until it was not believed that he could be healed, but I continued to treat him gently until the fire healed and the place was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And he had seen the place already consolidated, he guided him about the patient that in his belly was to have an accident of evil, and did not take on any accident due to the evil and remained in his usual dispositions eating and drinking, and then bathed and exercised himself.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced men say that when the plague comes in the intestines and is small, then it should be bound according to this manner: and it is that you take foments of great caps; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and place a foment of those which has the open mouth over the two lips of the plague; therefore when he takes hold of those and tightens his mouth over them, cut off the cap from him, for it will adhere and not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another foment near the first one, and do not cease that which you do with foments, one after another according to the quantity of all the plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return that and cook the plague; and let those caps remain in the intestines until the intestines are healed; and may not happen to the patient any harm.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestines be bound with thread subtle which is made of the intestines of beasts annexed to it, for it is more in a needle; and take the end of those intestinal threads, and let there be some flesh removed from it, and then bind the end of it with thread, wound up, and then insert that thread into needles and cook it with that the intestines, and return that into the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of suture with foments is not anything other than according to way of confidence and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the plague is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, for then it is nothing other than sottilization, and not its healing at all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of cure of suck and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that all plague and pustule when it is come to rot and become old, and is made ulcer, and is not consolidated and gives off stench, then in any member that it is in, universally is named fistula and we call that suck.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is swollen flesh, hard, white by which there is not pain and has cavity like the cavity of a tooth; and for that reason it is named certain rizatus, i.e., tooth.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some men it is moist, by which it gives off a stench; and the moisture is driven out in certain hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is great, and is little, and is thick, and is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already spoken before in the division, then when I say plagues, that any ulcer which is not healed nor is naked flesh in it, that is not due to one of nine causes: one is or by lack of blood in the body; or by malice; or because between it and its lips there is hard flesh preventing birth of flesh; or because it is of great moisture; or because it is subtle.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already shown all those causes and their signs and the cure for them through medicine in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And now I will tell you the cure for a fistula that is caused by surgery with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas can occur in any part of the body; some of them affect large veins or arteries, or nerves, or the brain, or intestines, or bladder, or one of the bones, or one of the spinal discs, or a joint made up of multiple parts, such as the hand and foot; and some affect areas near these major body parts.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And so, among these types of fistulas, those that follow this pattern are considered among the most challenging illnesses to cure, and they often do not receive proper treatment due to ignorance and a lack of understanding.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is a fistula that does not reach these places I have mentioned, and you are hopeful for its cure, and want to understand it better, then take a needle or piece of iron and probe the fistula.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is winding and tortuous, then investigate it with a thin lead probe, for lead, due to its light weight, will be drawn and bent by the fistula's curves.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrible movements that you cannot understand using a probe,
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	then cleanse the orifices through which the enema fluid flows, for the moisture that you use to cleanse it will flow through these other orifices.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then examine it closely, as best you can, to understand if there are any bones or nerves nearby, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or near, or if it is a fistula whose orifices are all located on one spot, and through your examination, and the creation of pain by pressing with your hand over the area, and similar techniques and causes of pain in the swelling, you will come to understand its nature.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And once you have fully understood these causes, then move on to the cure with confidence: and consider whether the fistula is apparent nearby or in a salty location, distant from a joint, or affecting nerves, arteries, or veins, or one of the places I mentioned earlier.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you must dry out the fistula as already described in its description, and remove what is inside it and what comes out of its orifices, be it pus or腐肉, and cure the interior until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and follows a winding path, then you must insert it into the fistula as far as possible, and cleanse it of all rotten flesh; then apply hot poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert these into the fistula's cavity, which you have probed with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten inside the fistula'
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then heal it with ointments that promote healthy flesh growth within.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed through this method, then you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone, and you are certain of this, then you must probe and dry it out as we have instructed, unless you detect any cause from a vein or nerve, or affecting a major body part as I have mentioned.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and darkness within it, then you must remove all of this corruption; then heal the bone with what will grow new bone tissue within it.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and the arm remains as it was, then you should know that you have not fully eradicated the corruption; then examine it a second time with great care, find the cause of it and cleanse it with your strongest medicine, and heal it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so, if it is healed, then it is good; but if not, then you should know that the corruption is in the distant depths of the body, and you have not reached it, and so you should only probe it gently.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the rotten bone is small, or you are able to pull it out, then do so with subtle forceps suitable for this task.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are multiple bones, then carefully extract them all, and leave behind no cause for worry with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you encounter any resistance from the moisture, and in probing them you fear no mistake or error, then insert those limbs or flesh if they are there, and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to pull out the bones at that time, then cover the wound with something that will cause pus to form in it, and leave behind what is around those bones of flesh and limbs, and guard the wound so that it does not heal over, and the section you have probed remains open.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Have faith, for if you are afraid, then place on it a pad soaked in soapwater, or one soaked in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, for when these liments rot, and the bones are separated from their covering, and the atraction is relieved,
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone like the bone of the leg or thigh, or similar, and only what is rotten is its fascia, then pull it out from behind so that the blackness and corruption is exposed, then heal the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is rotten is a large portion of it, and the corruption has already reached the bone's marrow, then it is necessary to close it up and probe that spot where the corruption has occurred, then heal it until it is solid.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I urge you to ask a man to lie on his side to help support your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around 30 years of age experienced pain in his thigh, and the matter within it was pushed towards the head, and this matter was from the leg bone into the head, and it was an abscess with a large abscess, and there was no external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so the time extended with it due to the error of the doctors until the abscess burst, and materials came out from it, and his cure was delayed because the leg bone was fistulated, and there were many orifices in him from which pus and fluids from the body flowed.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And so he was treated by many doctors for about two years, but there was no wisdom in it except in the bone, where I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw his leg and the materials that flowed from him through those orifices, like a corpse; and indeed the man's body was completely swollen and his colour was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And so I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I probed and explored all the orifices and found that they came from all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And so I cut and probed one of those orifices where I discovered a bone part, and it was rotten, and indeed it was earthy and blackened; and a part of the leg had been rotted where it had penetrated into the membrane.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And so I applied what was revealed to me and prepared for the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	I saw that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had cut and removed, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I applied the restoration of the plague with consolidative medicine for a long time, but it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I iterated and discovered again upon the bone secondly after the first discovery, and found continued corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I removed what appeared to me to be of that corruption, and then I performed the cure and restoration of it, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another ulcer on him and did not cease to bore into the bone little by little particularly and to perfuse the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I had bored around a palm of it, and extracted that with its marrow, and then I restored that one with medicines, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to iterate the operation on him or to cut him except for the disposition of his disease and for the smallness of his tolerance and fear of him of death, for he suffered in all hours because of an excess of evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so he was healed by entire healing, and nothing is in the place of hard bone; and his disposition was made good in his body, and his strength returned to him, and he was returned to his dispositions, and no contrariness was made to him in walking nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if there is prominent bone in the place of the body that has been torn, then you should succeed with that according to this manner: and it is that you take a length of string and wind that around the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone else to extend that for you; and place that string of wool thicker than the first string; and then wind that over the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you pull the flesh towards the parts below, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to cut so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place wood or a board below the bone decently, for when you do that it is not prohibited that the saw does not cut the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it should be sawn on the corrupted place little by little, for if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and it does not appear in its appearance to the sense, then force must be made to cut it another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then there is one part continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it; then uncover the flesh from all parts entirely, and then pause wood below, and then saw that from the first part where there is corruption until the continuation of the cutting of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the sawing should be according to the place of the corruption a little bit, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints then there is not reason in it except artifice.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand or the foot it is very difficult; however, you should seek out the corruption and see how it appears to you, and open that up, and cut that according to every disposition which is possible for you, and with whatever artifice it is rectified for you when no contrariness comes to you from a vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know that the saws and the knives to cut these bones are much according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their thinness and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so that when you prepare for every kind of operation a convenient tool for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that that operation tells you of the kind of tool which you lack; for with you is great study and long and knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of diseases, for then you already had for your tools what is convenient for any instrument for every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I will show you at the end of this chapter the number of tools with which you form them with simples and which you will use to process your prohibition which you will experience over the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of other saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a file:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this file be according to the form of a key starry, and its points are according to the form of the points of a stethoscope.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it does not concern that with that they are rubbed the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or is the mouth large and ample.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw decently made: let it be made arch of it more superior and the acuteness of it of iron, and the member of it of a boy's dagger decently made.
Forma de lu:	Its form is:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisor with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor, this one resembling a file, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is shown in many places in the ratio of the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a file which concerns the perforation of bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and of acute extremity.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly, all the causes that we have said of razors and of incisers and of saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of cutting edges and of the serration of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The edges may be blunt or for an intrinsic cause or for an extrinsic cause, or when you have medicated that corruption with cure of those medicines and the cure does not concern, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member which does not percept any cause, then you should cut that member where the corruption lies in order to prevent the patient from escaping through it by death or by malice which is a greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member is made black when it was burned, or it turns black soon after the burning, then cut that member where the blackness lies in order to prevent it from turning the whole body black and causing the whole body to be affected by it.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if the cause of the corruption is a concussion from some venomous causes like that of scorpion sea or of viper or of adder or of similar kinds.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or concussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it comes to the hand, then you cut that from the joint of the fire-bone, and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes into the fire-bone of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead you cut the arm, then cut the shoulder in the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption passes and then the collarbone, then that is the death of the patient; and add another cause to that in cure is quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And likewise do to the foot as you would for corruption, then you insert it into one of the nuts.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the heel of the foot, then you insert the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it can enter the toe, then you insert the leg into the joint of the toe.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already reached the toe, then in that case there is no remedy but to let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way of cutting the member or binding it is that you stretch the ligament in the part lowest down from which you want to cut, and stretch another ligament on top of the spot; and extend one ligament to the lowest parts, and extend the other over them; and you separate the meat which is between the two ligaments so that there is a space between them wide enough to be completely exposed all the flesh; and then it is cut or bound.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And make sure that a piece of cloth is laid over all parts so that it does not touch the wound, and let the patient have a poultice applied to the wound adjusted and bandaged.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if blood flows out when you cut into it, then cauterize the spot carefully, or place over it some powders that stop the flow of blood; and then return to your operation until it is finished.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then bind the member that has been cut with a ligature in any convenient way, and dress the wound so that it may heal.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And he reported to you that he had an incident with a man on his foot, this patient who told you and whose problem you inquired about, which was that blackness appeared on his foot from scorching which looked like fire had scorched it.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first happened on one of his toes, and it affected the whole foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And that man prepared for himself remedies that when applied to the member with his strength caused great pain and scorching heat; and he cut into that foot at the joint, and it healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long ago that same kind of corruption happened on one of the fingers of his hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me and forced me to reflect on that excess with what I applied to the hand, namely the purification of his body; and the excess was not reduced and began to go to the other finger as it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he urged me to cut into his hand, but I did not want to do that for fear of the reaction of that excess, and yet I feared death to the hand of the patient because of the strength of his body.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he lost hope in me, he returned home and there found that man who had prepared and cut into his whole hand, and it healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narrative except that it be an aid about what is caught from this disease, and that it be a sign by which it is recognized and according to which it acts.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	About the cure of sores and quality of cleansing with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When sores occur on certain fleshy parts and the space of the sores is prolonged so that there is a collection of pus, and then it breaks open and discharges, and the pus exits from it, and the place becomes hollow like a wound, and the membrane which is over it withers away, and no further corruption occurs in the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged so that corruption prevails in any part, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that you cut away all that membrane as it has become turned over, and especially when it has been thinned out and made with cloth, and plasters that do not adhere to the spot by its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you expect the membrane to adhere and that corruption has not achieved through further consequence, and in the membrane has spread out widely, then you cure it with a clyster.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider the sinus and if it is large and the wound gives off a foul odor, then clysterize it with Egyptian medicine which is of oil and sour wine and zinyar received into parts split in two, and are placed over fire so that the medicine becomes hot and attains to the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take of it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and clysterize the sinus with it, and plug up the opening of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then take out that with a spoon; and do this for as many days until the sinus is cleansed and the stink is reduced.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is clysterized with water of ashes when you do not have that medicine at hand; and you take the ash of wood, and place over it water; and then strain that and clysterize it with it until you are convinced that the sinus has been healed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, then clysterize it with water and honey in which is mixed powdered zinyar, and clysterize it with wine and honey mixed, for the property of honey is that it cleanses and washes, and wine causes the sinus to adhere, and especially when there is excess of stiffness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And after you do this several times and you are convinced that the sinus has been reduced, then clysterize it with what makes the flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And take of the unguent called dyaphincum and dissolve it with refined oil or sharp wine, or clysterize it with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have described in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and will not receive the tube of the clyster, then you enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and place over it wool wrapped in Egyptian ointment or in basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Likewise if the opening is wide, then you join the lips of it with a suture and leave in it the quantity in which there is an addition of clyster.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening through which the arm goes is elevated to the parts above it, then dry that at the lower place where the pus has collected in it because when the arm is contracted in the depth of the sinus the flesh in it is engendered.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in the hollow of the bone according to what you want, then force it that you prepare the member with preparation by which the arm runs loosely according to how it appears to you and that there be no cause in it for the arm to be retained.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines which are placed over the sinus conveniently so that they extend those over cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth is of such great quantity as to make communication with all the sinus; and then cut into the sinus on the right side of its opening a wound much larger than the opening of the sinus, and then extend over another cloth of the ointments leons according to the quantity of the wound, and place it over that in distant position from the opening of the sinus so that the discharge of the arm from it may be stopped and not touch the cloth but after several days one time.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is over the opening of the sinus, which is reduced in all hours as a result of what is stopped in it from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know whether what flows out of his arm is a lot or a little, or is digested, or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And in this way you may consider the location of that vein, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess there.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medication is prolonged in this way, and you see the matter that is discharged over the orifice of the vein already adherent, or if there is proper adhesion, then on the third day, loosen the poultice, and when you loosen the wound, change the dressing for another and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if subtle humors escape from the vein over a long space of time, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is proper, for there are some men in whom generation of flesh in their wounds is slow, and of others the contrary occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the arm that has been discharged is indigest for several days, then know that the vein does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the vein is delayed and its cause prolonged, then you regulate the medicines in desiccation, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as with ointment of diacon, when there is added excess of vinegar.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most recent one being healed is to take ointment of diacon and dissolve it in rose oil, and over it apply wine vinegar equal in its substance, and then comfort that with it, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And in that action, when there is no arm, take ointment of diacon, honey when it has been cooked until it is thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and incenses, triturate all and pulverize over the honey when it is over the fire, and then line that over a bandage and strengthen that over the vein; and line that with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and pulverize over the bandage and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they are administered with long-witted aristology and rays of heavenly lily (and that is the heavenly lily) and flour of erysimum and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust, triturate all and sift it and pulverize over the honey which I have recommended; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the vein is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is in its vein, and make examination of the bones or other hard members or in the bowels; then heal it with fistula treatment, as above is said.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment of panaritis and nail abrasion and addition of digit incision and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaritis is an abscess that arises below the fingernail of the finger of the hand or of the foot, and it is usually found in the other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its healing is less valued, or it is an abscess of cautery, or it is corrupted, and it erodes the nail, and very often corrupts all of that, and the corruption very often pervades the bone within which there is a foul odor, and the extremity of the finger is made flat, and its color becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that in the division and do not confer your treatment, then see that you pierce with iron all of the superfluity that is rotted from the nail, and then cauterize the wound there, for hot cautery is beneficial in that.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is intact and the nail is healthy, and the nail parts are pulling together the flesh at their ends, and they begin to pierce it and irritate it, then see that you pause a fine ray below the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push that up and insert the flesh with facility, and pause on that which rises from the flesh of the corrosive medicines until all is thoroughly cauterized; and then heal that with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption already pervades the bone, then see that you pierce the bone there and extract it, for it will not be healed as long as the corrupt bone remains.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption extends to the finger, then insert that in one of the nuts according to what is prescribed in its reminder, and then heal that until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail has impact or abrasion, and there is violent pain in that, then see that at the beginning you flebotomize the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula having a transverse cut above it, and beware that the cut does not pervade into the flesh below the nail, for you will cause violent pain to the patient, and its cause is generation of superfluous flesh in that place; and then heal that place with that which relives the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But a finger that is born, which occurs in the hands of some men, is usually all flesh, and very rarely bone, or it is usually nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some are born in the joint of the finger, or its generation occurs in the nuts of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in some nuts of the finger does not hurt, and that which is born in the joints is usually painful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those which are born fleshy, its section is easy, and you pierce that below its root with a broad spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of that which is born in the joint of the finger, its treatment is difficult; and so beware of its incision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in that which is born in the finger below the nails, see that you at the beginning pierce the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw with one of those saws appropriate to that, and then heal that until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their joints several times, or by generation of the man who was born that way, or by consolidation of the wound, or by burn of fire, or similarly, then see that you dry that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then pause between their bands of the oils of rose so that they are not consolidated easily, and separate between those, or pause between those a thin lead plate so that it is consolidated according to what you see.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs in some fingers with the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suited to the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incision of varices, so are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varices are varicose veins, and so are thick enveloped vessels full of serous humors which flow in the parts of the body, and their major occurrence is in the legs, and most especially in the legs of travellers and workers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then see that you administer the purging of the body from black cholera several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But their treatment with iron is according to two methods: one is that it is pierced and the black blood is drawn, and the other method is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	Its section is according to this method: at the beginning moisten the leg with warm water so that the gross blood is resolved which is feculent of the leg, and then strengthen the leg of the patient at its upper part of the thigh above the knee with a bandage, and then dry the black blood in one place, or two, or three with broad incision, and then elevate the black blood with the hand of the patient at its lower part of the thigh below the knee so that the blood ascends up to the amount which you desire and which the strength of the patient tolerates.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then tie that up, and command him to abstain from foods engendering black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this is noticed in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is according to this manner: You who raise the leg of the patient, if in him are moved hairs, and then put him into a bath and embrocate the leg of him with warm water until it reddens and the veins are dilated; or that he be exercised by strong exercise, if bath is not at hand, until the limb is heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut off the vein in the right side of the vein by section in the long or in the back of him where he feels the most pain, or in the lowest part of him where he feels it in the heel.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the vein with nails and gouge the vein from all parts until it appears to sensation, and he is supposed to feel that red turns to blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then when blood flows from the vein you will see that it is white as cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you put down that which was raised and let it flow from the vein, and suspend it with an iron hook or a lead weight.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section below that section through three fingers, and gouge the vein from above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise that which was cut and insert it in the rear section where he feels it in the heel, and then extract that and raise that until it is released by the second section, and then extract that from the section which is above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract that from the section which is most superior or highest of all the sections, until all has been released; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if he does not obey you in extracting and raising it, then insert a strong bent needle and pierce that and extract it, or insert under him the leg and rotate your hand all around until it is released.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it is not pierced, for if it is broken, it is made difficult to raise that vein and it has come about on the patient through that damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all that has been completely released, then apply to the site of the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil, and cure that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted and has tortuosity at which is enveloping at its parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you must split that at all parts of its tortuosity and its enveloping locations, and then suspend that with nails until you raise it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware of your section not piercing the vein and not damaging it, for it will be difficult to raise that; and serve your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incision with which the vein is dried:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of iron hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not cut with nails nor is it of acute extremity so that it does not pierce the vein; and it has great flexibility, for if it were slender it would pierce the vein by its slenderness; it has superfluous thickness in him as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of extraction of the vein of the leg:
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is engendered in the legs in hot lands like Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in hot and arid lands of India of little tenderness, and in which there is no herb nor grass.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also engendered strongly in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its gestation is of putrefaction that comes from below the vein like venom within the body of serpents and worms and insects and worms engendering between the vein and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And sign of the approach of its advent is that this vein begins in the leg with violent inflammation, and then the location is blistered, and then the vein begins to flow from the site of that blister which seems like a plant-root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when you see the end of it, you must wrap around it a piece of lead whose weight is that of a penny, and leave that suspended from the arm.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many times as it is driven by any cause to the parts outside, wrap that with lead and suspend him.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the vein is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and wrap what remains; and do not pierce that from which it is released until it is completely outside, for if you pierce it it is contracted and enters the flesh and makes apoplexy and inflammation in the location and ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it is drawn out slowly and is extracted little by little until it is completely released from the rear of him and does not hang in him any cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein it is issued in some men who is in its length of five yards and ten, and I have seen one of twenty yards.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is pierced in the hour of its medicine, then insert the leg into the wound and pierce that with a long piercing through the body until all that is in the material is evacuated, and then administer putrefaction of the location for several days by medicines; and then cure that by the cure of apoplexies.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has pains, and most often when it appears at the joint of the leg or in the leg, and comes to him pains of orifices, and it is issued from each orifice ram.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then cure that as we have said in the division and with what is above it.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of section over worms generated under the skin and is called bovine sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This sickness is named in some land because of the cow's sickness for although it moves the cows and there are few worms which are born between the vein and the flesh, and it goes all over the body pushing and breaking through, and it is shown to sensation by its movement from member to member until it breaks the vein and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is by putrefaction of some humors like the coming of worms and serpents and roundworms and tapeworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its wickedness, for when it goes in the body and is raised to the head, and it has come to the heart, then it pierces it and breaks into it and destroys the heart, and that at the same time many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, it is not done unless the movement of him and his appearance to sensation are done, and then you tie up what is above him and what is under him by a ligature and strong constriction, and then cut over him and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is deeply rooted in the flesh and you do not pierce it, then you apply cautery by fire to the location where it resides, and the greatest cause that is feared is corruption of it by which it corrupts the location as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see that it has come to the head close to the throat, then tie up the neck with a strong constriction and cut over him, and extract it; and if the patient feels exhaustion of the body due to putrefying bad humors, keep him from foods engendering putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of section over sickness of the navel.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This sickness is named in our land navir, and it is pain which comes in some members, and then it is transferred from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	I have already seen it for myself as I will tell you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village and after uncovering her arm I saw a small inflammation on the vein of the arm. And when it was pricked for an hour, I saw that inflammation go away just as quick as if it were silver being pushed from place to place, but more gently so that she did not feel pain, just as if it were living silver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain went into that spot and spread throughout the muscle and she stayed there for another hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Then the pain ran through the rest of her body and went down to the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And he told me that it was turning around throughout her entire body as I saw, and I was quite amazed at the transformation of her and how quickly it moved from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen something similar in my own home according to that way, but I have seen many times that pain is transferred from limb to limb.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it in the arms as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was due to the arms being old with dry flesh and exposed veins, but rather because in that case the feeling of that moving wind appeared.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary for it to not appear according to this back-cure in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure it and the patient is feeling that pain, then do not appear in front of him as we have said, but rather press down on him slightly and quickly over the spot where that wind was blocked and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then cure that person by expelling the wind from the body and getting rid of those wind-like things through vomit, as well as foul-smelling pills and Serapi-like pills.
De extraccio de sagetas.	By pulling out arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse depending on the species and the parts of the body where they land, for their diversity is that some have large points, small ones, concave ones, and blunt ones; some have three angles, some look like tongues, and some look like stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And they are according to the members and the feet in which they land in two ways: for the members are either main members like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, bowels, bladder, and similar; so when you cut one of these members and you see signs of death, which I will tell you about soon, then you should avoid pulling out that arrow from those where death is certain, and if you do not see these bad signs and the arrow is not buried deep in the member, then pull it out and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of the soul are when an arrow hits it and pierces the bone and is buried in the brain, for then it causes violent tremors, dizziness, vertigo, heat in the head, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion, vomiting of bile, a weak voice and destroyed speech; and moisture white like dust comes out of the wound.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if you see these signs, then refrain from curing and pulling out the arrow unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart are that it is near the left mammary gland and feels hard when poked, and it does not feel hollow; and the movement of the arrow is quick like the pulse, and black blood runs from the wound, and coldness comes over the extremities, and there is a cold sweat and fainting; so know that death is certain.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has hit the lungs are foam and blood coming out of the wound, and the vessels near the neck are swollen, and the color of the sick person changes, a great spirit is exhaled, and they ask for cool air to be fanned over them.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow hits the diaphragm which is in the chest, then the pain will be near the small ribs and there will be great pain and sighing, and all the members of the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, then immediately see some indigestible food coming out of the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow hits the abdomen and is buried in it, see a wound in the flesh or the membrane or intestine which is torn, and there is no hope of curing him by pulling out the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine comes out, and some wound or ulcer appears on the outside, and there is great pain in the sick person, then know that it is deadly.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members like the face, neck, throat, shoulders and their supports, the vertebrae of the back, the breastbone, the groin, the thigh and their equivalents of the members, are safe according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit any vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will tell you about this so that it helps you with your curing.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason is that in a man who got an arrow in the tear duct of his eye into the root of his nose, I pulled it out from the other side and he was healed and did not suffer any harm to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I pulled out another arrow from a Jew who got it in the gray of his eye, below the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and he did not get anything but a small extremity with which it adhered to his socket, and it was a large arrow of the pointed arrows of the Turks with lion-iron which there were no eyelids.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was healed and did not suffer any harm to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I pulled out another arrow from a Christian who had got it in his throat and it was an Arab arrow and it was the one with which there were eyelids; then I split it lengthwise between two needles and it was already submerged in his throat; so I made it thin and then pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I pulled out another arrow from a man who had got it in his abdomen and thought he would die from it; so after he had passed 30 days and there was no change to him in any of his dispositions, I looked into the wound and probed around, and he was healed, and did not suffer any harm.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had hit his back and the wound was closed over him, and after he had walked for seven years, the arrow came out of the root of his groin.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had hit her abdomen and the wound was closed over her, and she did not change in any of her natural dispositions for three years, and she did not suffer any harm.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man who got an arrow in his face and the wound was closed over him and the arrow was removed; he did not feel any pain there, and similar things happened to these men.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I pulled the arrow out of the king's son who got it in a small place on the side of his nose and it had already declined to the right a little, and the arrow was completely hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to his cure soon after the insertion of the arrow, within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I discovered the wound of the arrow very tightly; and then I inquired about it with a subtle probe, and did not feel anything; but he felt a sting below his right ear, and then I perceived that this sting was due to the end of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I plastered the place with an ointment in which there is an attractive and digestive virtue, confident that the place will become apparent to me so that it dries up over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And I did not see in the place any significant accident that the arrow had achieved that place; and I continued with the ointment on him for several days, and no accident happened; and the wound healed in the meantime, and the patient recovered from the extraction of it within a space of several days, when one day he felt the arrow between his teeth and informed me of this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied to the wound an acute corrosive medicine for several days until pus opened up, and by means of a probe I examined it and discovered the end of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I applied in the perception of the wound that acute medicine until it appeared to me visibly the end of the arrow, and I passed time with it for the space of time within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then, since the wound was enlarged and it was possible for me to insert pincers into it, and not obstructing at all, I did not cease subtilizing and ingeniously working on that with various tools, until one day by means of tools made according to the form which will be given in the end of this chapter, I began to draw it out; and then I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it, and the wound healed up, and the patient recovered entirely in health, and nothing remained in him in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows so that you pause upon it rule and significance about which I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended by narrative nor understood by those who read the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artificer compares a few things about that which is moving to that which is motionless, and discovers new operation and new instrument the descent of strange causes of the art when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not forced out of the limbs in which they are stuck, but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place into which they entered, or by the contrary of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is forced out by the place from which it entered is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place, and is pulled out and forced out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the time at which it struck, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it becomes putrid and is separated from it, and the attraction of it and its exit are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is stuck in bone and does not obey you when you strike it, then leave that for some days and repeat that with attraction and motion on each day, and it will be forced out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey you after a few days, then you must pierce around the arrow in that bone on every side with a very thin boring tool until the place is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has already progressed into one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the patient some of those accidents which I have mentioned, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it until his being equated after a few days; for if the arrow penetrates to the brain, then death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck but in the core of the bone only and does not pass into the brain, and the patient remains for several days and no one of those accidents happens to him, then you ingenious in the attraction of the arrow and in the attraction of it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is deeply stuck and does not obey you when you extract it, then you minister boring tools around the arrow as I have recommended, and then cure the place until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is hidden in the place of the body and is hidden from sensation, then you inquire about it with a probe; and if you sense that, then draw that out with certain tools which are convenient to the attraction of it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot operate on it because of the constriction of the wound and because of the length of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein here, then open the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is stuck in the ears with which it is held, then you loose the flesh in which it is stuck on every side with all the ingenuity that you can; and ingenious about that, if you cannot operate on the opening of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in twisting them until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whichever place it is, then you use with twisting of your hand with forceps on all sides so that it obeys; and subtilize with very subtle piercing that the arrow is not broken and that it is difficult to extract it and that extraction from it.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot operate on that from your side, then leave it for a few days until the parts which are around it become putrid, and then repeat that because by then it will be separated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you meet with contrary bleeding, then you administer what we have said about the cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue from incision of vein or nerve, or string, and ingenious in all manner to you possible of the extraction of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquillity and slowness and firmness just as I and you have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore that you contract the arrow so that the patient be according to the figure according to which it is due the position of the arrow in him, for it is more salutary.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then you minister what is possible for you by the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows which are forced out by the contrary of the other part, or which from him proceed some parts to the outward parts, or cause swelling the extremity of the arrow by sensation of the part above the shoulder joint and feel that eminent; then you cease about that; and let the section be according to the quantity in which the forceps take it; and then draw that out, for it is made easier to feeling.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the blade according to the contrary so that the arrow presses into the bone, and enlarge it by itself, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave that for a few days, and then repeat that until it becomes putrid.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you drive it out with him.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is lost and you wish to administer impulse, then you insert that in, if it is hollow, a tool bent so that it enters the hollow of it into the head of the arrow and then drive out that with him.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is hollow, then you drive it out with a strong tool entering into that, for the arrow is separated by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisonous, then you must cut away all the flesh around it, as much as you can, and treat the wound with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the arrow hits the foot or belly or bladder or side and is close enough for you to touch with your finger, then cut it out if possible. And if you can cut it out, do so and be careful not to pierce any vein or nerve. Remove the arrow and sew up the wound if necessary, and treat the wound until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Here is a description of how to make a pair of tongs for pulling out arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The ends of these tongs are shaped like the beak of an eagle and serrated so that they can grip the arrow tightly without slipping.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from these, different kinds are made: large, small, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow, the depth of the wound, the swelling, and the degree of constriction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Here is a description of how to make a hollow instrument with a curved end shaped like the beak of an eagle so that it can be used to loosen the arrow from within the wound, and a blunt instrument to push it out:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Here is a description of how to make a blunt-ended instrument:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	It should be shaped like the toe of an eagle's foot so that it can be used to loosen the arrow from within the wound and push it out with the other instrument.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Here is a description of how to perform phlebotomy on veins:
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which it is customary to bleed are those from which blood should not be drawn. Those in the head are .xvi, There are also two pulsating veins near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs on either side of the temples; and two veins in the tear ducts of the eyes, called aspicientz; and a vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose; and two gullet veins at the throat; and two veins on the lips. These are the veins that are called algelic. And there are also two veins under the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins in the arms that should be bled are 5; Among these is a cephalica vein, which is called the wild strawberry tree in Latin; and the common name for this vein in the local language is “the head vein”; and it is a superficial vein composed of a branch of the basilica vein and another branch of the cephalica vein; and the common people call it “the vein of the whole body”, and the basilica vein is the one that passes over the armpit, called “the heart vein” in Latin, and the vulgar people call it “the belly vein”; and the funis vein is the one that passes over the elbow, and it is the one that is bled; and the salvatella is the vein between the auricular and the little finger, and it has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the chest and the flank there are three veins: one of them is below the curve of the jaw of the wild strawberry tree; and the second is the sophena, and its location is below the flank of the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, whose location is below the curve of the jaw of the wild strawberry tree; and in the flank are other veins similar to these.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	Bleeding from the veins near the ears is good for old catarrhs, migraines, and old ulcers in the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the way to bleed these veins depends on what you observe: if you see redness on the patient's head, wash the patient's head with warm water and massage it with your hands; then tighten the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two veins near the ears appear in two depressed places on the head; and feel those with your finger, and if you feel a pulse in them, pierce them with a needle.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the cutting knife and pierce it where it is insertion into the vein so that the blood comes out through the hole.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand up with the vein and the artery towards the parts above, and pierce the vein with an insertion cut.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be about two finger widths, or around that; and let as much blood come out as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then tighten it with a bandage so that it heals.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And now I have described in the beginning of this book the incision and cauterization of these veins.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But the bleeding of the two arterial veins in the temples is good for old migraines, bad blood, and constant eye pain and sharp pains in the face.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the way to bleed these veins depends on what you observe: tighten the patient's neck so that the two veins appear, and if you feel a pulse under your finger, pierce them with a needle.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then lift the artery above the vein towards the parts above with your finger, and pierce it so that it comes out below, and lift the vein up, and do as you did with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then loosen the tightened neck of the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour, then place a poultice and a bandage over it and tighten it so that it heals.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now I have described their memory, and the incision and attraction of these veins in the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And so the benefit of bleeding the forehead vein is also the bleeding of the cephalica vein for old diseases of the face, and migraines and feverishness and pus-filled ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the way to bleed this vein depends on what you observe: tighten the patient's neck with a bandage so that the vein appears, and then take the instrument called “掘削器” (fossori), of which this is the form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the prominent point of the fossori, which is at the tip of the instrument, over the vein and pierce it with a needle or another tool in the manner described, and let the blood flow according to your need; then loosen the neck of the patient and tighten it so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes it is opened with a wide incision, but do not let the incision be too sharp like the other incisions, but rather oblique, for the bone is close by and would break if the incision were too sharp.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the benefit of bleeding the two veins in the tear ducts of the eyes is for pain in the eyes and feverishness and inflammation in them, and for diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the way to bleed them is for the patient to be sitting up, and then bleed them, and you should be standing over the patient's head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And let the incision be made according to the transverse, about a finger's width in length, for there is no flesh in that place; and if the incision is too sharp, the end of it will break.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then let the blood flow as much as you need, and place a poultice over them, and tighten them so that they heal.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But the bleeding of the nose vein is beneficial for acute fever and violent inflammation, and for diseases of the face and migraines and feverishness that occur in the face, especially when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck and with your left hand, you take the phlebotomy needle and insert it into the middle part of the nose according to its straightness because the vein does not appear in feeling here and because the blood starts flowing immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	And when you finish, hold the needle with your hand little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; and tie it at night because this is restored quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the benefit of phlebotomy in both ears leads to the constriction of bile and the beginning of leprosy and many illnesses and bad corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of phlebotomy for these is that the patient tightens his neck down a little with complaint and the artist stands over the head of the patient who is sitting on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then phlebotomize the vein from top to bottom with a small, wide needle little by little and extract blood according to the amount of temperature or according to what you see is needed and do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then untie the ligature and tie the two veins with a loose ligature so that the patient is not too tired and let him rest until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of phlebotomy in the veins of the ears, treats small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of phlebotomy for these is that you make the patient lower his head and tighten his neck with a bandage and then pull down his lips and look at two veins, one of which is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and their demonstration is due to the darkness of each of both, and this more so because in the circuit of these there are small black veins; and then cut into each with a cutting incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you doubt this and do not know which is which, then cut into the largest of these, or where there is the most pus evident.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And do the same with the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is usually better to cut into the two veins that are on the lip below.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But of the two veins that are below the tongue, the benefit is phlebotomy in the cephalic towards pre-occlusions that are in the throat, to the illness of the uvula and to illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomizing these is that you follow the patient between your fingers in front of the sun and lift up his tongue and look below it, from one side of him there is a vein and from the other side there is a vein, and the color of each is declining to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize them both; and be careful not to cut into your hand while phlebotomizing these because below these are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the head are found in all people, and phlebotomy of them is done according to two ways, either by putting on the phlebotomy needle with myrtle or olive oil declining in subtlety; or cut it with a scalpel and call it if it is a vein, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this vein is that it convenes to a section and from those are special sides and thin according to the amplitude of the veins and according to the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of phlebotomy with myrtle:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Be the sides of it as often as needed, and convenes to open up the concave veins that are full and apparently large, and to those which contain thick, twisted blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of phlebotomy with olive oil:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this phlebotomy is of less breadth and more subtle end, and convenes to phlebotomizing subtle veins that contain citrine blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the benefit of phlebotomy in the basilic vein which is one of three veins, because when blood is extracted from illnesses that are below the throat and neck, and what affects the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it convenes to the phlebotomizer, when phlebotomizing that one, to guard well and be over-cautious in that one because below it there is an artery, and if he errs and cuts into the puncture of the phlebotomy, cut that artery and stop the flow of blood, therefore, it is not proper to phlebotomize that one with a piercing needle but rather cut it with a scalpel.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic does not appear by manifest appearance, then it is proper that you leave it and change to the other or look for some ram of it; or phlebotomize in the end of the arm because this is manifest; and cut it with a scalpel as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want to phlebotomize it metiously, then it is proper in front of the tightness of the arm that you touch the location between where you know the location of the pulse, and then press on it with your thumb; and let him rest his arm and cut the vein with a concave incision with a scalpel as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery with a needle at all.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, swelling in the location that you pressed with your thumb, then this swelling is of the artery, and therefore cut it off.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flowing in the phlebotomy as a color of infant's milk and the blood is thin red, then know that it is of the artery; and then press your finger over it for a long space; and then release your finger and if the blood is stopped because many veins are stopped, then tighten the arm and leave him.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And be cautious of the patient for a few days and be over-cautious of him and not anger him.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not stopped and you see that medicine is not present at all, then cut the artery, if it appears to you; because the end of it is contracted and the blood is stopped or take a small piece of fig tree, cut it, and take the one side and tighten it over the location of the vein with a ligature and a bandage around it on the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is stopped, it is good; and if not, then treat that one with what it preceded from the memory of the location of the veins from which the flow of blood is stopped.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the cutting off of blood from it is difficult in many dispositions because of the small location of the plague and the possibility of the tightness of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But of the dark vein the phlebotomy is benefit that extracts blood from the superior part of the head and the inferior part of the body because it is composed of a ram of the basilic and a ram of the cephalic as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is proper to be cautious in phlebotomizing that one because below it there is a nerve; and then if it cuts into the puncture of the phlebotomy and hurts the nerve, stupor will come upon him and healing of him is difficult, and very rarely is he healed, and this nerve many times appears in feeling; and if it is hidden in some people and is thin and not manifest, then it is proper that you stop the phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize with a concave incision and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it drains the blood from the head and brings relief to the illnesses of the brain.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And for this specifically, if you want to perform phlebotomy using an olive-wood needle or a myrtle-wood one; for it is the safest of all veins, as it does not pierce any artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you must make sure that when performing phlebotomy with the needle, you only pierce the skin of the elbow slightly, and seek out the vein closest to the surface; do not press on it, unless it is first detected by percussion.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, very often in some people, a hickey does not appear after phlebotomy on the first percussion; do not press on that hickey.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of this phlebotomy and its incidents are matters which you must consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that one should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and for hope in it, and as a precaution against the onset of illnesses; and that phlebotomy be performed at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in the spring and autumn, and in winter close to mealtime, when signs of fullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy be performed on the third day or the first after three hours have passed in the morning.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	However, phlebotomy which is administered, if it produces convenience and necessity for that, or at night or during the day, at any time and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it must be that children are not phlebotomized until they reach 14 years of age; and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month until the seventh, and the elderly who have surpassed 60 years of age are not phlebotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, it must first cleanse the bowels before phlebotomy with a lion's rectal suppository if in them there is retained broken wind, so that the veins do not push out the superfluities upon phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those who are phlebotomized should not be nauseous or vomit, nor have an illness or drunkenness within them from which it has not yet been purged; and not sick of hydropsy, but that phlebotomy be feared when colic pain occurs, or vomiting, or a pain in the belly, or multiplication of cough, and labored breathing, and due to all causes that dissolve strength, whether bodily or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider subtly on the withdrawal of humors before that if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is subtilized.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And perform phlebotomy on him in the evening of the day, as it is around the hour of terce, just as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And make sure that the foot of that one is guarded on that day from all accidents of animals, as it is constriction, anger, fear, and of all bodily accidents, as it is labored breathing and excessive pain, cough and their likes.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And for his own sake, make the causes present in the use of which men are accustomed to aromatics and odorous substances, and balsamic things and their likes according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomizer on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of him who is to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And stretch out your arm, and wipe that with his hand the phlebotomizer twice or thrice; and tighten the bandage with a belt and wrap that twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the tightness be moderate, for when there is not equality in the tightness, or the tightness is on superfluity, then flows of blood are prohibited; or it is on a softening, and then the blood of the body runs out.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And with the tightness, make sure that he who is to be phlebotomized rubs his hands together in between them so that the veins are inflated and made apparent to the sense.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And let the phlebotomizer smear his needle with a little old oil properly; and let him pause his right index finger on that vein, from which he wants to phlebotomy so that the vein escapes a little, and the percussion is stopped because it is of those veins which are compressed as by a string when they are phlebotomized, and of those which are full of windiness; and when he pauses the needle upon that it is constricted, let him remove the needle, and the needle does not open the vein, and if it does, that one is constricted.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, for this let the phlebotomizer be stopped and solicited in all of these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And let the needle be paused, but if the vein is opened in a while, then it is; and if not, repeat that again another time beneath that location a little, or upon it with compression if the location is not hickeyed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is hickeyed or the sick person shudders, then leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage, for it will quickly attract hickey cautery, nor enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And let the phlebotomy be iterated if there is love.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the wound is small and the blood flows subtley, and you fear that the amount of blood which you want does not flow, then repeat the needle in that vein according to rectitude and adjust it a little in the perception, for the location is hickeyed in many people due to few perceptions.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if he has hickeyed before then do not repeat on him for it does not help you any cause; and pause over that some part of the wound with oil, for it stimulates the blood of the body.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this location than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer oil in all phlebotomies for which phlebotomies the veins must have the prohibition of blood of the body, and make it teryak and sagzenea when it is paused over that one of those on the location, for the blood is subtilized and is moved when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of phlebotomy a great hickey is generated from many times occurring, and especially to him for which there is not stood bloody save that vein once, or in the perception of the vein little, then you cot it, and pause over the location sponge soaked in water and salt, a little warmed, and tighten that for an hour, for it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And make sure that that one also let the flow of blood from that vein with its compliment or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it appears in the location for some days some blackness or viridity, do not notice that; and if you want, pause over that some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of succus of mastic tree or of powder or its like.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many times hickeying and eminences are generated by phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore pause your hand over that, and if you then push softness by your compression over that, then that eminence is wicked and bad; and therefore guard yourself so that pause over that any cause of what we have said, for it will quickly flow from the artery blood.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a poultice with water in which is added styptic, so that the wound is hardened and then heal it with another treatment until it is cured.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And whatever you draw out of the blood, do so according to the amount of its virtue and according to the color that appears over the blood.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let it be cooked until it turns red; and likewise if you see that it is thick, let it be cooked until it becomes subtle; and likewise if it is sharp, let its sharpness be tempered.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for the person who is full and strong and needs bloodletting in a single session, the phlebotomy of the vein should be widened and the phlebotomies should be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for those who are feeble, do the opposite; and whoever draws it out in several sessions, let the incision be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best way to administer phlebotomy of the vein is by a cross-section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of phlebotomy spares blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more manageable and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And whoever is accustomed to experiencing syncope due to phlebotomy, cure them before the phlebotomy with a small piece of bread soaked in wine of pomegranates or plain oxymel heated; and draw out their blood in three or four sessions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is an inflammation of the face, then take before phlebotomy bread soaked in myrrh syrup or in scented honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar; or scented syrup and very fragrant.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope occurs due to phlebotomy and the cause is excessive blood loss, then have them drink a little wine and scented syrup; and use aromatics with aloes, and bind their feet with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to open their arm and dissolve their blood second time, from whom the phlebotomy is for great evacuation, and whose nature is cold, should evacuate the blood little by little according to the amount of its virtue in consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But whoever wants to open their arm and draw out their blood a second time, and their body is strong, then do so about seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But whoever wants to throw out their blood from their body against the direction in which it declines, let them be bled on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But a body in which blood is already heated and sharpens and fever ensues, let them be bled once, and let a large quantity be taken from him, and the wound be enlarged so that syncope occurs; and keep all the conditions of phlebotomy, and place your hand over his pulse against the direction of the flow of blood, so that it does not flow towards death instead of syncope, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not press hard on the arm and make the blood flow out with difficulty when you want to open the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, after the orifice of the vein is closed and it has become difficult to draw out the blood; rather, gently extend it slightly bent, for this is very harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Have the wound healed before it is bled again; or clean it with a sharp instrument if coagulated blood remains in the orifice of the vein; or place tallow or alum on it, and compress it gently with a slight poultice until the blood flows out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then let it be left alone and not touched until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if you are compelled to evacuate the blood again and there is no excuse, then bleed them in that place or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "the strings of the arm" is bled in the place of the basilic or the cephalic vein when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of these.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient immerses their hand in hot water so that the vein becomes prominent and appears evidently.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then it should be bound tightly with a bandage using a small needle; and phlebotomy should be done according to the small transverse, not longitudinally nor according to length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the wound be wide and your phlebotomy of it on the joint of the hand be small.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse the hand in hot water again and let the blood run into the water until you have satisfied your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from immersing your hand in hot water; and the body of the blood is bathed in hot water during the winter months.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is no pulsating vein or nerve beneath it.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And phlebotomy of the outer part of the right hand is related to diseases of the heart.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that you bind the hand with a bandage or your own hand, after having immersed it in hot water, until the vein is swollen and this is demonstrated by the pulsation; then bleed it transversely; and if you insert the needle everywhere, it will not harm anything.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And beware of not penetrating your hand with the phlebotomy, for beneath are the nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein and flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is drawn according to the amount of need, then place olive oil and salt over the vein so that it is not dried up harshly; likewise let them apply it in every limb.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But phlebotomy of this vein of the left hand is related to diseases of the uterus.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do likewise in phlebotomy like you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is related to diseases which are below the body, like diseases of the womb, and retention of menstruation, and also to diseases of the knees and old ulcers of the feet and hands, and their likes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient immerses their foot in hot water and rubs it so that the veins appear; and tie with a bandage around the ankle; and the location of the vein appears at the tip of the toe, and from there it branches into the fascia of the foot in many branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Then phlebotomy is performed on the broadest branch below the ankle, for it is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you bleed it in the fascia of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are below it on the fascia of the foot; and phlebotomy is performed according to the way you want to insert it, as if you were to pierce it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the phlebotomies be mild.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If there is a prohibition on the movement of blood, then you should raise the patient's leg in warm water and allow the blood to flow into that area which needs to be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bloodletting instrument fails on the first attempt, then repeat the bloodletting a few times, because the site is salty; and do not fear evil on him, but rather beware of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, do this to the other foot in the same way.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the site is as we have said, under the talus bone below the ankle of the wild forest.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the benefit of the bloodletting for him is at the hip joint when it is due to stagnant blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the bloodletting for him is that the patient should enter a bath, and quickly and tightly tie the bandage on his thigh on the side of the wide space above the talus above four inches in one long slender bandage, because it does not appear except through that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And so when it appears, then you should bloodlet that according to your ability and according to the cross-section, and it is better; or pierce that with a piercing instrument or cut that with a cutting tool, because the site of it is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most men hidden; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the touch of all, then bloodlet one of its branches, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot opposite the little finger and ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then untie the constriction and place something on the site of the bloodletting, and tightly bind the area, because usually it heals quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventozes are from horns, or ram's horn, or glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation that is without scarification is according to two methods, for it is either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the vents that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are twelve sites on the body, one of which is where a paunch is placed in the back of the head; and the middle part of the two parts of the neck together; and vents from the chin below the jawbone and below the mouth; and vents from two spatulas; and vents from alohoster, which is above the end of the tailbone; and vents from two little holes, which are in the armpits; and vents from two little bones; and vents from two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it has the virtue through them as is evident through phlebotomy; nor do I think that ventilation should be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by a full body evacuation.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if need demands ventilation for disease or for continence, we should administer it throughout the month and in its middle and also whenever necessary.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason for this is that in some people blood is multiplied within them when they suffer from extraction through ventilation and find heaviness and congestion in their heads; and in others congestion and heat affect their faces and heads, and in others pressure appears in their faces and foreheads, and darkness and weakness in their eyes; and in others the site of their ventilation oozes; and in others their saliva is bloody; and in others their sleep is disturbed, and in others they see blood while sleeping, with heat and swelling and other similar causes according to their own experience.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when you see any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then we command ventilation to be done after two or three hours have passed of the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of ventilation at the nape is that when it confers heaviness to the head and to that which is sunken in the eyes; but we beware that this is not a full body evacuation.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is at the site of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not advisable to use it on anyone who has a complex fever or in whom there is catarrh, because it causes great harm to him.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore we beware of using it on the elderly and on heads in which there are cold diseases.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But if after that is continued over him there is forgetfulness; and therefore we command the ventilator to pause his hand for a moment with the ventouse at the sites below, fearing the occurrence of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventilation of alkehel is at the site of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the basilica: and therefore it confers asthma, and to constriction of throat and to splitting of throat, and to cough, and to congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And let the alkehel ventilation be stopped for a moment, because if it is stopped below, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And ventilation of alhagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and hemorrhoids, and pre-vision, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is at the site of phlebotomy of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And let us command the ventilator not to press his hand while scarifying, lest he pierce an artery and cause an outbreak of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventilation below the chin confers colic in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and appearance to them of diseases that are in the mouth, and it stands at the site of phlebotomy of alicric, which is on the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But ventilation that is done over the two spatulas confers headaches, which are caused by congestion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And ventilation of the two sites in the pits of the armpits confers benefit from phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilica, the cephalic and the dark; because it draws blood from all those small veins in the flesh, and those small veins from the other large veins through which there comes attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And let us command the ventilator not to go too deep in scarification, because the site is deprived of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a ventilation in which it is ventilated over the buttocks and confers benefit to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to ulcers below them.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And let us command the ventilator that it be a strong ventilation, and that it is of ram's horn, because the site needs a strong section; and they pierce very small vents with a pointed cautery instrument and it is scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But vents of the legs are lessened for manifest diminishment, because they draw blood from all the body, and confers benefit to ancient pains of the knees and of the uterus, and induce menstruation, and confer benefit to hernia and hemorrhoids; and they stand at the site of phlebotomy of two sophens, and in the armpit, and of two little bones.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken all the body and cause syncope in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the benefit of vents at the armpit is that it is close to the benefits of vents at the two legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the leeches is that you place the leech at the beginning of the vein and suck gently, and do not prolong the position of the leeches, but remove them lightly, and keep the patient still so that the humors come to the affected area naturally.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this until you see the area turn red and swell, and a heat from the blood appear.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should scarify and continue to suck gently, gradually, while observing the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Indeed, for a person with tender skin and few scars, you should scarify once and not again so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the leech to deepen the scarification and take a little more blood, tempering the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then you should scarify twice: by opening up the pathway to the blood and moisture in the first scarification, you ensure that these are drawn out.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second, you seek to extract the thick blood itself.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul, then a third scarification should be made so that all impurities are expelled.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract a little blood or a small amount, one scarification is sufficient.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we should make many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we should scarify deeply with a wide scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers to both the depth of the cut and the width.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the person has a thick, tough hide with tight pores, then the areas where leeches are to be placed should be made smooth and open; in summer, this can be done using oil of aloes, oil of violets, oil of bitter almonds, or oil of camphor gum; and in winter, oil of nardus, oil of lily, oil of camomile, or blood, and similar substances.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superficial layer is thick and tough, then the oils should be of myrrh, or oil of balsamita, oil of aloes, oil of aniseed, and similar substances.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the leech has wide pores and a tender skin, then oil should be prohibited; instead, the areas where the leeches are to be placed should be washed with hot water or hot salt water, or with water of vinegar, or with water of soap, or with similar substances.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the person has blood that is very moist, then wash the leech-bites with sour wine, or with water of myrtle and sumach, or similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those whose superficial layers are thick, wash the leech-bites with old wine, or with water of sage, which is marjoram, or with a decoction of aniseed, or of camomile, and similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And the leech-bite should be kept dry; some say that it should be exposed to the sun for an hour or two, and then the patient should sleep with the leech in place.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is the purpose of this, that one should be bled before being leeched?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider the beginning: if the leech or the person to be bled is choleric and has hot blood and inflammation, then they should take cooling remedies, such as acetic milk-vetch, and endive in sour wine and lettuce, and henna, and julep, and similar substances.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And give them foods such as poultry, and flesh of wild birds, and seasoned foods with vinegar, and to him similarly.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for the person who has a hot complexion, let them drink honeyed water, or honeyed water of sesame seeds and sumach, and very fragrant wine between spring and winter; and let him be commanded to eat sparingly, and give him foods of poultry and cabbage and pigeons and small birds and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And on the day of leeching and bleeding, let his drink be greater than his food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And let him be given in drinking at certain times to some people terebinthine of aloes, or medicine of musk, so that it is musky, or alcelita before the leeching or bleeding or afterwards, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is drawn out; and let not them take those scabs.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the leech-bites that are to be scarified should be those that are placed over the liver, and over the melsa and podagra, and over the umbilical region, in the places of the joints, and the tip of the elbow, because these members do not endure scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those but attraction of blood from the member, so that they place the leech over the breast in malacia of flow of blood of the blood of the veins; and they use it so that the thick leech is dissolved and softened within the member, so that they place it over the belly and the umbilical region; because it softens the member and opens it and reduces its pain as it resolves the leech.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And indeed it is placed over the bones when they become swollen in their joint or broken, for by virtue of strong attraction it opens their joint and removes the break from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when it is placed over the liver and the melsa for those who are confined.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these leeches should be applied with suction only; and some are applied with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are applied full of water in the afflictions of the melsa.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the leech should be filled and made large, so it is water alone or water in which there are mixed herbs according to what is convenient.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of leech applied with fire: its orifice should be the size of two grains, according to how we have formed it; and the amount of heat should be the size of a palm; and in width on him, in the place where it is in the circuit, its size should be that of him, and the burn should be small according to the amount that enters into him like an awl.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is made of ramie, or citronwood, of thick margins, hemp, and thistle, in order that it does not irritate the member, it should be placed over him in its position upon him.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And a bar of iron or steel, where the candle is held with fire, is applied across his back.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And indeed this leech should be larger than that which we have recommended; and the few smaller according to the afflictions and the condition of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And leeches for children and exhausted people should be smaller than those for adults and large-bodied people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of applying this leech with fire upon the member is that it lengthens the joint with a decent fire before a few candles of wax, and let it be placed over the middle of the bar across the middle place of the leech, so that the fire is lit around the bottom so that the body of the patient is not burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then let it be placed over the member of the patient, and his finger over the break that we have said, while holding the leech so that when we hold it and the steam rises upon that break, then the leech will be dissolved immediately.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And light the candle according to its use, and relight it if it goes out.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	As for the cupping glass which is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse vein or pulse, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb merely.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this cupping glass, as large as it is, is better, so that it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leeches are not applied to the small parts of the body where it is not possible to place cupping glasses because of their size, such as the hand and the gums and similar areas; or on bare flesh, like the finger and the nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And you should use leeches that you have found in the warm waters of the sea, clean from dirt.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they should be kept for one day and night in warm water, until they are hungry, so that no cause remains in their bellies; and the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping glasses; and the limbs of the patient should be rubbed until they turn red; and then they should be applied to him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full, that is enough.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck the spot with a cupping glass, it is better to do so.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the spot with sweet wine and then with pure water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood continues after the removal of the leeches, and it is sweating, then you should dip a cloth in cold water and place it over the spot until the sweating is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is increased, then sprinkle powdered vitriol, or onions and similar things from the causes of astringents, until the blood is stopped; or the pods of cooked fava beans should be applied to the spot and left until they adhere to it, and the blood is stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if it is necessary to repeat the leeches, as often as possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are prohibited from being suspended, then the spot should be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle should be stuck into the spots where blood can be seen; and then they should be applied, for as soon as any blood is seen.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle some ground aloes or salt or ashes over them, and they will soon drop off.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the section of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very necessary many times in the art of medicine; it is a restoration of fractures and accidental displacement in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, understand that the foolish doctors and the common people and those who have not read the books of the Ancients nor have understood a letter from them boast about this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this cause the manner of those learned in our land is private; and I have not been obliged to it at any time because of all; and I have not applied what I have learned, except through long reading of the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, until I extracted their science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I also add to it experience and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science tells me and about which my experience has passed; because I have shortened it for you others and freed you from occupation of elongation; and I have shortened it in the end of shortening, and shown it at the end of demonstration, and formed many forms of instruments that are administered in it, as is done through addition of demonstration, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from being fractures of bones, from which whose precedent is necessary before we begin the remembrance of fractured members and various if any.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	And so that we may begin at the beginning of this chapter the summaries of speech, and the chapters to understanding of which in the beginning the artificers and in station on the truth of those are compelled; you and those who are prompt to know this noble art others from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so I say that when accidents happen to any fracture or displacement or twisting or hernia, then you should begin at the beginning with phlebotomy or leeching him, or whatever poultice, unless some cause prohibits it, as is debility of strength, or he to whom it happens is an infant, or old in decrepitude, or there is violent heat, or violent rubbing.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let him be content with food of herbs fresh and of meats of birds and of crabs; and forbid thick meats and full of food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of suppuration of cauterisation, and if you do not fear effusion of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to his first regime with which he used to cure himself.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the bone is broken begins to be restored, then let the patient be fed with nourishing foods of food thick and heavy in which there is stickiness, as are foods made of wheat cooked in water, and rice, and caps, and peas, and bellies of cows, and hives, and fresh fish, and wine thick and similar things to those, and at this regime coagulation of fracture is made sooner and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the broken bones when they are in old people or in those who are weak, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time by the drying of those members, and so they continue and consolidate those which are of them at the end of softness, as are the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and binds on the broken bone of all parts any cause like glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens together, until they come to an end of strength and firmess, as fire at the beginning, so that no cause prohibits it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this cause it is necessary that you stop the foods of the patient, foods in which there is heaviness and stickiness and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Great diversity of fracture according to diversity of member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the kinds of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the toe; and similarly all other members are diverse among them.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have come by remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its distinct chapter from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Great diversity of fracture in itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the kinds of fractures are diverse in their joints; for there is made arcuated fracture another that occurs in them stars; and some times fracture according to the length of the bone: and so fractures of the satagia and asthlas and additional joints and non-additional joints, as is made in the pen when it is prepared to write, and fracture is fissure small.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And every species has its own pain or torment in its restoration according to what will come by remembrance of it distinct in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this it is known that there is a fracture: if the bone feels crooked and has a protuberance which can be felt and seen, and when you press on the bone, it hurts.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And if in the spot there is no crookedness visible nor any protuberance and the patient feels no great pain when you touch it and move the bone, then here there is no fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there might be a crookedness or a small crack, then you need not worry about this if you touch it with your hand and compress it; you should put on the medicine of which you have experience at this moment when it suits the spot; and it should also be tight with a subtle bandage.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the spot is arched and not split in two or anything else which does not happen there, like when it is completely healed all over its surface, then you should start to treat it by cauterization until it is cured.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an ulcer occurs there, then leave it for several days until the ulcer stops; and then heal it in any way you can using medicine or by other means.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and piercing of this spot is more painful than the bone in which the fracture occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to what you remember about it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the bone is healed, then extension of this broken member into two parts is necessary, whether it is the arm or leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And then you should place the member in its natural position as much as possible while the broken parts are extended, and you should pierce these joints with a pointed instrument or by any other means that you can think of for their location.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware that you do not cause pain to the patient or harm through your operation; and see to it according to your ability that you apply one bone to its fellow according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And you should then advantageously touch it with your hand and if you see anything else there, rectify it and heal it by the amount of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish doctors make ulcers occur through their operation or cause contraction in the member just as we have seen it through the operations of many times.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then you should connect it, adjust it and properly operate on it and tighten that member and rest and tranquillity; warn the patient about this and cause him to move so that he does not hurt himself in the hour of his vigils or sleeping, and watch his revolution and agitation, and look into his excretion and all of his movements with all your skill; and see if the position of the member is a position which causes pain, because its cause is when it feels this disposition of the member's pain; then you should change it to another disposition in which he does not feel pain; and beware that the position of it is straight and healed, so that no crookedness occurs to the member when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the broken member's tightness is such that you count it; for you should know that the broken members are different in their smallness and in their greatness and in the forms of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And those which are small like the arm and the finger and the wrist and their likes, then you should have a very thin cloth wrap it up.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those which are large like the thigh or leg, then in those you should have a hard wrap, because the tight wrapping connects the large member and tightens it all around with an even binding so that no crack occurs within it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then you should begin by adjusting and tying it, pausing with a convenient bandage over the spot of that fracture with three or four wrappings depending on what the member deserves; and tighten your hand a little with the binding.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then you should go to that at the top of the spot of the fracture and tighten it so that your tightening does not focus on the spot of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then you should lengthen it by wrapping the spot of the fracture a little and loosen the tightness little by little while taking a large grip on that spot.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then you should take another bandage and wrap that other part over the broken spot, and then you should go to the wrappings at the bottom of the fracture; and your operation should be in loosening the wrapping and in softening it according to what we said above about the first wrapping.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then you should pause between the wrappings of cotton or cloth by which the crookedness of the fracture is evened out, if there is crookedness in it; but if not, then don't pause for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then you should pause on it another bandage and then heal it on these decently made layers, if there is no inflammation or ulcer in that spot, and then you should pause over it whatever causes the ulcer and which stops the inflammation; and let that be for several days; and then you should tighten the layers.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the layers should be made of thin split cane, or of wood; or of strips of palm tree; and the thickness of each layer should be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the layer that is paused over that fracture should be thicker and tighter a little than the other layers; and the length of the layer according to how it lies on the member in greatness and smallness; and then you should tighten over the layers with another bandage according to your first tightening; and then you should tie it decently above it just as we have said about loosening, and let the tightening be less, and how much more the length of the fracture is, the less the tightening.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be medium in thickness and thinness, and they should be of linen; and if the threads are thick, just as I have seen through the operation of many foolish doctors tying their threads with cords from a bow, and that is a great error when the tightening is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very thin threads are not convenient, because you will not get what you want with them and let there be the thickness of a finger between each bandage.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is hurt by the edges of the bandages, then pause below those with cotton or woolen cloth so that it does not harm him.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes the fracture is in splinters and there occurs disruption in the tendon and I come with a reminder about that in the chapter according to its uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not every broken member is tight with bandages on the first day; the cause of which is because the member when it is large, you should not pause over it bandages unless after several days or a week or more, according to your confidence in the occurrence of an ulcer.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the way of the ancient doctors by which they healed those who were broken and dislocated and crooked.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Way of the emplaster which is sprinkled for healing fractures, convenient for many complications and especially for women and children, because it is that from which heat and friction are not felt: and you should take from powder of bran, and it is the membrane of the bran that comes from the movement of the millstone in the mills.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if you can't get it like that, then you should soak it in egg white and pause the application of it not too thick nor too thin; and then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of healing fracture and dislocation and twisting: take asafoetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is the resin of wild balsam, of all these one drachma each; of myrrh and aloe, five drachmas each; aloes, twenty drachmas; mix them all together with alcohol of vinegar or with white of egg if the patient's complexion is scorched; and use this ointment for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and confers to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of ointment which confers to fracture and twisting: take myrrh and met of white poplar, one drachma each; of myrrh and aloe, five drachmas each; acacia, six drachmas; balsam of armenia, twenty drachmas.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Grind all of these ingredients in a mortar with a pestle, and then sift them, and mix them with aloe juice or egg white, and apply it.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Way to make a poultice for joints and bones that are separated from their sockets, and healing pain in those, and also for splits and fractures: take soft wool and soak it in sweet wine and olive oil, and then place it over the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	May this poultice bring about restoration, stop bleeding, and ease pain effectively.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way to make a poultice that restores broken bones: pick leaves of the wild fig tree and leaves of the wild poppy; crush them all together and make a poultice out of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Way to make a poultice that brings about quick healing of broken bones and also resolves remaining bleeding: take ground aloes, camomile flowers, violets, and bean flour, all in equal parts. .ii.; Grind them all together and mix with wine if the body part is not burned.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is burned, then mix it with water of coriander or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another way to make a poultice that is even stronger in resolving bleeding, when it happens with broken bones: take ground aloes and licorice root, and also aniseed, fennel, marjoram, violets, camomile flowers, all in equal parts; grind them together and mix with water of celery or with water or with wine, depending on the quality of the affected body part and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But Hypochlorite does not dry in its own nature, unless it is placed over the broken body part to heal it, but rather wax made of cerumen and oil, and not another cause; and it should be applied between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But it has been seen that they are placed over the broken body part to heal it and the causes of their dryness from heat are also small as myrrh, aniseeds and other similar things to those causes which we have recounted above.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Way to make a poultice that helps injury and pain: take ash, cedar wood shavings or peacock feathers, aloes, and salt, all in equal parts; grind them together and sift them, then mix them, and make a poultice out of it.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the amount should be according to the extent of the injury and the pain; also, if there is no pain or swelling, nor the bone broken out of its socket, then you should not use this for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is great pain or swelling or inflammation, then you should not put any poultice on it for that hour, but wait until the pain eases a little.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a sponge and marine sponge, soak them in warm water, then wash the affected area with that until the swelling stops and the pain is eased; then let it rest for an hour; then place over it wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or rose oil, and let it stay there overnight if you are sure of bleeding, and that the inflammation of the affected body part is reduced, and the pain is eased.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that gentle compression with a small poultice and don't compress it too much at first, but gently until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the bleeding and the swelling and the pain and all of its accidents are already reduced completely, and you have stopped using poultices and compression, then you should do it again just as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if none of the causes that we have mentioned above happen to the body part, then don't take it off but wait for three or four or five days.  .viii.; and some times it is left for 20 days, depending on how it appears to you from the poultice, as we have said, until the fracture heals, and the flesh comes together over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the compression little by little, but not as much as at first, and the thickness of the poultice, according to how it has recovered.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the broken body part already dried and exhausted but not covered, then know that food is prohibited from reaching it; and then soak it with warm water again completely, once every three days; and loosen the poultice a little, and through this operation, the body part receives nourishment, and is healed quickly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what they do the restorers of the broken body part another way when it is not healed at first, according to how it is bent and how it has been treated, is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were to be straightened by force in its sockets and moved by them.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, because it is more reasonable that it does not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: Of fractures when they happen in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their shapes are diverse, and their causes are distinct, because some fractures are caused by the impact of a staff, and the impact hits all of the bone within the skull, which is beneath the bone, just as it does in the arm, and therefore this type of fracture is called a complete elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the crack of both these fractures is large or small, and the cause is compression or crushing; and the cause is impact with a stone or hard object, and similar to them.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that it approaches the membrane which is beneath the bone; or it is in the membrane of the bone, and the crack of both these fractures is large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And from fracture it is hollow in the bone, in the thickness of hair, and because of that this type of fracture is called capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And fracture is caused by impact with a stone or hard object and similar to them, which causes any lamina of the bone to enter between the fingers, and it is made in the hollow place like that happens when it happens to the fingers when there is impact and the lamina of the bone enters between the fingers.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And it happens most frequently in bodies of old men, as well as children's heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all of these species of fractures are set like stars separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And they will come to the memory of all that in their place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you know all these species of fractures by examination and by inquiry from them, and by the appearance of rotten flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the species of hair is known by being uncovered over the bone, and washed, and linen is laid on it, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the cure of fractures, consider first the accidents of the patient, and then if you see through the accidents that indicate by manifest signification fear, as well as vomiting of cholera, extension, loss of understanding, loss of voice, syncope, acute fever, emission of humors from those, and appearance of them, and resemblance to them of the accidents in the greater dispositions, it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see accidents not running, you expect health, then you begin the cure for him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason for this is that if the afflicted has come to you in the beginning as it is afflicted, and that is in the days of winter, then know that you should study the appearance of the bone before day fourteen according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then know that you should close up the bone before day seven, having that which is under the skin be corrupted by the bandage, and that the accidents that we have recounted occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the skin covering the brain, and it is in small pieces and rotten, then know that you should insert the rotten small pieces according to what I will recount to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you cut the head of the afflicted, and uncover over the bone according to habit and manner to you possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter over the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you see the detection of the bone, blood flows or pus cauterized, then you must oppose it with what is appropriate, and it is that you apply the place with fabrics infused in wine and roasted oil, and make the plague rest while the apostema is settled, and be secure from blood flows; and then begin in the circuit of the bone and in its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And that is according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the one way is that you insert the bone with a narrow incision like this, and this is its shape: And then administer another incision this, a little wider than that; and this is its shape:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more of the incision wider than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And know that it should be due to you number of different incisions, of which some are wider than others; and some are shorter than others and are in the thickness of their extremities, and are of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with facility in percussion over the incision so that you do not strike the head and lead that.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you pierce in the circuit of it before you administer the incisions with the boring tools, which are named non-deep borers.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named thus but because those do not stop the end of the bone from that which is under it, for so that the boring tool is rounded on its end or has a margin on that which is under the head of it, acute-like margin or a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take of these boring tools many numbers of which each one is appropriate to the thickness of each bone, while it is to you present in all skulls of the brain whose end is acute, the quantity in length and brevity is according to the quantity of thickness of this skull.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the shape of three species of boring tools: The quality of boring in the circuit of the broken bone is that you stop the boring tool over the bone and turn that with your fingers while you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then change the boring tool to another location, and pause that which is between all pierces the quantity of thickness of the thread or wire.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert with incisions that which is between each pierce of the bone, and make that more subtle which you can over it in end of elevation, as we have said, while you radiate the bone, or by your hand, or by any other cause through some tools which you have prepared for that, as tweezers and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And know that you keep with total caution that the incision does not touch any cause of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have circuit the bone and separated it from the brain if it is continued with it, then extract that, know that cut and gnaw that in its roughness of that which is in the bone with another tool resembling an incision, but however know that it is more thin and more subtle than the other incisions.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there appears any part of the small bones and rough, then take that with facility by that which is due to you of the tools; and then cure the plague with poultices and ointments which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other way of operation is lighter, farther from fear, which Gualia and Launcelot say by great law; and this is the speech of it: it is necessary to you in the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone of the place in which there is the fracture more violent and more manifest, while when you have uncovered that part and stopped under it the end of this incision long and gentle of which this is the shape:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the rounded part is lion and do not insert any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides forward in length, as you see; that the rounded part be fitted to the brain with the membrane of it incisive acute in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then pierce over the incision of one part with a small hammer while you insert all the bone with facility as it is turned, and be secure of the membrane that no accident occurs in it which you fear in any manner, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if appears any cause annexed to the bone of the membrane in any place of bone, cut that from it with the end of the incision rounded, and loose that from it with facility, for it is loosed from it without harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate within the membrane, and that which is cut off or is left of the bone is the membrane of it, and appears in it rough and small pieces, then know that you cut that roughness and loose those small pieces with razors subtle by which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it be to you possible to administer of those most convenient ones and the rightest of them according to what you are led astray by your operation that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And know that you administer in your reason with which you cut the bone at the beginning the widest of those razors, and then use next it of the most subtle of it, and do not cease doing that according to continuity while you come to administer the most thin and the most subtle of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in each of the other small hair fractures and subtle fracture, know that you cure treatment according to what you are led astray by rectification of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is caused by not being rubbed on all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we will now show you what we have written about large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the flesh is torn when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the amount of the wound and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; then take another piece of folded or doubled cloth and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it on top of the first piece of cloth, and do this gently over the wound so that you don't cause the wound to bleed; then apply a bandage of linen, and don't tighten it but only as much as the wound can take.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let him stay under this treatment for one or two days until you are sure that the wound won't fester; then loosen the bandage and apply medications to remove excess moisture such as linen rags, oatmeal flour, powdered peas, and similar things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is good for you to make a powder of these medications and sprinkle it on the wound, especially if they are dry; generally speaking, apply to that any medicine of such nature that it cleanses without biting.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful in your treatment that the wound is clean; and let there be no putrescence or anything else on it; nor let virulence accumulate on it; for when it is applied to the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and damages it, and malicious evil happens to the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the head when the bone is cleaned and especially when the treatment of it is neglected, and there is blackness on its surface; therefore, consider if these accidents happen to the patient as we have said, know that they are all deadly.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if blackness doesn't happen except from the medicine that is applied to it, and it is because of that medicine that causes the blackness, then take honey in one part and rose oil in three parts, and soak a cloth with them, then place it over the head; and treat that with spices of healing until it is cured.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3:
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken in two pieces except in two cases: either both are upper bones or one of them is cartilage and not broken; and only pain, crookedness, and sinusitis happen to it.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger into his nose and grip that fracture with your index finger and thumb from the outside, so that the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And let this be done by you with ease, and be careful that you don't cause pain to the patient through this operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper bone of the nose and the finger can't reach it, then let the end of the nose be made small and thick.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the same thing.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And let him be treated for restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and otherwise, then let him have rest from the festering wound.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert into the end of the nose a plug of linen cloth if the fracture is in one part, or two plugs if it's in two parts, and let there be thickness on the plug(s) of an amount that fills the crack in the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorators say that the plugs should be wrapped in wool, and changed every day; but I haven't seen this; let there be instead a plug wrapped in honey comfit with oatmeal powder, and let the bone be set and the cartilage harden.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes there should be inserted into the nose, instead of plugs, a feather of a bird that is wrapped in linen cloth; and let there be such vehemence that the fracture of the nose isn' t prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want to do it, then do it, and if you want to do plugs, then do that.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if the wound happens again, plaster the nose with cerot or with cotton soaked in wine and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if the wound doesn't happen again, then let there be plastered on the outside with oatmeal flour and powdered peas cooked with honey; and let there be placed over it a plug of linen, and don't wipe the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or ground down, then split them and extract them with instruments that suit this; then sew up the cut and treat it with something that encourages flesh to grow and harden, and apply plasters as is convenient.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if the wound happens within the nose, then let it be treated with plugs and lead tubes inserted so that it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4:
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of the restoration of the mandible when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the mandible is broken and there is no wound on it, then be careful if the fracture is only on the outside and not broken in two and curved on the inside, then its perception is easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then insert your left index finger into his mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the mandible on the left, then insert your right index finger; and push with that the crookedness of the fracture inside with ease from the outside with your other hand; with that decently straighten it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the mandible is already separated into two parts, then let there be extension of those two parts according to straightness so that its position is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if the teeth are shaken by disruption, then strengthen those of which you expect that they will break with thread of gold or silver or of silk; and let there be applied to the broken mandible cerot, and let a doubled cloth be placed over it, and place over the cloth a great star decently made, or a sole piece as long as the mandible; and tie that under it according to how you are equipped with its application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to have rest and stillness, and let him drink wine mixed with rose oil.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you see that its shape is altered in any way, then let it be checked and loosened on the third day; and straighten what has been altered on it, and plaster it with oatmeal flour, with honey, or with oatmeal flour, after you have removed the cerot from it, and place over the plaster wool of linen.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then after that dressing is placed on it and the position of the bone isn't altered, let it be left so that it's healed and the fracture strengthened; for many times this fracture has been healed in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if the wound happens again, then let there be done what we have said several times in its healing so that it' s healed, and let that wound be cleaned.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture has a wound, then consider if it is split or shattered, then you be subtle so that those pieces with what suits for this in the removal of those tools.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is small, then you should make it larger with a bloodletting needle according to the amount of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then, when you have stopped the bleeding and it does not bleed again, then open the wound if it is large; but if not, put one of the ointments that are fit for this purpose onto it and cover it until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the collarbone is broken in front of the chest, and that fracture happens in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is broken, either it is separated or it is separated into two parts without any bleeding and it is easier to restore, or it happens with bleeding and it is more difficult to restore, or the fracture occurs through the skin.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation on that, when the fracture is through the skin, is that you have two ministers present, so that one has the aid and follows the broken collarbone, and the other extends the neck in that direction.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then fasten the fracture with your fingers until it is made in its form according to how it should be, and there is not a little protuberance or concavity in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then you should put a pillow of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit, and its size according to the amount of your need; and extend and raise the collarbone and narrow the pillow with your hand until it fastens the fracture as it should be.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot bring the end of the collarbone to the sides outside because it is reached by the armpit, then you should have the patient lean back on his neck and place a cushion under the muscle on that side.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister should press the muscle on that side towards the sides down so that the bone of the collarbone is raised up where it is in the armpit, and then you should straighten the fracture and fasten it with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel bleeding from the collarbone and they are not stopped, then you should open it and stop those bleedings with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you should make an incision on it with one of the cutting instruments which you have prepared for this purpose, after you have placed under the collarbone the instrument which serves the head; and that instrument is of wood or iron, and this is the shape of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need it for, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But its length should be according to what is possible for you in the operation; let it have two ends thus, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the opening of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the bleeding from the bone is wide, and it is certain that there will be a scab, then you should bring the two lips of the wound together with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the opening is small, or you fear a scab, then you should fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the cut of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if a scab occurs, then soak a cloth in warm vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it on that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the fastening of the bone when it is without a wound and without a cut is that you place plaster made from wheat flour with egg white, and place a poultice on it, and then place the pillow under the armpit if it needs it, and then take a bandage, which should be very long, and its width should be about three fingers, and then place powders on the poultice and the plaster; and then take a slender stake of wood whose width is about three fingers and its length is similar, and then wrap that in cloth, and wrap that cloth with the stake around the site of the fracture; and then take a bandage when it is turned back, and turn it around the neck of the patient and under the armpit on his side, and bring it down to all parts, and when you see that the fastening of the fracture with its fastening has descended, and this is what is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And let it not bleed on the broken bone; and so that you see the patient every day, when the bandage becomes soft or you see the stake has bled, then you should straighten that and tighten the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's pillow under his neck, and place a small cushion under the armpit on that side, so that with that the support of it is raised from that side, and therefore the fracture of the collarbone is elevated by the elevation of the muscle; or let his arm hang at his neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bandage unless bleeding occurs in the site or a scab, until twelve days have passed.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster when you have seen his face to that, and adjust the fastening and restore that and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the collarbone is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comfortable according to the month in 28 days, and sometimes in some people it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The scapula is broken in its lateral part and not broken from it but the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And then when it is broken in its middle part and not broken from it but the margins, then according to how the fracture is twisted you should prepare it and reduce it according to the natural shape in every way that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place on the site powder of wheat flour with egg white and a poultice, and then place on it a bandage of cloth doubled; and then place on it a slender stake of wood according to the quantity of the scapula or more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if under the stake the scapula is hollowed out in any of its parts, then you should straighten that hollow with a poultice, and then place the stake according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then tighten above it with a long bandage with mild compression and the stake so that it is not bled from its site.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the bandage every day; and whenever it becomes soft, loosen another turn and tighten it and equalize the stake if it has bled from its site.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And support the patient on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the scapula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when that number is complete, then you should dissolve the bandage, and know that it is certain that there is a beginning of union of those bones from which there is not feared or their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if the site of the bone weighs down and there is placed under it the cord, then you should cut that, and support it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone about bleeding from a scab if it occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes is broken in its middle part and that especially occurs at the end; but the ends of it are usually crushed and ground together.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And when the patient's lung is broken it leads to a decline in the internal parts and the occurrence of great pain, difficulty in breathing, cough, and strong vomiting of blood; and the cavity in the broken bone is revealed and not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of the patient is that he should be supine on his back, and place a cushion between his shoulders; and press the muscles of his chest, and adjust his ribs with the hands of two assistants, and act subtly in the operation and according to all ways that are possible and convenient, until the bone returns to its shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place a plaster and wadding over the fracture site, and put on top of it a thin table made of willow or alder wood, or similar materials in levitation, wrapped in cloth; and act subtly in tying that around the broken bone so that there is no pain; and go with the binding according to the shape of the back several times, and tighten that decently with a strap; and consider the binding at all times, and when it becomes soft, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity requires the removal of that bandage or dressing, or swelling, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the place, then you cut and loosen that, and remove the plaster and correct what occurs through the mode of cure of the patient; and then return the plaster, if possible, to its former state; and tighten the binding so that it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that rib fractures do not occur except in large places that follow the back; and from their ends at the front, contriction does not occur to those except through what are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And cognition of it is not hidden from sensation by means of inquiry with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is that you unite the fracture with your fingers according to the possible mode, so that it is united according to its shape; and then plaster and tighten the broken bone with splints, if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the rib fracture is declining to the internal parts, then the patient experiences vehement pain and puncturing, just as puncturing occurs in one who has pleurisy, and it causes difficulty in breathing, cough, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Antics are ingeniously devised for that with many ingenious things.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them I say: place foods that generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed to the external parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we should eat that so that it is not a cause to generate an abscess, if it has not occurred; and if it has occurred, then it helps.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be placed above the windpipe and that it should draw strength; and it is like reasoning, but nevertheless it is feared that the windpipe will send the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: cover the site with wool that is already submerged in hot oil, and place powders between the ribs so that it is filled, and let the binding be made as round as you wrap it; and then the patient should be cured with pleurisy cure by food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes vehement constriction on the patient who cannot bear it, and the bone punctures the membrane with piercing pain, then fear for the patient; cover the site, cut open the broken rib, and place over it an instrument that conserves the heart, the remembrance of which is preceded, so that we may insert it into the bone with ease and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then tie the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with sutures, and cure it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs within, then you cut and pour powders into rose oil and place it over the site, and let the patient be cured by that which occurs to the abscess within.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And he should be laid down on his side on which he sleeps so that it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and collarbone.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes it is a fracture of the bones of the collarbone, and it hurts them there and the joints of the spine.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if it happens to someone and you want to know whether he will be healed or not, then consider that if you see the joints soft and stupified and dead, and they cannot move them nor tighten them, and when you press them with your fingers or puncture them with an awl and do not feel pain in those places, then know that it is not healed; and in some dispositions it is deadly.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they hurt and you feel constriction in those places with the fingers or puncture, then know that the joint of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the joints of the collarbone like this and want to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider the patient's feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that they are already soft and it happens to them what happened to the joints, and then when he lies on his back, he experiences windiness and involuntary urination, and sometimes he is laid on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is deadly, and so you should not treat him.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those happen, the cause is better and less distant.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure of him is that you pierce into the abscess that you place over the fractured joint with a dropper, using either rose oil solution or crushed beans; place it on several times throughout the day so that the abscess is soothed.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and relaxing plasters, and tighten it with a strap; and order the patient to take rest and tranquility and not sleep on the side that hurts so that he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it occurs due to the joint of the bone being separated from him, then cut over the cord and let the bone rest; and then unite the two lips of the wound with sutures if it is large; and then cure it with something encrusted from within the gums, so that it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if it is the end of the bone of the hip joints and the end of the cloth, then insert your left index finger into the anus, and unite the broken bone with the other hand according to what is possible by the second mode; and then place a plaster and splint over it, if needed, and then tighten that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken tendons in him, then cut over it and hold it, and cure the wound with the cure that is preceded so that it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the shoulder joint.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the shoulder joints hurt when they are broken, and if they are broken, then their fracture is only a conjunction in their extremities, and they are inserted lengthwise and decline to the internal parts; and it hurts the patient in that place with piercing pain.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of him is that you extend your hand over him so that it is over the fracture as is his shape.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in its extremity, then you unite it according to what appears to you by the second mode so that it is assembled into its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the leg or that which inclines towards the parts below, then you make the patient lie on his belly until he is prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have bound that up, place a plaster on it, and also place a splint of wood or cane on it, and tighten it with a bandage so that there will be no puncturing of the fracture or removal of the splinter.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And fill the cavity with something that fills it up so that it assumes its normal shape, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess has occurred, then cease from its extension and restoration until the abscess is suppurated, and place on it something that promotes suppuration according to what has been mentioned before; then return to its restoration, and bind it tightly with a bandage in that way.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if the bones have become separated or splintered, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the hip.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The hip is what is between the armpit and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then its restoration is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a splint of the thickness of a finger according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let there be holes at both ends of the two splints, and let it be suspended from an elevated point.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient lie on a chair; and let him extend his broken arm over the splint until he reaches the tip of it at the point where the curve of the splint is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And let someone suspend some heavy weight over it, or the assistant extend the arm downward; and then the doctor applies pressure with his hands on both sides of the fracture until the fracture goes back into place according to how it should be.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient be laid on his neck and suspend his hand from his collar with a splint; and let the doctor command two servants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below the patient's arm; and each of them extends to his own side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you tighten with a splint on the fracture and another splint above it, and let each of the two servants extend to his side.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it should be placed halfway on the tip and the other half below the fracture beyond the armpit.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is near the armpit, then let the splint be placed on that point and on the armpit.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Bind that up with ease and without pain, and then when it is bound according to how it should be and applied well, tighten it if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess occurs, then cease from tightening it until the seventh day, and place on it soft wool soaked in wine and rose oil until the abscess drains; then you tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to tighten it is to place a plaster on the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then lift up the arm on that hip, and place your open hand on his muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And let the cloth and arm rest on the hip so that the arm is in its natural place, unless some cause from the broken bone prohibits it.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place on the fracture that splint which is wider and stronger than the others; and let there be between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers of all parts.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten on the splints with the binding which is described at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And let your binding on the site of the fracture be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, then let the binding be shorter.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you see the position of the splints and binding as we have said in the time when you are restoring the member to its natural position, then you do this:
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, then you cease from tightening and splints for the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the splint in all parts for three days so that nothing occurs at the point of pressure or inflammation, or that nourishment does not reach the member because of a surplus of binding; and then rectify all that according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are certain that nothing occurs of that, then do not loosen the ligature except after three or more days.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his hands be over his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place on the hip a poultice full of wool bound up, and consider all night or day that it is not loosened or dissolved nor the figure of the broken member altered, or that the binding be softened; then rectify all that with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And let the patient' s food be according to the order which we have mentioned before, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it is started being tightened; then let the food become coarser.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The custom of the hip and the bed is that they are tightened for 40 days; then let them be loosened and a bath be administered, and it be anointed with ointments which rectify that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is laid open, then you do not loosen from it the binding and splints until 10 or 2 days.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is made of two bones which are called two bones; one of which is small and is that which supports the finger, and the other is large and is that which is placed below the small finger from the part that is further away.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And usually it is only the larger bone or the smaller one that is broken.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small bone is broken above, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when it is broken below, then the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone which is broken is the small bone above, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to restore it, to place a little extension with ease so that it is bound up.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger bone is broken, then let there be placed a more violent extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken at the same time, then let you place the most violent extension.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And let the figure of the hand be according to its restoration and its extension stretched out over a pillow, and let its wrist be above the parts, more above all the other fingers, and let the finger be below all the others, and let the patient lie on his back on a inclined pillow.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let one pillow be in front of him at an angle or straight under him so that the patient does not strain himself.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the assistant extends the arm of the part below with his hand or with a splint, and another assistant extends it above similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor binds the bone so that he reduces it according to the best figure that he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are sores on the bones, then you must pierce through and reduce all pain in its place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears on it a separate sore that punctures the cord and is not hopeful for its restoration, then you must cut over it and treat it according to the manner we have mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with pus, I have already made a particular chapter about it, and so take its cure from that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you must line a cloth with ceratum made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be medium between thin and thick, and tie the tight cloth over that so that the abscess may yield; and then remove the ceratum and place an ointment prepared from moly powder with honey, and then place stelae; and let the stela which is placed over that fracture be more pus-laden and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of the stelae on the arm is seen in the greater dispositions, or it is a fracture in one or two joints together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your compression over the site of the fracture more strongly and more fiercely, and when you see that the compression goes to the parts above the fracture or to the parts lower down on it, stop the compression a little softer according to how it is remembered in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths which are wrapped over the fracture are to be soft moistened cloths, and not hard nor rough, and the thread with which it is tied must be of medium thickness between thin and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and its ligament after a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there happens some cause for which a correction is necessary, such as a growth on the member, and then you see that you embrocate the member with warm water until that growth ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the member not be constricted while it rests, and then return the compression.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the compression is already softened and the bone is already healed and similar to those, then correct all that with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from coming to the member because of superfluity of compression, then cover that a little and let it be for a few days until the nourishment runs to that, and then tighten it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if none of those causes happen to the patient, then don't untie it until about twenty days or so from those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then let the hand of the patient be suspended by your virtue of moving activity and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or around 32 days, or rather it is restored strongly in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and dispositions of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of restoration of fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that in the thumb of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers there are many times fractures, and not just to them but also much attrition many times.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there happens to the hand fracture or attrition, then cover that the patient follows sitting and in front of him lies sleeping according to equality, and then place his hand over that extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor apply ointment to them until they are joined with good connection.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then cover that they stop ointment and bandage if there is no abscess cautery; and then place a stela over it according to the quantity of the site, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth of it.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the parts within the fingers near the palm, and then make like a spear of cloth, and command the patient to tighten that with his palm fractured; then let it be tightened with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the stela of horn be with cloth in the one which is raised, so that the horn is applied to the palm; and tighten that according to how it covers.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is to the parts outward, then cover that they stop over it stelae and another stela of the part lower in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight; and then place the compression, as the hand is turned to the palm between the fingers with movements.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if fracture happens to any of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, let it be ointment according to how it covers and then let it be tightened with the palm, and if you wish, stop at it a small straight astela so that the fracture is elevated and not bruised.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in the other fingers, as in that of the middle, or in the index, or in the auricular, or in the ring finger, then let it be ointment and bound with the finger whose one is that; or they are all bound according to continuity, and that is better; or stop over it a small stela, as we have said in the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the disposition of abscess cautery and oppose — by your operation — with that which covers when there happens some cause of those, according to how is iterated its account of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of restoration of fracture of the bone of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh many times is broken and is declared in feeling according to how it is converted to the part in front and to the highest.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And its restoration is done in that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and let the patient lie on his stomach and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends all the ligament to its part according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is near the root of the thigh, then let the ligament be near the back of the knee to the part of the patella, so that extension is made in them, and the other ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the fracture is near the back, then let the ligament be made near the back, and let extension be to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor applies ointment to the bone with both of his hands so that he reduces it according to the natural resemblance and the bone is joined by good conjunction; and then cover that they stop ointment and compression if there is not abscess in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if there happens to it abscess, then leave that for a few days until the abscess cautery yields, and then return to its cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	Its compression is done thus: cover that you wrap over the fracture a hard bandage, and fold that two or three times, and remove from it superfluity; and then wrap the leg so that it comes to the heel and to the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And interject long thread between the thigh and the leg near the back to the parts below, and let the ends of the thread come from the highest party of both parts, and then turn about the leg and the thigh that superfluity of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then stop over the thigh in the site of that fracture astelae, and stop of those a stela over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the vacuities between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths so that the compression is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with strong compression of the middle over the site of the fracture by three or four wrappings, and when you see that you are alone with ligament of the site of the fracture, let your compression be minor and more slack and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend both ends of the rope to the lower parts until they reach the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the stars on the other side so that the ligament is not dislocated from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then place the bandage over it in such a way that there is no swelling or blistering or inflammation of the limb; and if any of those things happen for some reason, then remove it from him, and correct what happened entirely according to what we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if the pain is in the bone and it feels heavy, then you must dislocate it according to what is possible for you; but if not, apply a poultice on it and leave it, and cure it with that from which the preceding memory arises until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this fracture of the thigh is dislocated by applying stars to it, just as we have said about the helper and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the restoration of him in such a way, no claudication occurs in the patient; and if he is restored alone, then it is necessary that he also has the other leg applied to it, then it is necessary that he also has the other leg applied to it, then it is necessary that he also has the other leg applied to it.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the thigh is dislocated in 40 days or a little more or a little less, and all of that depends on the variety of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .xv.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the kneecap hurts here and there, but it happens to him in many ways traction.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it happens to him fracture, then it is nothing more than a crack or break in its parts, and that is due to plague or sesamoiditis, and on top of that, everything is due to the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And its restoration is in such a way that what is broken from its parts is healed with the said within it, until it is united and joined according to what is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then apply a poultice and place on it a round star, if necessary; and tighten above with a bandage in a convenient way.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the dispositions we have recommended in other fractures, just as it is blistering and similar to those in the same way that it opposes any accident with what is convenient for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter .xvi.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick and is named after the name of the leg; and the other is thin and is called a shank.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to both species of fracture that it happens to the two bones of the arm, and for that reason, the restoration of it is done by restoration of the arm, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are torn apart, the leg is turned into all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the more subtle bone is torn, the leg is turned to the front parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is torn, turn it underneath, and it is from those causes that you are not able to heal it.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension and equation and ligation of the stars according to that restoration.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But nevertheless, if the fracture of the leg is jagged having many points, let the extension be less and more gentle, and draw it with your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you dislocate the stars and complete all your operation, then you will take pieces of pine wood which are placed underneath the causes which are placed in soles, and they are made by splitting white palms; attach them to those to which there is a small thickness, and not be split from the fingers, and let the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the lowest part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap each one in two wraps according to the length of it, and place one on the part of the leg from one side and the other from the other side, and they are from the knee to the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then tie the two stars in three places of two ends and at the middle place, for with this bandage the leg is prohibited from tilting to the right and left parts, and it stands in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a brace of wood according to the length of the leg is already administered; and let it be placed on it so that it conserves that from movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And most importantly, do this in fracture, and when you have it is plague indeed.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider the leg every day and study it with that from final study, and guard it from blistering and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those things happen, then treat him with what is necessary within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the heel and of the bones of the foot and of the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fracture does not happen to the heel at all; but to the bones of the foot it happens in some ways; and to the toes of the foot few fractures happen, and nothing happens to them except for traction in the months of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if to the bones of the foot indeed fracture and those bones are lifted above themselves between them, then let the patient stand on his foot prepared in that way.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot over what is lifted from those bones, and press and dislocate them within so that they turn in the places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a poultice and place a stopper above it, and place underneath the belly of the foot a small table to which are two pegs.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tighten that with the foot by bandage descending, since you have wrapped it with bands and other causes from which it needs.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you loosen the ligament, for you will find the bones dislocated, or torn, or broken, and the operation on them is in that way known.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if any toes are torn, then restore them and dislocate them in the same way as you and put together to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place to the torn toe bandage according to the length of the toe, and let it be more inclined from him; and underneath the foot that table which you have recounted to me, and tighten that with bandage descending.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is torn from the bones are two or three or more, then you place on each toe a star of its quantity wrapped in linen, and tighten that table at the lowest part of the foot, and let it stand on one of the pegs of the table bore the belly of the foot so that the tongue has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you to remember that you do not consider all the causes which have been mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents we have spoken about; and pause with each accident as it occurs.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the pubic bone and of the bone of the penis and of the virile member in man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the pubic bone is broken, then have that woman lie on her back, and tilt her pelvis slightly to one side, and let her hand be held behind her.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And let the midwife fill the pubic region with cotton, and have the man's penis be made erect; and let the woman be shaken, and let her pelvis be raised little by little, for everything that is forgotten will come out before what is in front of the pubic bone, just as it was, and the broken bone will return.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And let powdered herbs be sprinkled over his back, and when he wants to urinate, wet the cotton with ease, and let him urinate; and reduce and return it according to the way in which you applied it at the beginning, and let him return to his first position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that, for that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and insert into the wound of him a cannula of canvas; and put the whole bladder into his pubic region, and let the cannula be insufflated with vertigo so that the bladder is inflated inside the pubic region, for the fracture will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be filled with cotton and stay for several days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the penis in man or woman is broken, then administer to its restoration and healing what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is straight is not hidden in these proximity fractures, and few understand it, especially those who have some study and understanding of this my book; for that fracture indicates to you in the greatest dispositions a direct way in its restoration and in its stricture, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the virile member of man when it is broken, take a walnut shell, and put the penis into that; and let powdered herbs be sprinkled over him, and let it be wrapped up, and let it be left for three days or around that, and let it be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of fracture of bones when they are swollen.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him to whom fracture with swelling occurs, and especially if the bone is large like that of the thigh or the adductor, or similar to that, that you care for it and treat it immediately, if the conditions of phlebitis testify to you as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling flows with blood, then have you care for its retention in that way as you pulverize it over it with ground black thistle, if another cause is not present to you.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And let the fracture be restored on that same day, and do not prolong it, unless swelling occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if swelling occurs, then let you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, so that the swelling may cease, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days, for you will make bad accidents occur.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered tendon, then have you reduce it and bring it down by your hands with ease and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared for you and the equation of it by your hands, then let you reduce that by your hands with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight digits, and its breadth according to the quantity of swelling; and it is necessary for the doctor to take one of these three or four according to the quantity which is needed in the cure in all kinds of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be round and have little thickness so that it is not bent by the pressure upon it in the hour of operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let its end be acute and its edges sharp; and let it be of a thick thickness above, and of the thickness of its middle within to the ends.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labro volentz atelarem", thus is palette little.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that let the acute end of it be elevated and paused over the prominent extremity of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press it into a hollow so that the bone returns, and let it be bent with some equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore force yourself to bend the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is subtle, and does not take that instrument for a good perception, then have you insert the end of that bone so that the instrument has power of it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone in all of what we have recommended, then insert that into that which is convenient to it among the inserts which we have said; or saw that with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And let you smooth that which is rough and jagged in the bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and therefore the reduction causes great pain to the patient, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do that which you confer to the patient great benefit.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed your restoration which you do to the bone, then soak cloth in black wine, and especially if it is summer; and do not pause over the swelling ointment or other cause by which oil is made, so that swelling and decay do not occur in it.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And let you administer stars in the hour of your compliment of the restoration of the bone, and leave the swelling uncovered so that you insert the wound with tweezers and use bandages according to the quantity of the swelling.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And keep yourself in all caution so that you do not constrict the swelling with the fracture, for many times have been made by foolish doctors, and caused over their patients death or a rotting ulcer, thus is a wound.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your constriction is long, soft, different from the constriction of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the swelling is great or it is bad, and you fear some evil accidents which we have recommended, and pain occurs in the place, then do not have you pause over that astelas, but do to that a covering of hard cloths in place of astelas and tighten it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one or two days the swelling begins to come out, let there be engendered in it a bruise, then you stay above that cloth which you have put over it with wine, and therefore administer hot waters, in which medicines are usually applied to swellings, thus with tetrafarmacon and similarly to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is convenient for you to loosen the bandage and consider the swelling every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed up, and let the member be prepared in such a way that the swelling runs from it to the ends below with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If after several days the swelling does not become consolidated or it is not separated from it the bruise, then know that here are hidden small bones, so beware of the swelling with tent.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those small bones which are separated and extracted, those that are not separated from it and cause the member to ache, force yourself to insert them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if it happens that the wound is infected with pus or becomes swollen, this indicates the presence of a foreign object, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction. In such cases, you must apply to the wound whatever treatment is appropriate, as described in the preceding chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And regarding the object which caused the wound: when it is a large object that has penetrated deeply into the body and broken through the bone of the thigh or the rib cage, and resembles those objects found in the larger limbs, do not attempt to extract it, for its removal often leads to death. Instead, leave it there to fester, for it will usually fall out on its own within 20 or 30 days. And then treat the wound if you can see it; if not, leave it as is.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of nodules that appear on the site of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This nodule often occurs on the site of a healed fracture, especially near the joints, and affects the shape of the limb; it strongly hinders the limb from performing its natural functions.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, if the nodule is recent, administer to it those medicines that have a styptic effect, such as aloe, myrrh, and gall-nut; take some or all of these, and prepare them with white wine, or vinegar, or sweet wine, and apply the mixture to the nodule using a piece of cloth, and bind it tightly in place.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the binding remain in place for several days without removing it; then loosen it and repeat the treatment, until the nodule is reduced in size; or press a piece of lead gently over it, since lead has the property of reducing anything that is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the nodule has already turned into a stone and it is causing pain, then split it at its highest point, and drain out the pus and any other fluid that has accumulated inside it; treat this wound so that it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is healed, and on the subsequent return of the limb to its normal condition, without any deformity.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and the limb regains its normal condition without any deformity, this happens due to several causes: one cause is excessive fluid retention in the ligament and the failure to properly bind it; another cause is excess swelling of the ligaments, preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or excessive movement at an inappropriate time; or a deficiency of blood in the patient's body, or weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The treatment for this is to encourage the patient to eat and make their heart strong, so that blood flow is increased in them; administer a bath; and apply poultices of marjoram and lettuce over the affected area.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then apply a poultice to the limb, so that it draws nutrients to the area; or continue to apply warm water to it, until the flow of nutrients is restored and the limb returns to its normal shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of fractured bones that are healed in a crooked position, and prevent them from returning to their normal condition.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When a healed bone is crooked and there is nodule formation, causing distortion in the shape of the limb, but the limb can still function normally, then you must not accept the word of someone who claims that this limb has recently been fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are some foolish doctors and surgeons who have performed this operation in our land, and it is a very reproachful practice, causing great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the claudication and nodule are recent, then they should be bathed in tepid water containing soft herbs, such as mallows and plantain leaves, and mallow-root, and similar ingredients; or a poultice should be made with sweet almond oil, or with soap made from olive oil and white lead; or fat figures should be bound to the affected area using the feathers of a young pigeon, and similar remedies from among those mentioned earlier as consolidents.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by continuous gentle friction with the hands that are moistened, and the limb should be moved to all sides at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the crookedness has progressed further and has become a stone, requiring treatment with iron, then the pus should be drained first, and the bone should be softened by dissolving any nodule with subtle incisions, and the area should be treated with gentle manipulation and attention.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23
De sermo en dislocacio.	On speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the separation of a joint, causing the limb to be unable to move, and the shape of the limb is altered, bringing great pain and severe injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it must be reduced immediately and not delayed, for if it is delayed, the joint will become inflamed, and its reduction will then be very difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason, it must not be bent or twisted during the process of reduction, for this often causes spasms and pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, the patient should be given a bath, and then the affected area should be left to rest until the swelling subsides; and the limb should be bathed in warm water with oil, and then reduced gently.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every limb should be treated according to its location.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation, following those on fracture, from the highest part of the body to the lowest.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	The two jaws are dislocated if they do not meet; and their dislocation occurs in one of two ways: either they are displaced from their joints by a small amount, and are then slightly softened; or they are fully dislocated, causing them to be displaced at the joint where saliva flows from the patient' s mouth, and their teeth cannot meet, and their tongue is wrapped around their words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when their dislocation is slight, they usually return to their proper position for the most part, due to some minor cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and full, then it must be reduced immediately, and not delayed in any way.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor should push one of his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if it is dislocated on one side; or he should insert both of his fingers simultaneously, if it is dislocated on both sides, while the other fingers are wrapped around the outside; and command the patient to open his mouth and loosen the jaws.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if its reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are fully dislocated, then the jaw should be bathed in warm water with oil, so that their reduction is made easier, and their reduction should not be delayed at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they have returned and are engorged, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not loosened, then place on those powders of cloth a cerot, made of wax and rose oil; and it should be bound with gentle ligatures.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head should be between two pillows, so that he does not turn to the right or left; and do not force him to chew anything for any reason; while his food should be meat of a lion, until when the pains are relieved and the jaws are swollen, then he can do as he pleases.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with gentleness, and he should not work hard or exert himself through speaking, eating, drinking, or opening his mouth wide, until the jaw is swollen and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce both mandibles when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their places, then often many complications arise, such as fever, constant sweating, the stomach of the patient becoming very hot, and vomiting pure cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is dangerous; and often the one who experiences this dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocation of the collarbone and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not dislocated on the inside by its connection to the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated on the outside, and this is indicated by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then press the joint with your palm with a strong compression, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place on that an ointment and powders and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which is connected to the head and continued from it, is not dislocated at any time; then it must be reduced and engorged according to what we have said and according to how you are prepared.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place on that an ointment, powders, and a bandage, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And by this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its joint.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the nipple towards the bottom.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and this happens rarely; and it is not dislocated at the back by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and exits outward at the bottom by the nipple, and mostly in those whose flesh is thin, it is dislocated easily; but in those in whom there is much flesh, it exits with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often it happens to some men due to a blow or fall, and the muscle of them is pustularized by pustules, and is cured by that which has already dislocated it.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	So therefore know this while you are above him, and then proceed in his curing.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the bottom by the nipple; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact muscle, for you will see a marked difference between them; and you will see in the head of the muscle a concavity and below the nipple towards the touch of the head of the muscle as far as an egg, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move that by any motion.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated above or below, and you will see a marked touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation there is made an easy reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And its reduction is that the minister raises his hand above; and then place your fingers below the nipple of him, and raise the joint with strength above to its place, and the minister raises his hand and extends that above; and then place that below so that it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if by what we have said it does not return, and so from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, after many days, then know that the patient should be bathed in warm water and be administered embrocation which softens and lubricates as though his joints were razor-sharp, and fenugreek, and honey in water, and be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should lie on his back and place below the nipple of him a pad of wool that is engorged between compression and relaxation, and then the doctor places his heel over the joint, and raises the head of the muscle with force, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it is not turned downward, and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it is not turned downward, for then that will return to its place at once.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it according to this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stand on his side, and insert the muscle of him below the nipple of the patient and raise the nipple of him above while the patient is suspended in the air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the bottom of his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is thin, then know that with him or another cause suspended, by gravity it returns at once.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced according also to another manner: and it is that there is placed on the ground a post whose head is rounded in shape, like mortar, which is not thick nor subtle, and then place below the patient; then place over the head of the post lion cloths, and let the patient stand according to the length of the post, and then extend his hand from the bottom of the other part with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it by all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a post whose length is two cubits, and its width is four digits, and its thickness is separated in the nipple according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then over the rounded head there are tied lion cloths so that the patient does not slide.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place below the nipple of the patient, and let his hand or arm be extended over the post to the bottom, and let the post be tied over the helper, and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm over a rung of a ladder according to its width, and let the hand be extended to the bottom, and let the other body be suspended from the other side, for the joint will return at once.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of him is completed according to any manner that it is possible for you, then know that you place below the nipple a pad of wool of equal quantity; and then place ointment prepared from ground moli with honey over all the muscle, as far as it is turned above, and then bind below the nipple with a bandage moderately tight; and let the bandage be turned over the ointment, and let his hand be joined to his neck, and let him be bound, and not moved his hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And once the patient's food has been reduced, as long as the member is comfortable, it is closer to being healed.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then food should be given in greater quantity and the patient exercised; if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated many times due to moisture that happens to it or for some other reason, then three punctures should be made on it, as already mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament is loosened and the joint not closed, and the poultice and the binding are removed from it several times, and it is not closed and the skin not closing and unable to lift that arm up towards the parts above, then know that its nerves which are at the head of the muscle are either severed or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never return to its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is made from the foot and the breast or the parts behind, the reduction is made by impulsion and extension with the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let the other binding be administered on that, and heal it as long as it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing becomes heavy on the member and delayed in its movement, then let the patient take many baths until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its first nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the curing of dislocation of the elbow.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all parts, and especially to the front part from the back part, and its dislocation is not concealed from you because when you try to bend the dislocated elbow towards you or away from you depending on how it is dislocated, this will be made manifest to you, for the joint is hollowed out and cannot bend the arm or touch with that muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And if you see that the elbow is dislocated and you reduce the dislocation at once before it comes to an ulcerated wound, for if it comes to an ulcerated wound, its reduction is difficult, and most often it does not heal at all; and especially when it is to the back part, for it is worse than all other species of dislocation, and more painful, and many times leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And its restoration, when it is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it be stretched with two hands, and the arm of it expanded, and the doctor's hands on the elbow and under it, and he pushes the joint together with his fingers or the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is to the front part, then it returns thus that he bends the hand with his hand, while striking the elbow with the root of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer vigorous extension and great force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two ministers are to hold that joint while it is being extended so that it is not pulled back by the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then let the arm be rotated on all sides, for it is wrapped in a long folded cloth over the hand or ligament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should smear it with some oil so that it causes the cause of the joint to be helped by ease of lubrication with facility; and then push the joint together with strong impulsion until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then its reduction should be that the poultice in which it is wrapped with stiptic and astringent albumen of egg white, and it being tightened by descent binding, and the arm suspended from the neck, and let go for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen its binding and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not to be stronger, then you iterate the poultice and binding, and leave it for several days until it is tightened; and then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens to it heaviness after the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer moisture in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or pause over the joint all-night-oil, as it is grease of motion; and then let it be bound, and leave that on the bone the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then wash that off, and let him take a bath; and when he is bathed, you rub the joint with tempered friction, and then iterate over it all-night-oil, as it is rose-oil of motion, once, and the second, and the iii.a.,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already occurred on the nerve through the instrument of bathing, unless it was limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, pause over that cow's udder moistened with wine and heat over it; and do that several times, for that is moist and reduced to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the curing of dislocation of a mallet, that is of the joint which is between the arm and hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The hand some times is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, but it is contrary with other joints; however, when there is swiftness in its reduction at the hour that it is dislocated, before the place becomes ulcerated or that an ulcerated wound occurs on it.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the mallet on a table and the minister extends the hand of him, and the doctor pauses his hand or his palm over the impendence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But however, let it be considered if the palm is already turned to the belly of the hand, then the mallet should place both hands on a table because of extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is before the palm of the hand, then the position of the hand of him intrinsecly over the table, so that the hand of the doctor rests on that impendence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And then if it returns at once, good; and if not, then loosen that with poultice, letting it go; and do not repeat that, for unless it passes on it days, you will not suffer nor be able to reduce it.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But however, let the joint be reduced according to its tortuosity; and do not trouble the mallet for any cause, unless the hand is softened and not able to strengthen for any cause; then know that the nerves are severed or torn, and then it does not have strength in it except when it is tightened with cautery close to the joint of it and very often that confers no cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the mallet is returned, then pause on it the poultice which we have recommended, and let it be left and tightened for several days; and then loosen it and let the hand of him be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if its movement is stopped and any heaviness happens to it, then loosen that with water and with friction several times, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the curing of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes they are completely displaced.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of these fingers are dislocated on the back of the hand or on the belly, then press the finger and push out its dislocation with your thumbs, while returning it to its position.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then hold the head of the finger and suspend that part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it while straightening it on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when morning comes, apply that narrative again, and do not cease loosening it during the day and exercising with movement, and apply it at night; and do this for several days until it is tight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do this similarly if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and apply that narrative to that part and do your first operation with it until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do for when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck and many vertebrae have left their places, then there is no cure for that, for death overtakes the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient's excrement escapes without their will, and they cannot retain it; and many times some members of them or both legs of them or both arms of them, or one of those, are deadened, because many times a vertebra has left its place and many times there is removal of those to four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	So that is already deadened in the back parts and is named paralysis.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But its cure is that then you consider if the paralysis occurred from youth, because in that there is no cure nor any healing of that at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that which comes from falling or from beating or similarly to those, the Ancients have already described the methods of cure with a lengthy speech, of which the most returns with profit; but I and shorten that from which little excuse of it from its excess for me, because of my proximity to my intention my exposition, by which I have already exposed and formed from diverse instrument of that by which I will show and spread that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in paralysis which occurs from the front part in the feet, there is no remedy nor healing of that; and similarly in that which is done to both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those there is no cure except that which occurs properly in the back by that which I relate.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient be extended on his face over a pillow propped up near a wall, and be extended under him instrument wet so that his feet are not bound.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight stick be placed, set in the ground at the end of the pillow around the head of him, and another stick in the air under his feet at the other end of the pillow.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister hold the stick, and it not be stopped in a pit; and another minister hold the other second that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around the head of the patient and under them tickle with a lion tail; and extend the end of the tail to the stick by which it is supposed the head of him, and apply that on him; and then tighten all the tails and apply those on the other stick by which it is supposed the feet of him.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the ministers each extend the tail to the end of the stick, and not be deadened the two sticks and the tails in their locations in which they are placed, but nevertheless do not stop them as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the vertebra with strength until it returns, or that he places on a table, and then he adjusts over the table his feet until he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if he does not return by this form, then take a table of which the breadth or the length is in the air at three arms' length, and dig into the wall of which we have said that it is near the patient a place in which between the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the middle of the table on the vertebra, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and tighten so that the vertebra is cramped and returns to its location.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open by a turn which is wound with the hand; and it is that you place on the ground beneath the head of the patient at the end of the pillow two sticks, the length of which is one arm, and place the head of him in the end of the pillow two sticks; and let the length be between each stick one palm, and it is already made in each stick a hole in which turn, and each be very stopped on the ground so that it not be deadened.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a round stick in which is the turn, and it is wound in the two holes of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And in its end is a hole in which the stick is formed, the length of which is one palm by which it is wound; and in the two other sticks is similarly.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the tails which you have tightened on the feet of the patient in the hole by which it is supposed the head of him, and the tails which you have tightened on his thighs in the turn by which it is supposed the feet of him.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each turn and stand a minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor smooths the vertebra as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then when the vertebra has returned and the location is smoothed, then cover that with plaster of egg white, and then stop; and then place over the plaster a cloth of table of which the breadth is three fingers or more, and the length of it is quantity that takes up the location of the paralysis, and over the end of the vertebra its.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be tied with a tail as we have said, and use the patient of subtle food until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any swelling remains in the location at the end of the healing, then cover that with medicines that soften and spread by administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is administered in that location leaf of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes swelling occurs in the end of the vertebrae of the back, and it is seized by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already swells so that it not be made projection to him by this medicine, because strongly he will do to you occur death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of cure of hip dislocated.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not deviate but dislocation only, and it does not occur to those that occur to the other joints of small removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four ways, because it is dislocated at the ends inside, or at the ends outside, or at the ends in front, or at the ends behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And most often it is dislocated at the ends inside, and seldom at the ends in front or at the ends behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of its dislocation at the ends inside is that when you press the healthy hip with the sick, it is longer and the tendon is more prominent than the healthy, and the patient cannot bend his leg because of the lengthening, and it is the location which they say the lengthening of the tendon causes apothema cauter, so that the head of the hip has already come here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of him to whom this dislocation happens is that his parts are bent outward, and that his accidents are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of him to whom dislocation happens in front is that he stretches his leg according to his ability, but still feels pain where there is pain; and if he attempts to walk and cannot go forward in front, and his urine is retained and his testicles are swollen, and he has difficulty walking on the ball of his foot.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of him to whom dislocation happens in back is that he cannot straighten his leg or bend the testicles forward, and his leg is shorter than the other, and the testicles are softened, and the head of the thigh points to that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has been long since it was contracted, and that you should not administer reduction to it, but only when it has been recently contracted; then there is no need for poultices.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in him whose dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you go to that which turns the joint and extends it within and without, and from both right and left, for he will quickly return and does not need other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare to extend the leg of him from the lowest part, or with his own hands, or by means of a bandage which is tied over the leg above the thigh; and another extends his hand of that one above the ankle so that he may put his fingers under the toes; and another tightens a lion skin around the root of the thigh, and let another minister hold the end of the lion skin.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it should be extended either from within to the anus, or from behind to the navel.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And all of these should be extended in one sitting while the patient is elevated from the ground and his leg hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary to all species that we speak of the proper treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the proper reduction of it, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is within, let the patient be laid on his side; and then place the lion skin over the root of the thigh in that place between the head of the thigh and the location below the testicles; and then extend the lion skin above the ankle to the highest part of the breastbone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another minister should take hold of his arms and press the thick part of the bad thigh and extend to the outside by violent extension, for it will return to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is the quickest cure by which that member is reduced compared to the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if he is stubborn towards you and does not obey this species of treatment at all, then let his two feet be bound together with a strong bandage, quickly, over both balls and both thighs.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each of his parts be the quantity of four digits, and let the bad thigh be extended more than the other by a quantity of two digits.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then let the bad leg be suspended over the head of the beam and be in the middle; and let its length from the ground be the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to lessen the head of the thigh, and let another young man suspend it, and the other young man lessen the thigh with strength push, for the joint will return to its place with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated outside, let the patient lie on his back according to what we have recommended regarding the swelling; and let the lion skin be tightly applied over the bad thigh properly and over the feet of him.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then let two beams be placed, one under his feet and the other under his head; and then let beams be placed close to the middle of the pile upon which dampened cloths are wrapped, so that the bad leg is not harmed by the beam being between his thighs, so that the extension below is not pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister should extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand should direct the reduction according to the article.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if he obeys reversal, it will be very good; and if not, then pause over that diligently and in the way we have said regarding swelling so that he swells there.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But let the bad leg lie on his side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in front, then let the leg be extended quickly, and it is according to this narrative on the pile; and the doctor let the palm of his right hand rest over the testicles, and then tighten that with his other hand, and with that tightening let him extend that to the lowest part towards the navel.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is behind, then let the bad leg not be extended to the lowest part and let it be elevated above the ground; but let him lie on a hard cause, likewise as if his thigh is dislocated outside towards two beams according to what we have said about the sitting of him on two beams; and let him lie on his back and the lion skin be extended, likewise as we have said, no doubt.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And let compression be administered with a table over the location at which the joint goes.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore when the reduction is complete according to what you have — and the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend two thighs, and when you see those bumps and the bad leg stretch its thigh and expand likewise without excuse, then know that the member according to which it has returned — and then you adjust two thighs and apply poultice and tighten with bandage thus so that the thigh is not bent in any of the parts; and let the bad leg rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then loosen the lion skin and the poultice, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those bumps in truth, then know that the dislocation is already stopped, and then let the bad leg walk.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and poultice that, and tighten that according to your first extension, and let him rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then loosen that, and let him delay walking on it for several days, within which he is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the testicles.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The testicles are dislocated according to three ways, for it is dislocated outside and inside and below but not behind; and in front it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of him is that you command the bad leg to apply his thigh to his thigh; then know that the testicles are dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all his ways is that you make the bad leg straight, thus so that it extends its thigh, if it can above that; adhere your two arms to his face, and let him place his foot between his feet; and then let him adhere the testicles with your palms, and press those between your fingers over the testicles of him with strength, and another minister extend his foot thus so that the testicles return to their place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And a sign that the patient is improving is when their bed does not adhere to the mattress with effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then plaster that area and attach the bed to the mattress, then bind those areas with a bandage for three or four days, then loosen them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not let the patient walk for several days until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if you cannot reduce the dislocation, then administer strong extension with instruments of which mention was made in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of a dislocation of the talus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The talus is sometimes dislocated by a small displacement and sometimes dislocated according to its completion; its dislocation can be made either within or without the parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And a sign of its dislocation is that you will see the talus swollen in the direction of the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment for a small displacement of this is gentle reduction; it should be extended easily with the hands and bound until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of this when it is dislocated according to its completion, you should make the patient lie on his back; then have a strong servant pull firmly upward from behind at the patient's ankle in the middle of that location.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then you should have your right hand hold the foot of the highest part and your left hand hold the lowest part of the foot at the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and twice with the left, then extend with the left; push the bottom of the foot with your right hand towards the bed in front of the thigh.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice according to what we have told you.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then push the bottom of the foot against the bed on the third attempt; then you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two attempts according to this method and you see the foot swelling, that is good; but if not, then repeat the operation, for it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you cannot reduce it by what we have commanded, then let the patient lie on his back on the ground, and tie a rope firmly to the ground, and place it between the patient's thighs; then you have wrapped a cloth around him so that he does not slide.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then let one servant hold the patient's thighs and another extend the foot with their hands or with an instrument they have placed over the neck of the foot; then each servant should extend against the other, and the rope be pulled between the patient's thighs so that his body is not drawn to the lower parts due to the extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then let the doctor hold the dislocation with his hands; then let another servant hold the healthy thigh at the lower parts, for the dislocation will return with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation returns and you see that it is healed by the reduction of it, then apply plaster and extend it with strong instruments, and bind the foot to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And beware of the nerves which are behind the talus, so that the instrument over it is not violent and does not strike it forcefully.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave it for two or three days; if the instrument softens, loosen it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then loosen it on the third day or fourth; then forbid the patient to walk for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if he is forced to walk within that space, it is not safe that the dislocation is not dissolved and ruined, and then what treatment is not received.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an ulcer occurs to him, then you should administer in the healing of it what we have commanded before, in another place for treatment and brothy, so that it is heated.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Let that which is dislocated be swollen with little extension without effort; and that which is difficult, first be gentle.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some part of the top of the foot, then let the patient lie on their back over something flat on the ground or on a table, and be lying as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you stand on your feet and place your foot over that which protrudes from the joints; then press that with your foot with force so that it returns; then see that it is already swollen and does not appear as a protuberance in that location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place under the bottom of his foot a board which covers all of the foot, to which are two ends, and then tighten that with decent and firm pressure for three days; then loosen it and let him rest from walking for several days so that it is relaxed and its reduction is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the species of dislocation which are made with splint or with fracture or with any other impression.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those things happen and you are expert in the treatment of that and in the restoration of it, many times death succeeds.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And therefore you should not presume over the treatment of it, but that which is wise in the art, from long experience, merciful and compassionate, slow, not hasty or presumptuous; and use in the beginning of medicines which produce ulcers cauterized only, and let the patient go to divine judgement, unless you hope for salvation from destruction, with some relief of illness, and in which there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then effort to make the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before it produces an ulcerated cauterized.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns according as we want, then administer a regimen which yields an ulcerated cauterized and cures the splint with what is convenient for it from the dry ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with fracture and occurs in the bones separated, then you are expert at their binding, and do in that which we have said in the simple illnesses of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware and avoid according to your strength that of the instrument in ways of fear according as you are preceded by my prediction; for that is better for you to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more healthy to see those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus end the words of Albucasis perfectly of which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
