Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Al-Buqaa'.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O son, I give you this book, which is the last part of medical science, to complete it as far as possible through its explanations and statements; to me, it seems that I have fulfilled this by writing this treatise, which begins with surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For as surgery is laid down in our country and in our time entirely deprived, so great danger lies in the science of it, and its evidence remains; except that there are a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which they changed with mistakes and situations until their judgments were closed, and the force of them was extended and their art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I see that I have made it possible to arrange this treatise in the second way of explanation and statement and abbreviation; and because it comes to add to the forms of the instruments of cauterization and other tools of work by addition of the statement, and for preparation of it, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The cause for which no good artisan can master himself in this art in our time, is that the science of medicine is long, and that he has to deal with the actor before him having been exercised in the science of anatomy which brings together Gualia as it knows the joints of the limbs and their shapes, and the connection and separation of them; and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their numbers, and the length of them; and of the pulsating veins and quiet veins, and the locations of their sensations.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore say I that a certain name is necessary, small in the work, and more so in the art of surgery.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said of that in the introduction of this book; for who does not know that we told him about anatomy, is not aware that he falls into error by which people die, so I have seen many of them formed in this science and get themselves out of that science and their experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a doctor in a book and tried to find out that he had put an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and hit some of the arteries of the neck so that blood flowed from her; that's why she died among them.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who promised that he would cure an illness of a man which had progressed much, and the sickness was great, and he came to him and cut off part of the bladder with a bit of the urine, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	But I already called to remove that one out, and I saw that because of the greatness of the sickness and the disposition of the patient, it seemed certain that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took a fee of two ducats from our land for surgery; and he had placed a black cast on him which was broken in the crotch of him; and the doctor prepared himself with his ignorance, he removed the fracture by cutting it, about the pubis, with pulvines and needles to strengthen the stretch; and did not leave the pubic area breathing.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Then he removed the plaster according to his desires and prayer, and he left it for several days and commanded us to remove the ligament; and thus, in the end, the crotch was opened with an abscess, and came to destruction.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and I dressed the ligament so that it was quiet and gave no more pain of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But corruption had already become established in the member, so I could not restrain that one, and I did not stop walking the corruption in the member until the patient was in danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who pierced an abscess of cancer and it became an ulcer in a few days, so that the evil of it reached its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	For the cause is that the cold cautery is pure of melancholic humors; therefore it does not seem to reach him by all means, but that he should be on a member which you suffer all to be host.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, son, it is necessary to you that the operation on man should be divided into two operations; one in which health is associated with work, and the other in which danger lies in the greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already kept it here in all places of this book in which work is done by mistake and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep it and not open it, so that the pages do not block your way to speak or disturb you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Then take your weapons with care and protection of God, and your illnesses with relief and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Then take your best way through the grace of God for salvation and worthy succession, and leave those terrible illnesses of difficult recovery, and keep your weapons from here which makes you afraid, so that it does not escape you in your faith and in your name: for more remains to your glory, and first and last before your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia has said in some of his advice:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not cure a bad disease so that you do not have to deal with bad doctors."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered by head, in the shapes of instruments and tools of cauterization, and from that which is necessary for surgery.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of cutting and piercing, and of vacuums, and of extractions of arrows and resembling those, is divided and ordered by the shapes of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of cure of torsion and resembling those; chapter ordered by head, in the shapes of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of fire cauterization and acute medicine and remembrance of surgery.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will tell you the quality of the joints of cauterization and the important points of it, and in which combination it should be prohibited to make cauterization.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of the joint of cauterization and the important points of it is long and prolix, and subtle by science, and hidden; and from him a great many of knowledge, and from him they disagree, and for me a little of their speeches is enough for understanding.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore I say that cauterization confers on all combinations universally the same quality; except for two combinations which are combinations of five parts.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the combination of tail and dry matter it will disagree; for some say that cauterization is favorable to that one, and others say the opposite that cauterization is not suitable in a disease of quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not suitable that a disease of tail and dry matter be healed by the same which is dry and hot.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	He who says the opposite of that one, is it not favorable in all disease of tail and dry matter which he sees in men's bodies; because when you compare men's bodies with the dryness of him to the combination of fire, he frightens his own body.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the word of that man, who experienced this already a few times to uncover it.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But nevertheless I do not cover that it comes upon this one which is already exhausted and exercised in the chapter of cauterization per latter exercise, and has known the diversity of the complexions of men and the causes of those, and the accidents of their own, and the space of the time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	Mays in the other complexions, it is not upon you a fear, and mostly in the wet and damp diseases, since all doctors are agreed about them, and they are not discordant in the cauterization of those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you know, children, that of the secret of cure per cautery by fire and of the goodness of it, it is because the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach but to the member which is cauterized and not to another member with the medicine applied, since it is only a small injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of the burning medicine reaches that member which it is applied to, and strongly brings about a healing in the sickly member, and strongly it has a taste.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But the fire, for its subtlety and its substance goodness, does not affect it but that it overflows And I have already known it by experience and by long service in studying the truth of causes; and through this one I am excused from the length of speech And if it were not that it is not legible to me at my own will in this pause to you hidden with fire, and the quality of the operation of it on the bodies and of its excretion by which it eliminates the diseases, with philosophical demonstrative speech, which would serve acutely in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And you know, children, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to make cauterization and pause the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the injury by time is submerged in the healing of it that is drawn out by cauterization, and mostly if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, which do not suffer a delay since they are feared from those which come out by time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And then do not cast in your minds, or children, that this is only the popular belief and foolish practices; since it is because all disease which is healed by cauterization is not suitable at all times, and pause at that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not good in that way which they watch by it, since cauterization is only a place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the humidities which are the causes from which pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nevertheless cauterization in excess over the medicine by the will of its usefulness and the virtue of its operation and greatness of its Lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the disease which was administered to it by medicine returns in some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his disease, and the virtue of it; and because it was prepared in its body with the addition of its excesses to its food and the resemblance to those causes; but if the disease which was healed by this is subtle in a member of few excesses and humidities, then, if that medicine for a tooth pain is similar to it, it is possible that in him it does not return that pain, but that it goes away.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	But popular speech is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a harsh speech, not to him who understands it, since I believe that it is no cure which profited by medicine or any other cause; but cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to this; and I say that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine only when we administer the methods of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not benefit, and at the end of the cause we administer medicine to him, and it benefits at that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And then from here I say that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I have of the popular beliefs and silly practices of doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they say that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and do not say this one but for the equality of gold and its subtlety.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cauterization does not burn, since I have already seen it and touched it that this one does not burn except in some courses where the others do; and cauterization with iron is good and better than that with gold as they say; but when you make cauterization with fire of gold, it is not revealed to you, because it depends on the quantity which you want for the roughness of gold, and because it prepares to receive it in the fire; and if you place over it ignitions so that gold burns by the fire, and perhaps in the fire some sheets by which the artisan cuts himself through its occupation.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this one is made cauterization with iron, it must be done lightly and carefully on the right side of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have ordered those within the chapters so that they answer your questions which you want about them.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	About cauterization for a headache by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers on humidity and cold the accident of which there are two causes; so it is a cause of soda and many fluxes of rheumatic fever, called rhagousia, from the head to the branches of the neck and ears flowing, and many sleeping, and toothache and gingivitis, and generally in all diseases that come by cold; so also, for those which are paralyzed, and sudorously and apoplexially.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is that, first of all, you command the patient to be evacuated by lacative medicine from his head, for three or four nights, according to whether you require the virtue of the disease and its age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then order him to shave his head with a razor, and then make him sit between your legs on a bench that is raised, and place his hands over the area.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the movement of your palm on top of the movements of the razor on his nose between his ears.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But nevertheless, when this one says about the place of your head, it is reached, and then take the olive oil with your hand on that place; and then ignite cauterization in its middle.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then pause it on the place gently, so that it goes down slowly, and your hand is put into constraint little by little, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then raise your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see some quantity of hair fall off, like the amount of salt in water, then lower your hand, and if it does not turn to iron, then move it from that one, if it is cold, before you see the bone which I have told you about.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on that place and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then pause over it wrapped in a bandage and leave it under it until the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that place with a fourfold medicinal ointment so that it be healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that when the Roman plague raged, so many were burned with fire; because it was better and more pleasant.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say some of their that is cauterized within the bone, and it should be heated to dry up a part of its surface.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And be it cut off that which is close to the bone, and be it healed.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they said to me that the cautery should go up to the last, until it reaches the strong bone, and this is the form of the little alpaca:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they say from that place exhale the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the blister should be kept open for a long time, and be it healed before it hardens.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I do not see these two kinds of cauterizing at all, except in the case of a great fear; and let this one be better if it is healed, since the head is destroyed by solution of continuity from it, as we have shown in the other members, and especially when the patient's head is of freckle nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first kind of cauterizing is better saved and more useful to me; and of that one, and of that work, I am a supporter.
Capitol segon.	Capitolo secondo.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the head cauterizing.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head chronic and long pain occurs, and water remains in the patient's head for a long time, and he uses plasters and poultices and salves and ointments and ointments and oils and perfumes, and especially if he has already been cauterized with one type of cauterizing and does not profit from another, consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not pleasant and causes much pain, then cauterize it with another cauterizing.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize that on the tip of his head with a cauterizing, so that the knot is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the knot and expose the bone as much as we have said, and cauterize that in the last part of the head behind the ear - and it is that place where wind is let out.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And rejoice your hand in it, and do not expose the bone, for the patient' water causes great pain, different from the pain of all the other head cauterizing.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And direct this cauterizing to its place, for what is more subtle cauterizing of the head's horns and the occiput than that cauterizing with which it is cauterized in the back of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Capitolo terzo.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the cauterization of an old emigrant.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When in the back of the head hard pain occurs, or it hurts within the ear, have the head cleansed with medicine, and administered another cure, which I have mentioned in the causes of the head' water; and does not profit from it, then cauterize it twice: either with acuter medication that burns, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But cauterizing with acuter medication that burns is to take a piece of lead, and burn it, and rub the edges of both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then cut the place of pain in the temple with a sharp knife, so that it is within it, so that the knot is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then hold it with a stopwatch by constant contraction, and leave it for three hours; then take off the lead, and keep the blister for two or three days, and put your hand on it submerged in water until the place is pain-free.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that with ointment so that it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, there are some medicines with which I have written in the two treatises of burning medicine.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cauterizing with iron according to this method: this is its form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	is called a little peg, because the head is thus shaped in its form as a peg has some curvature, and it is at its midpoint that there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then put your hand on the place of pain and hold it firmly  - so that the peg is not broken - and turn the small iron slowly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of it that is dried up by the knot is about half of it, and raise your hand so that the artery is not broken, so that blood does not flow from it.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then dip the cloth in salt water and put it on the place, and leave it for three days; then dip the cloth slightly under the edge, and heal that with ointment so that it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see it, cauterize the end of the knife according to cauterizing, and beware of cutting the artery in this old emigrant properly.
Capitol quart.	Capitolo quarto.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cauterization of an old emigrant.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an old emigrant with water that I have mentioned in the previous cure, and which is not profitable for the emigrant' water, and sometimes because of the cause of the head' water which I have mentioned in the causes of the head' water, and does not profit from it, and sometimes because of the cause of the head' water that I have mentioned according to cauterizing with a knife, so that it is white, since it indicates on the place of pain with a long line that is half of it; and leave your hand for a turn, and firmly hold it within incision of the artery and turn the knife within it, so that the iron goes into it.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to protect the continuity of the jaw which is tightly bound by mastication, and that the larynx is not broken, and the nerves are not damaged, and do not get entangled by a spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and safety of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut off, since in the cutting off of it there is danger, and mostly at the one which does not know water and is not studious and is impatient; and leave the operation on it at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come to mind with the memory of the accident of blood flow of the artery according to your method, in its place from this free.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If this old head does not profit from this cauterizing and the patient' neck is tolerable, then cauterize that in the middle of the head according to what we have said, and heal the blister so that it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cauterizing that I have mentioned in the chapter of stretching the artery by two knives, and it is better cauterization than this, and confirm more.
Capitol .v.	Capitolo quinto.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain from scratching and it is treated with the causes of the scratch cure and with the other cure that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not improve, then burn the cauterizing, and this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then burn the end of the knife towards its ignition, and direct it around the whole ear as a rolling wheel or in the circuit of any small part if the pain is there.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with the cauterizing of the hair of the ear, slowly but surely so as not to burn the place with the tip.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cauterizing of punctures is spread over the whole ear, and then it, and heal the places so that they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Capitolo sesto.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of the cauterization of a tumor.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	A tumor that is cured and the cauterization is not anything other than the medicines that enter through the blood according to what we have mentioned in the causes of the head' water.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization by the heat of the instrument, which endangers the person through drying out or spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that kind of torture with ablation and purgation and enema, and don't control your treatment, then when you cauterize the anus with three things: first, razing the anus, second, a small piece of hot iron, third, the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause the small cauterization for the opposite of the bad part, because softening doesn't happen except in the part that is healing and becoming healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with the cauterizer on the right side of the edge of the anus, placing a small piece above the hairline of the head, and in the hot one, whose length should be according to the length of the said leg, and then pause your hand on it cauterized so that the amount of the essence of the wound is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of the cauterization, and it is special with the knife, the shape of which is facing forward.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But more importantly, that little one slowly pours out; and when it comes to the knife in place of unnecessary excess richness a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with water that is already cooked in front of it so that it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .vii.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On Cauterization for Ancient Apoplexies
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When an ancient apoplexy is and you treat it with water that we have said and don't give your medicine and the person doesn't have a fever, then cauterize that with four things: over all the hairs of his head; and at the cauterizer and the top of his head, as we have said; and at the skull.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the way of the cauterization is done according to what has been said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is already cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and more later; and then, treat it with water that you have cooked.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .viii.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On Cauterization for Oblivion Caused by Flame
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Then give the patient in the beginning great jerras and pills with a servant telling them.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then return the head of the patient to the barber who is in charge, and place him on his back with a black cloth described in the treatise about plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then pause some drops, because that is a way of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And make it according to the water measure that I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And then if it is good for the person's health; and otherwise, then do three things on the back part of his head, which are placed from the back edge of the head to the front edge within the hairline.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cauterization the length of the leg, and then treat the cauterized area with water that has been cooked.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you add more and the person tolerates water, then treat the cauterization in the middle; and if you add less, then cauterize that above the two hairlines.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat that within which is healing; and it is the olive cauterization according to the shape that has been given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .ix.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On Cauterization for Paralysis and Softening of the Whole Body
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Then treat the person's head in ablation with jerras and water that we have said; then return the head of the patient to the barber, and cauterize that in the middle part of the head, and over all the hairlines, and over the back part of the neck, and over the two spondylos of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary for the softening of the whole body, then treat that with the four things mentioned above; and more importantly, treat it so that the essence of the wound is burned out of the body, and support your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then treat that area within which is healing, and let that be olive cauterization.
Capitol .x.	Chapter .x.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On Cauterization for Epilepsy
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epilepsy is not cauterized, but that kind of epilepsy is caused by flame.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Then treat the person' brain at the beginning with jerras and another treatment that we have mentioned in the chapter when the patient has a great illness and tolerates the medicine' effects.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who doesn't tolerate the medicine, then administer ablation and enema to him in front of water for three days, with a servant telling them; and with good food for the child.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then return the head of the patient to the barber, and then cauterize that with one thing in the middle part of the head according to the previous way, and another one on the occiput of the head, and over each hairline, so that his hairlines are also cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the person is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the things mentioned above, in paralactic position and softening of the whole body over the spondylos of the neck and back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	Then do olive cauterization according to what has been said before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause in a subtle way according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On Cauterization for Melancholy
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted moistures and coarse flame, then cauterize that with the things that we have said in the case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess of sadness causing melancholy, and the patient' body is moist, then give him water that treats his brain according to what has been mentioned in the previous chapter.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then return the head of the patient to the barber, and then make it turn gently over its hairline, and then pause it in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the person be sixty years old, and is held by his hand throughout.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then pause the oiling; and it is more worthy of being a shepherd than an ox.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And dry that over fire with moderate heat that he endures when it is hot in his mouth.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then hold him in the middle part of his head in the circle, and let him wait until he is chilled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And treat the person with water once a week, either with one treatment or with cauterization mentioned above, in order to moisten his brain and equalize it.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then pause that hair in the shade or in gray-colored hair.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On Cauterization for Downward Water in the Stomach
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have said that the beginning of water in the stomach is declared by the signs mentioned in the previous chapter, then start and give the person water that treats his head, and hold back all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	Then do the sugaring in baths with cold water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then order the person to wash his hair, and cauterize that with one thing in the middle part of the head; and then cauterize that with two things over two temples, or from the beginning of the water in two vessels, or at the beginning of the water in a single vessel.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Then apply one thing to all the veins and arteries that are left of the head; and those things are applied at a distance in the length of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And don''t give him any medicine when he is cauterized; and if you have to give him any medicine, which is unlikely, then do so with great caution.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I come to wisdom who is in extract of herbs and in abstinence from those and caution from flows of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some are cauterized in the neck between two bones, two cauterized tools being removed.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter .XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of grief are ancient and flow vigorously through the veins and arteries that go to the top of the head and it is shown that this is a superfluity of fluid phlegm, then cauterize it with a cautery as we have described in the beginning of this book on water coming out of the eyes, and cauterize it in the middle of the head and two cauterizes between two temples, and two cauterizes between two bones of the neck.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is swelling, then cauterize it in all places on the edge of the eyelid over the brow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter .XII.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of a bad smell from the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you prepare and give to the patient three glasses of wine; then shampoo his hair, and cauterize it with a cautery that is half strong and half mild.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize it with a clavium cautery, two cauterizes on the two eyebrows, one small hair being left between them.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And keep away from fire so that you do not burn it up.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of this cauterization with the clavium, this is the method.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cauterization of eyelids of eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize it with a cautery that has this shape.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, then cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little, and let them be long in length.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not squeeze your hand too much with the cauterizer, less according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is dried up.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cauterization of eyelids of eyes when the hairs are turned inward and the hand pulls the eyelid.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid are turned inward so that they can be pulled out with a pinch, then cauterize it in two ways, because cauterization or medicine burning is done.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If a cauterization of fire is to be done, then the servant in front should not wet his hair, but rather let it be long and curled; and if he pulls it out, then you should strengthen the eyelids with a cloth so that they are not torn, and let them be pulled out.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then, when they are curled and curled up, then pause the servant's head on a stone, and place his hand over the eyelids of his hair with a clenched fist, according to the figure of a fawn in death; and this is the beginning of the sign.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then pause the sign in beggar's milk in an album or peacock's feathers on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then set fire to the cauterizer, and this is the shape of it:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize on the shape that is signified, little by little, until the surface of the eye is burned and it looks like a leaf of mint, completely burnt.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And this is the sign of health from this work, that you see the eyelid of the eye already tightened and the hairs of the eyebrow already curled up by the pinches of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and let it rest on the sign for three days, and then pause over it on a stone, and let fire be applied to it until it is burned up completely.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with oil, so that it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if for some reason the hair falls out and the eyelid is softened, then do the cauterization again all at once with a strong fire.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hair is in the eyelid below, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural place and curled up, so that the hairs do not pinch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But if the cauterization is with burning medicine, then order the servant to wet his hair so that it is long and curled up, and then let him be burned with a strong fire in the shape of a peacock' s feathers.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then dip it in salt water and in live garlic. Chapter I. Take this water, and mix it with both of these ingredients, and make it into a soup so that it does not become cold; and then pour it over the cloth that is done as a shape of a peacock' s feathers, and let it rest on one side; and let the head of the servant be on the other side; and dip that in salt water and in garlic, and then bring it to a boil so that it does not become cold, and then pour it over the cloth, and then dip the cloth in milk and butter, and let it rest on the table for an hour.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Then dip it in the medicine and let a little bit of it be on the tip, and then let the servant feel the bitterness of the medicine, because the bitterness is in fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then, when the servant feels the bitterness of the medicine, then let him spit it out and wash his mouth with water; and then consider whether the eyelid has been raised as it should be raised with fire or with a cut, because he will feel well; and if not, then return to the medicine on the spot where the medicine has not been applied and the operation has not been completed, and has not been damaged.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then pause the sign on a stone, and let it be burned until it is completely eradicated, and then cure it with oil or something else that heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And you must be vigilant in your operation so that the medicine does not fall on the eyelid, and if the eyebrow is softened by a cause of the hair pinching the eye, then repeat your medicine to the spot where the eyelid is softened, and completely do it, and then return to the place where it should be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of a peacock' s feathers.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Know that the eyelids of men are different in size and shape, and therefore your contraction should be according to this.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the way to make it for yourself if you want to study this craft.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with the water that we have described in the divisions of the face, and do not confer your treatment, then cover it so that you cauterize it according to this method: order the servant to place his head on a stone, and let him hold his hair back with a cloth in such a way that he does not move or shake his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then pause the sign in beggar' s milk in an album or peacock' s feathers on the eye of the servant.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then set fire to the cauterizer, and this is the shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	that is curved like a cane or a feather of a bird, from one end which is done with the cauterizer.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see it, then it should pierce to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to come out so try.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But however that is enclosed is better to the whole work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And approach the fistula if it is open, and take out of it and dries up that.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and remove the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place over it the cautery which is well ignited, and touch that the patient's hand or the hernia slightly at the tip of the nose, so that your hand or the hernia does not disturb, and then place the cautery on the veins of the foot, and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of the cauterization pain entered into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization a time or two, if necessary, and leave that there for three days, and place over it with care and wet it with salt water until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it is not healed after eleven days, then place over it the sharp corrosive medicine again, so that the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what you want in his chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way of cauterizing a fistula that they first said: go to the place of the fistula and pour it out and place in that crack thin as a blade which is the shape of it: And pour into it a quarter of a pound of molten lead; and if your hand is firm, and does not hurt the patient for the lead to reach the foot of the nose, then cover that with a cloth wetted with milk or water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with water that we have spoken of in the cauterization and cure, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a nose troch of the nose and reduce the fistula to the base of the nose according to what comes into its own place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the Cauterization of the fracture of the bones.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Veiled warts may come about in the lips, and more often in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So if you cure those cracks with the water that we have spoken in the divisions and do not profit from your cure, then ignite the small cautery according to this shape that it encases:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And its cavity according to the subtlety of a blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that with great care in those cracks so that the cauterization reaches the tip of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with care within that it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And when in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth it gives rise to a swelling and then breaks, and then it becomes holed, and then it is corroded, and then there is made a fistula, and you cure that and do not profit from your cure, then place that which ignites the cauterization according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then place that ignited one on the tip of the fistula, and if it reaches the fire to the tip of the nose, and at the back of it make like this a time or two; and then cure that with water that we have spoken of in the cure, within that it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	But if the swelling is healed and it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and scrape the bone according to what comes in his chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the Cauterization of the Teeth and the Softening of the Veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	And when the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are loosened, then treat those with medicines and do not confer, then place the cap of the hernia in the patient' knee, and ignite the cauterization according to its shape that you put immediately over the tooth, and then insert into it the ignited cauterization quickly, and let your hand rest a little on that so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then take your hand off, and repeat the cauterization a few times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then place the hernia in the patient' mouth a cup of salt water and hold that for an hour, and then drink that, because the loosened tooth is firm and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the Cauterization of Toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is by cold or there is a burning or biting sensation, and you do not profit from your cure with medicines, then cauterize that according to these two ways: or cauterize on the edge of the cow's udder, or cauterize by fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterizing on the Edge: It is that you take a cow' udder and press it on a pan of iron, and then place a cloth over the edge of it and wrap it around the end of the tooth, and then ignite that quickly on the tooth that it is heated, and let that rest on the patient' tooth immediately so that it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that cauterization a few times within that the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see it, dip a cloth or a pad in the edge and place that on the tooth, and then place that ignited one on the edge within that it reaches the tip of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But however the cauterization by fire is that you take a pad or a cloth of iron, and if it is not thin, and place it in the center of it a little thickness so that the heat of the fire does not reach the patient' mouth; for the fire to reach the tooth, then it must be thin.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cauterization according to its shape, and place that on the tooth, and if your hand is hot, then make a few times; because the pain may return or persist for some time.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And when by the power of that cauterization the hernia fills the patient' mouth with its edge and holds it for an hour, and this is the form of the cauterization:
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Cauterize by Edge: It is that you take any extreme end according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the tube:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the Cauterization of Extrophy.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophy is of thick fluid and loose humors that do not submit to digestion by medicines and you see the digestion of those a little, then ignite the cauterization according to this shape, having two open ends so that the smoke reaches the other end, and place that ignited one on the swelling once, and another if you want from that, within that it reaches the tip of the swelling.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the swelling is little, then place the cauterization according to the quantity of the swelling, and let it rest for three days, and place over that a cloth wet with sweat within that it cools down.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with sweat and tries and bandages within that it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And this is the form of the tube or two cauterizations: to turn the patient' head, so as to place the tube in the correct position.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the Cauterization of Hoarsness of Voice and Constriction of Throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the moisture comes to the patient' throat, and more often when water is generated by cold, then it is necessary to evacuate the hernia at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that according to this shape that it encases the vocal cord in its cavity.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not put the cauterizer on the nose or burn from the cord of him, but only a little bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery it must be done at the junction of the neck in the last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cauterizer of him is to be held in the manner described above.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with water that is preceded, so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of the malady in the chest and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughing and lung disease are caused by moisture, and the fever is not high or there is a old cough, then cauterize that with two cauterizers on the furrow in the place that it is decomposed, and another above it between two breasts; and hold the cauterizer in the manner described above.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cauterization is to be with the pointed cautery that is called the puncta, the form of which you precede in the application to the pain of the ears.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points within those; and then cure that with water, if it is preceded, so that it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cauterizer has three ramps for cauterization: with one you can make three cauterizers according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of titillation, which is at the top of the jaw.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the top of the jaw is displaced by slippery moisture and does not return at first in the hour of its return, you must reduce the displacement within that it returns to its usual place, and then turn the intestine that is on top of it towards the inside of the jaw at its ends with the fingers of your left hand; and then raise the cord that is on the outside of the jaw at its ends with your right hand, and let the cord be pulled back.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then burn the cauterizer that has two heads; and this is the manner of him:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the intestine within that it enters on the other side; and there will be a figure of cauterization with three heads.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and then make it subtle according to the amount of attempt; and this is the manner of him:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some are adjusted according to this count, and because there are the cauterizers.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then hold the pointed end of the cauterizer towards the skin, and then make it adhere to the area quietly, and let the member not be irritated by any time before it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the displacement is at the ends and it is tight there, then cauterize on the muscle with a pointed cauterizer or with a sharp cauterizer, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is loose and the intestine is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is a flow in the stomach and loose fluids enter it from its whole circumference and then multiply, and if you continue the ways of cure and do not confer with them, then, when the intestine is on top of itself, return it by bending, and extend your hands, and then cauterize that with three cauterizers: one cauterizer leave the foot unbound for the quantity of a finger in the pointed cauterizer, and two cauterizers on either side of the two sides of the cauterizer, within that the figure of the triangle cauterizer is made; and make to pass between those which are not adjusted so as to cut them.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterizer is equal to the amount of the three times of the thickness of the intestine.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And be the figure of the cauterizer according to this form, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cauterizer in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this be a cauterizer according to the form of the circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And be cauterized the stomach with water that is afraid of that cauterizer: and it is because you feel on the stomach point according to the amount that you want to try, and then cauterize that with a cauterizer in the points; and then cure that with the cure that is preceded within that it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cauterization of the fret.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the breast comes from cold or moisture or a loose wind within that it is get from its normal circumference, and if you do not confer with it, then, when the intestine is on top of itself, return it by bending, and hold three cauterizers according to this form and this amount of water over the chest between the scapulae, and let this pass to the bed of the man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And be the space between each cauterizer according to the length of a finger, and be the cauterizer according to the length of the chest.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press your hand with the cauterizer.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water that is added is equal to half the thickness of the intestine, and it is not adjusted within; and if the intestine is on top of him; and if it is not lying down, then let it be lying down, which has extended its coysas, and raise its brasses.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterizer:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	You can make these cauterizers with a pointed cauterizer when you have subtlety and caution in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not process too much in the cauterization, and let the thickness of all the intestine be so that it is adjusted to the whole cors, for the intestine here is subtle; and know water.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On piercing an apoplexy in the breast with a cauterizer.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is a excitement or an apoplexy in the chest, and you want to know if that apoplexy is in the flesh of the chest or in the tunica of him, then, if it is in the flesh of the chest, the intestine has great gravity and acute pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunica of the chest, then the pain is acute and great, and already you are tired with the cure of him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then, when the intestine is on top of itself, turn it by bending; and then feel for the location of the apoplexy with an attempt; and then burn the cauterizer that is assembled of meat, the form of which was described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And then cauterize with it and with another within that all the intestine is closed, so that it reaches the cipha, so that it heals in ash.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with other cures for apoplexies within that it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And I do not know that this form of cauterization is used except that which was extended in the study of medicine, and at its end there were some subtle maladys; however, this one is to be tried sometimes on this operation, but most of all let it lie down, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of plauresis.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the small cauterizers of the Aristotelian rasps are to be used in the way described above, and this is what you take from the rasps of Aristotelian long, and be of the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then submerge that in oil and then burn it at the fire, and then cauterize with a small cauterizer in that place which is between the continuation of the furrow to the neck; and two small cauterizers on either side of the guide, one slightly declining from the beginning that is left, and two small cauterizers between the fifth rib and the chin, declining slightly at the ends; and another cauterizer in the middle of the chest; and another over the stomach, and three more cauterizers at the sides behind; and a small cauterizer between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover your hand with a glove while using the cautery, for it will be in the open air.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already some say that this is done by men who use a type of cauterizer similar to a ray or fire and place it in the area between the ribs until they reach the pimple and the skin comes off, and then we said about the pimple of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this hole made by cauterization there is no danger, because in that place it often happens without cure.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.30
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the Cauterization of the Male
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the hernia of the male, we have already said about the treatment in the division and do not apply your treatment, then make three or four cauterizations according to the length of the hernia according to the shape of the cauterization of the foot, whose image has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cauterization there is a size of a finger or less, and the way to make the cauterization is the same as we have said about the cauterization of the foot.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not cover your hand with a glove when using the cautery; and the patient is lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cauterizer with two hands, which causes what we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the blade which is in the area of the hernia causing the pain of the patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation is made in such a way that you raise the blade according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And approach the two hands, ignite, in that area where it penetrates the code from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cauterizer; and there are four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see it, cauterize with three hands.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And you cure the cauterization faster than it has been used for many days, because it is more certain that other causes preceding in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter.31
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the Cauterization of Hydropsia
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Do not cauterize in hydropsia but only in a certain case.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydropsia, apply the treatment methods we have said in the division and do not apply your treatment, then it is customary to cauterize with four cauterizations around the navel and one on the stomach, another on the foot, another on the hernia, and two between the ribs, and one on the right side of the feet, and one on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the amount of depth of the cauterization is proportional to the thickness of the code.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then remove the cauterizer so that it does not get stiff over a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And you do not evacuate the male by treatment before cauterization, so that two drops are added to it, and the third is mixed with it, and the fourth is used for the application of the treatment.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cauterization applied to the stomach is square according to the shape that preceded it, and this is the one used for the two sides.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter.32
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the Cauterization of the Feet and Thighs
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are aching and full of water, it is customary to cauterize the feet with a little water between the little finger and the ring finger, and to raise your hand with the cauterizer and not twist it; then return your hand, for the water evaporates.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the way to make the cauterization: And then make two points on the thigh with two cauterizations, and a cauterization in the tip of each.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cauterization according to the length of the thigh: and I leave it shorter at the top and longer at the bottom of the leg; and two cauterizations on each.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And you leave the cut open for a long time so that no water evaporates from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And you treat those causes we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter.33
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the Cauterization of the Belly
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is sore and wet, causing digestion and retention, which are in the stomach and intestines, it is custom to treat with treatment methods and not apply them, and sometimes the patient suffers from the vertigo of exhibitionism; then cauterize it with a large cauterization on the top part of the stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with a large circle and four cauterizations around the navel, with a square cauterization; and a cauterization on the thin part above the loins, or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the patient tolerates abundant humidity, then cauterize it on the pentagon and intestines, and firmly adjust two cauterizations on the stomach and close to the loins, for this is a perfect treatment for the health of which there is no cure.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter.34
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there is a nature of old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors that infiltrate or moistens the area, it is treated as we have said in the division and do not apply your treatment, then make three cauterizations on the pus between the small ribs and the small triangle, and one above the navel, cutting two dots.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you judge that the stomach of the patient is irritated and his food is not digested, and his face is aching, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cauterization according to what has preceded; and one cauterization on the foot, another on the hernia, and leave the cauterizer for a long time, then treat the area that needs to be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter.35
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the Cauterization of Athell Near the Absence of Its Members
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you separate athell, then use a type of cauterizer similar to fire.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	And then put the cauterizer on athell that is cut off, and hold your hand over the hole from which the blood flows out of the vein.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make one or two, because if the steps are three, then cauterize each one according to what we have said, and treat those with treatment that is applied, so that they be healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cauterization on the thin part, it will lead to death.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter.36
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the Cauterization of Fistulas That Are Caused by the Nature of Later Steps in the Divisions of the Male
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not respond to the treatment we have recommended in its place, the patient is afraid of it, and he will be healed with treatment.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	And when there is a fistula in nature due to the later steps in the divisions of the male, and it is old and rotten with humidities that infiltrate it, then apply treatment on it, and do not try it first, for it will cause pain; and reduce the depth of the treatment according to the front specified attempt.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And then use a cauterizer that is similar to fire.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place that cautery lit on this tube, and according to the quantity in which it intermixes, pour the wine.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat over that cautery inside which are burned those corrupted humors once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning of nerves and veins; or if the tube goes to the core of the bladder or to the core of the hernia, then beware of all those places; and do not pour water unless it is in a fleshly place and you think that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then cure the area within that is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is closed and there are no more materials to be removed, and it has healed for a long time, then you will know that it has been completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not held back by him, then you will know that it has penetrated or into the preon of his leg or comes from those causes from which remembrance will come to its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of the bumps.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When the bumps ache from friction or strong wind, and because of this the patient's leg is tired, then you should know that it is necessary to cauterize each bump with a pointed cautery from which the remembrance comes.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And very lightly cauterize it in two places with a small needle, so that three small scars will come, and then put them together with a quick motion.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter.XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When it happens in the bladder that there is pain and soften because of friction and humidity so that the patient does not retain urine, then you should know that he has a swelling on his penis, and at the beginning of the foreskin, and cauterize it with two needles on either side, and another in the right place.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the flesh; and cauterize it with a cautery at the lower end of the two, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And be a pointed cautery according to how it is used.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter.XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cauterization of the hernia.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is friction and humidity on the hernia, and because of this it causes pain, and because of that the patient's spermatic cord is corrupted, and the cause of it comes late, then you should know that the area must be cauterized with three cauteries along the navel, as was said in the cauterization of the bladder; and another cautery on the lower part of the two sides, or two cauteries, and be a pointed cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter.XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When the wet feet are covered with liquid that leaks out of the core of the ankle, and because of this it is clear that the foot is swollen, and if one foot is longer than the other when they are compared to each other, then you should know that it is necessary to cut the bandages from around the foot.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the core of the dislocation is turned inside out.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then, when you cut the foot of the patient with a circular knife in a place similar to that which is swollen, taking care not to cut it on the outside as if you do not turn the circle, then the core will fall into its place.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And be the knife with which the shape of the cauterization of the stomach is preceded.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this knife is not at your disposal, then you should know that it is necessary to cauterize it with three olive-shaped knives.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And be the knife according to how much the wound is painful throughout its core; and carefully cauterize that area within that needs to be healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter.XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the ankle and it is caused by friction and humidity, then the patient should be given water that has been mentioned before and not offer anything else, and if this water is stale, then you know that it lacks the medicines that are required for this; and carefully cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the way to use the cautery in that area is according to two ways: or cauterize it with burning medicines, or cauterize it by fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The second is that you cut it with a sharp knife in the shape of a triangle according to this form, and make them deep; then pour the medicine onto it.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And be the space between each knife the quantity of its thickness; and if the olive-shaped knife or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some additional details are given about the cauterization of the ankle with four knives.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, then cauterize it with a circle that surrounds the shape in which the dislocation of the ankle is cauterized; and let the fire burn throughout its core.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the way to cauterize when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the sock.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it extends into the sock, then you should know that it is necessary to cauterize it with two needles on either side of the sock in the place where it hurts; and make a point in the middle of the shin bone for four times, a little bit at a time, so that the core is burned.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the knife used for cutting is sharp, and be the depth of the knife according to how much the wound is painful throughout its core.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient reports that the pain is extended into the feet, then you should know that it is necessary to cauterize it where the patient feels the pain; and make a point with three or four points, or more if desired, in that area.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient reports pain on the sides of the leg above the sock, then you should know that it is necessary to cauterize it with a sharp knife.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And remember in any cauterization that you do not offer a fire that burns nerves or causes great harm; and if by accident it comes to the patient's skin, then be careful that it does not cause pain or damage.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	You have already seen one of those that I cauterized on the shin bone and the last in the cauterization, and the fire was so fierce within that it caused a swelling throughout the leg, and the fire pierced it completely.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then came a sudden solution to his stomach pain, and death followed him.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is on both sides then cut it each according to this form.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	The wise said in the cauterization of the ankle, this is the way: make a circle of iron whose circuit is most of a palm; and it should be the distance between the holes according to the thickness of a date or half a palm.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle there should be another third; and be the space between them the quantity of the flesh; and let these circles be open on both sides; and this is how it is done:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let the fire burn within that it gets red hot and makes sparks, and carefully place it on the ankle, leaving a space between the foot and the leg, so that the heat does not affect it.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize it with three curved knives in one place.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then let it rest for three days; then apply a paste to it and leave the wound open for four days; and carefully cauterize that area within that is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Diys Albucasis: Son few the cases of this type of cautery that I have used for fear of looking at them, and because few have found those who look at them.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More of these cauterization than the sufferer, and turn away from him that place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More of these medical instruments than the sufferer, so that you make two circles with a pointed awl on the door of iron; it is the length of the part in the shape of two nuts or keys that these are.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each amount is equal to the thickness of this one; and are opened from bottom to top, and that they contain themselves according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And put your hand over the opening of the anus while the patient is sitting on his legs, and press your finger onto the opening of the anus; and take a little tail of water between the two circles, and the quality of that is applied to the small fire gradually, and endure the pain of the patient for one hour — so that the pain stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument and wash the tail of water from all the anus with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then leave it for three days and put it on the border until the pain is relieved, and leave it for some days, and run away from him. This is the end of the cure.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then this cure is good if it is cured.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the crotch or to the legs, make him sit in a position that contains water according to what is done in the anus.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the way of tail of water, and I have already written that in the treatise of the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe water of alkali and two separate parts one from another, and cut them into three pieces and put them in a new wave of which the opening is pierced by a small hole, according to the amount that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Then put the bottom of the wave into another wave wrapped up, and place it on that alkali and alive water of two parts which takes it by a day, and then, if you press those with your good hand, and leave the wave that sends away from him the sharp water in the opening of them to the wrapped-up wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and put it on another alive cause and other alkali, because that one is strongly aggravated, which is administered in small operations of medicine and in the cauterization of the other members, because operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And then of these medicines a few that are cauterized broad, as well as to temper the fire and mix them with salt on the cause before they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Guilia told of a man of the old people the operation and cure by which is cured the pain of the anus and the sciatic nerve, and he praised it very much as being of that good, and said that there is no need for another cure, and because it is cured by one taken thus as well as by fortifying it, because that man was greatly ill before.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that it should be taken of a certain type of fruit, and if not, it is taken very fresh; and one is trised with a little salt and placed on the anus in which the pain is, or on the crotch, or on the legs, and left.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And leave it for the amount of three hours, or the quantity that the patient can endure the pain.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then put him in a bath and when his body is warm, insert him into the water, because the pain stops and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you know that it is not necessary to use cauterization with these medicines but by evacuating the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	More of Escorides also says that when the vein is tightened by a goat's tooth, it will be better for him; and this cauterization with him on this method: Take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the feet of the foot and between the toenails.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take a dry goat's tooth and ignite it by fire until it becomes a charcoal; then put it on the wool and leave it until it is dried up.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Then repeat this water, and do not stop until the water reaches the sensation of the pain that penetrates into the anus and leaves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cauterization is called cauterization by oxen.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LXXII
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cauterization of pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains are in the two parts by two causes, by rubbing or by percussion or by excessive discharge, and by those resembling them, by the infusion of friction and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization is not done except in this single specialty which is made by the infusion of friction matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it is an evacuation of the patient by pills which resemble them and are made on both sides according to the thickness of his body, so that there are as many in each line as there are in his body, because the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the medicine allow it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And make a cauterization by a small cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauterizations or four with a middle-sized awl according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter LIII
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of the cauterization at the beginning of gingivitis.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Some cases of this disease occur in small children, and the onset of it can be detected by the development of a crackling sound when they move their jaws; it is from that beginning that the pain occurs in them.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it begins at the last vertebra of the neck and the bones of the spine that have already begun to protrude beyond the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Then when you see this water and want to stop it, then cauterize it with a small cautery which is made in the following form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery onto all parts of the spine as one piece.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the spine with a small cautery made in two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	Those points are close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then this cure is good for the place until it is cured with water that we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	More should be kept in mind that cauterization is not administered in gingivitis which is caused by a spasm of the nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors which infiltrate each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, it is a sign that the body should be cleaned with a kind of medicine called podrague specifically for this purpose.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And then when this gout is cured by rubbing in a certain way and the pains are not repeated, then make a small cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is because you cauterize that with an evacuation on the circuit of the joint of the foot with a few cauterizations.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then make this olive cauterization, for which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a small cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains press within the feet or towards other joints, and it is a long way to walk, then cauterize that with three or four cauterizations in total with this olive cauterization.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you feel that these cauteries are necessary for you to heal, then cauterize it and do not press too much on your hand with the cautery, but only surround the skin of the cord.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain is present in the thumb and also in the index finger, then administer the cautery that we have said in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is present in both of them only, and it is called sugar, then make points on the circuit of the fire as it spins, making points on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in these two, then make points on the circuit of the fire over each finger and over the edge of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain is present in any part of the legs or muscles, then cauterize each one from all sides of the aid.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient properly or receive medicine, because if you do it well and clean with this cautery, God will help to heal.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 50
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization of breaks/fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a break occurs in the thighs and you order the patient to leave his food alone for a day, and to use mild treatments so that the wound does not open up from the inside of his abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient between your hands on his back, and order him to keep his head within so that it does not move or appear, or the intestine or budge.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return to the patient's back and try the break on the bone of the spine, taking care that it does not hurt or appear, but rather seems like a circular line from the bottom of the rib cage down to the hip.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then light the cauterizer in this way:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	within so that it is red and gets hot, and makes sparkles.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them; another servant should be on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cauterizer on that mark with your hand, holding it steady, and bring it close to the patient so that you can feel the bone of the spine at its midpoint; and repeat this process on the other side if you did not succeed in the first attempt within the os.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully how the intestine moves during the cauterization, so that you do not burn that intestine and cause death or some other great evil to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you do not feel the bone with the cauterizer, your operation is not complete.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	The cauterizer of children should be subtle according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then clean the area of the cauterization for three days, so that it does not become infected or scarred.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then care for that one with the others within so that they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should be lying down on his back for ten days, keeping the area clean and sealed from illness or plague.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And do not stop the patient's nutrition according to the length of time for his healing, and that the intestine does not burn outside due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then when it is time to remove the cauterizer after ten days, do so carefully and gently, keeping it for another ten days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And with hard work and proper nutrition and beverage, and with great determination, because when you use this complete healing regimen, it will heal.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And direct the healing of breaks in other parts of the abdomen as well, beginning with the third part, and cauterize that break with a small amount according to the quantity, so that it does not stop; then clean that one with water, which comes out of the abdomen, and do not tie it up.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And others have said that the first break should be cauterized with a triangular shape of the cauterizer, since it is marked in this way:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is paused between the lines that go from the bottom of the break and up to the top, and another line from the bottom up again; but pause your hand with a nail, because the first cauterization is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 60
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of twists/twists.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When the pain is present in any part of the limbs by confinement or impact, and it persists for a long time and does not respond to medication, then cauterize with a pointed cauterizer.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cauterization of each member according to its size and age, and its benefits and development, and its location of twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it is healed by the first cauterization, then it is good; otherwise, repeat the cauterization; because usually those pains are caused by punctures in that member, which come close to the body, so that you achieve with these cauterizations what is needed for the patient to be healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 67
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprosy can be healed by a great deal of cauterization, and moderately if the kind of leprosy is caused by the decay of fire and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so if you want to cauterize that one, consider whether leprosy is caused by fire decay and melancholy, and heal it with water as we have said in the division, and do not go further unless you are sure that corruption has reached all of his body and all of his complex; then cauterize that one on the head using two cauterizers: one at the middle place of the hairline, and another a quarter from it towards the back, facing the end of the hair; and both on either side. And one behind, over the nape or servitor.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And last, your hand with a little bit of cauterization within so that it remains on the bone a small impression, and the scales have been moved away, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is relieved from him; and cauterize on his own hand as soon as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has spread over the patient's body and appears visibly, then you should cauterize that one with those cauterizers we have said in the head; and one on the tip of the nose, and two on either side of the cheekbones, and two on the sphenoid bones of the skull, and one behind, over the jawbone; and one on each thumb, and another on each finger, and two on the top of the foot, and two at the bottom of the foot, and two on the spines of the hand, and two on the palms of the hand, and two on the shoulders, and one on each breast, and two on the sides of the ribs, and one behind the stomach, and one behind each knee, and two at the top of the thigh, and two at the bottom of the thigh, and one on each ankle bone, and one on each foot.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And keep away from those nerves that are over the skin because you did not burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some are cauterized by a cautery on the bones of the pentil and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the feet.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more times you apply cauterization, the faster it will heal and the less painful it will be; and you should know that with the patient immobile in cauterization, the body doesn't feel pain any longer because it is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And depending on whether the members or joints are treated before applying the cauterization, either with a large or small instrument.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the cauterization with flour of erucous seeds mixed with honey and the other cure within so that it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xliii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of the Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is stiff or asleep and is not healed with medicines, oils, and plasters; then you cauterize that stiff member according to the size of the member or the age of the person.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And this small cauterization enters into the essence of the wound a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then apply that one with ointment within so that it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some are cauterized in the middle of the stiff member that goes to the top and bottom, and the nerves that move that member, and it is refreshed so that the stiffness goes away.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	No more than this, unless one knows about the structure of the body and the exit of the nerves throughout the whole body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter.xlix.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the Cauterization of Morphed Albaras.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When Albaras is old and doesn't conform to any of the ointments of medicines, then apply cauterization on it a little according to the essence of the wound within so that the whiteness and the color change, and the color of Albaras changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then apply with flour of erucous seeds and lentil mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and sanch of colombo or sanch of yaronda; a little of each is mixed, and a cloth is laid on the area within so that it heals.
Capitol .l.	Chapter.l.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of the Cauterization of Cranks.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When the cancer has begun and you want to cut that part off, then apply cauterization on it in a circular motion while rotating it.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The wise ones said that it is to be cauterized with the last cauterization in its own place; but I haven' seen this, because I think that it is ulcerated, and I have already seen it ulcerated sometimes.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is said that it should be cauterized in a circular motion around its own place as mentioned before, or with a pointy cautery.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.li.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of the Cauterization of Adultered Ones.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When any adulterated one is delayed in maturation and becomes excessive, or by age of the patient, being old in decay due to age, or because of time, and you want to hasten its maturation; then apply cauterization around it with a small pointy cautery; and let that one fasten in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	Maybe you want to pierce it with cauterization, then apply the fire of cauterization, and leave that one in its own place among adulterated ones within so that it penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cauterization is placed in a place that is left alone, so that the body of the arm is relieved; then apply to it within so that it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter.lii.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the Cauterization of Corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is ambulatory corruption walking in the member, which corrupts that one as if it were eating dry firewood with fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if that corrosion is in a place where it suffers cauterization with fire, then apply cauterization with a small pointy cautery, and large according to what is appropriate in the place where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then apply cauterization completely, within so that you eradicate all corrosion and don't interfere with any cause of Albaras.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then leave it alone for three days, and apply a compress with ointment mixed within so that all the scars are completely eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then apply to that one with a fragrant ointment.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	Maybe if three days have passed and the flesh grows again in a healthy way without corruption, then apply cauterization on it again because it will re-corrupt; otherwise, repeat the cauterization on the places that are corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosion is cured with some medicines sometimes, because corrosion is half a place instead of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterization by fire helps to heal quickly.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	I have already said that the medicine for Albaras is effective in dividing it, and now take it when you need to leave the patient's side.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter.liii.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of the Cauterization of Claws and the Rest of the Semblants.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	The claws of the bad-tempered patient are sometimes broken, and this is a gross cause, causing the foot to hurt; and cauterize them in two ways: with fire, and with water tail.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Maybe cauterization by fire is what ignites the cauterized claw like a torch, and that is made of iron according to the amount it contains in the claw from the very beginning, and it is refined to a sharp point.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then let that claw ignite, and rotate it with your hand near the fire so that the cauterization reaches its depth.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Then leave it alone for three days within so that it starts to burn the arm.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply ointment on it with dried sea-weeds cut into three pieces, and leave the ointment on that one for a new thing, because it eradicates its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then apply to that place with a fragrant ointment generated within so that it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it doesn' convert, and sometimes it happens on the surface of the body, mostly on the hands and feet; then, when you apply cauterization with water tail, a little amount at a time, and rotate your hand; let that water fall slowly into the claw'a hole a little at a time, and return your hand, and now turn that one with a compress of your hand from top to bottom, and plug the edge of the claw'a hole with the compress, and wait for the patient' arm to stop biting the water tail; then remove that one.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And then apply to those ones again until you go over all of them in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then apply ointment on those places where the claws were to eradicate any infection with water of the ointments that the flesh generates in the body.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter.liiii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the Cauterization of Tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor that bites the nerves or due to fever from scratching, or similar causes; then, when you apply cauterization to that one with four cauterizations or five on the spine between each spine with a cautery; and one cauterization on the feet, and another on the stomach, and another on the back, and another on the neck.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of that patient is relieved, and the healing begins quickly because of the fever.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter.lv.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the Cauterization of Unintentional Injuries to the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there appear white spots and pustules that are formed from corrupted thick matter; therefore, at first sight of these, it should be cauterized over all the fistula with a gentle cautery made with a mirth stalk, its extremities being spread with fire; or with long erestology; or with lente-cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some veins are cauterized at the beginning of their discharge according to this manner; and they are not widened, and the surplus fluid is stopped by doing so, and cured from that.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But however, it should be done that this is done with a fluid drainage.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of the cauterization of a fluid flow from an accident by incision of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Trous veins that flow by incision of an artery must be cauterized or incised at the root, or cauterized at the root of the apotheosis or cautery of the member, and then it is difficult to repair them.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, if it happens to anyone that there is a flow of fluid, then hold your hand over the root of the artery with your thumb at its opening, and stop that fluid from flowing from under your thumb, and do not let it go.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then return the gentle and large fire cauterizations to their place, for many reasons, and exhale over them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take one of these, small or large, according to the location and the injury where the artery is broken, before you repair it, and cauterize that vein within that has been cut and stop the flow of blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the artery's opening when you repair it and expel the cautery, then take another cauterization that has been prepared in the fire, and do not cease to make a small cut within that the blood may flow through it.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And guard that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that fire does not come upon the patient's thigh or another evil.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when an artery bleeds, it is impossible to stop the bleeding in those places and especially so if the artery is large, unless one of four ways: or cauterize with this manner as I have said, or extract when not extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities of him burn and the blood is stopped from flowing, or that it is tied with a knot or ligature by strong tension, or that it is placed on medicines from which the virtue is drawn to stop the bleeding; and they are tightened on the palm of your hand.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But that which is administered with careful tension or tight pressure does not confer anything but fire and pain.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if it happens to anyone that there is a flow of fluid and it is not the present medicine or remedy, then open the pause of the index finger on the opening of that vein as I have said, and understand with great tension of the inside that stops the blood from the root of the injury, and over the artery do not repair it; and, above the artery, spray with cold water in a way that the wound is cooled and thickened; and further burn with fire or with medicine if there is need.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision, piercing, vents and drainage, and of blisters and their resemblances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all illness that requires fire and fire cauterization and when and why and what instruments are convenient for it, and these chapters of the sub-heading of the head within the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter according to that method, so that what is desired may be obtained, and then on that which has been desired; for it is difficult to obtain it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Before I began with this, let me tell you, dear sir, that I will tell you in this chapter what is frightening for your benefit; the first chapter was about the cauterization of fire.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for your benefit, let me tell you that in this operation, there are many ways to avoid danger; because when it is necessary to cauterize or incision at the root of an apotheosis or open a pustule or clean out a wound or extract a arrow or cut off hair and its resemblances.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And of all these, fear and trembling accompany them, and at the most they bring death with them.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that it does not happen to you what happened to others; for some of them, there were ways in which they fell ill because of the behavior of others' illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them some died very quickly from their illness and were not afraid of it; and others died slowly from their illness and from its duration and from the illness which was causing death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of them is the one who gives you hope and comfort, hoping for their health, but their illness is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so I do not agree that you consent to this behavior towards you which is this manner; and your caution be greater than your fear and your haste; and do not assume any cause against you except a certain science that certifies it, to which the success of glorious praise belongs.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your illnesses by prediction and indication of which is saved, for in this it is helped to you regarding acquisition of fame and memory, glory and praise.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Or, children, God gives you his understanding and does not leave you alone in your direction and protection, for it is in him.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I will proceed with this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter of cauterization, of the care of the head within the feet, so that what you desire may be obtained from it and for which you have needed.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You should know that this illness appears to children, when the child is born and when the head of the child becomes light.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some appear to be due to hidden causes that are not understood.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this illness except in children; and all those whom I saw died quickly, and so it seemed to me that a worthy work was performed in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head remained as it was, until fire killed him; and more than that the humidity increased within that fire killed him.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture or is added between the nose and the jaw, or is added above the jaw over the chin.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation in this is that if the moisture is between the nose and the jaw and the apotheosis is little, then you open at its place in the head with a crack in its depth; and let the length of the crack be two inches within that it runs water, and this is the shape of the spittle:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is increased and the apotheosis is larger, then there are here two cracks according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is above the jaw, then it is a sign that you open the comissures of the head completely and squeeze out water when you compress that with your hand at its depth; and it does not happen to you what has happened.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Then cut the middle of his head into three parts according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	Then remove all the moisture with a scraper; then stretch the openings with cloth and feathers; then sew it up again with thread, oiled and soaked in water on the fifth day, and then tie the head back into place and care for the wound with wet bandages and apply ointments, then make sure the head is equal and healthy before feeding him dry food with little moisture until the member has recovered and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	There is another way to make the incision, which you consider appropriate for the size of the abscess and the amount of fluid: some are better in the occipiti, or on one side or the other; so make the incision where the abscess appears and where the fluid collects, and pour water as quickly as possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause a sudden flow of blood, which could kill the patient with such a loss of blood; let him evacuate the moisture slowly.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of incisions into arteries that run near the ears, called carotid arteries.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is a cough or fluid in the lungs or feet, and it has been treated with water, and this treatment does not work, then do the final treatment by making an incision between those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to make an incision where the patient's hairline is, and rub the area with an abrasive cloth so that the veins appear, and put a strong cloth around the head; and consider the place of the pulse; and the areas next to those at the ears are cut in some people but hidden in others.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then stretch the vein out; and make an incision on each side from above toward the bottom, going deep into the bone, and pour water by the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want to, insert a blade between the artery and the incision on the sides.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two fingers' width apart, for when a vein is cut, the pulse jumps and stops frequently because it jumps often.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	Except if the vein is not felt when pressed, then cut where there is a space of three fingers between the ears, and stretch it out.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	So that the amount of water is equal to the quantity of blood. And so stretch it out by holding it up in the air as much as or more than the amount of blood that appears from the virtue of the patient and the amount of fluid in the vein.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the pulse; if there is a cause of кипha (not sure what this means), then cut it out carefully so that there is no abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then stretch the pulse with feathers and a cloth drape, and then care for it with bandages until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of excising veins that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there is a headache that is either due to the loss of fluids and quality in the air of the temples, or it is a violent and similar pain to those, and it has been treated with medicine and water but has not responded, then we turn to this treatment for removing the veins from the temples, or cauterizing those veins.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the way to operate and extract those is that the patient shaves the hair from the temples; and consider the vein that appears in the temple because it is shown by the pulse, and it is hidden in a few people due to its speed.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the head of the patient is strengthened with a cloth; and rub the area with an abrasive cloth or evaporate the moisture with water, so that the vein appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then take this spike:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then pull the vein out with this ease, until you reach the artery; and cut it out separately from the top, until you extract that from the spike, and discover that of the tunic which covers that one, completely.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	Except if the artery is thin, then wrap it at the end of the finger, and cut it from one side according to the amount by which the extremities are longer and shorter, and do not allow a flow of blood, because if they are not cut, the blood will not flow completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then empty the blood with water. From one to three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, then cut it into two pieces with a double-edged blade or a strong string, and do not allow it to break; otherwise, the blood will flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut off the surplus that is between two cloths; and pour it out at that time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want to, cauterize that vein with a knife within the bone until the extremities are incised, and place that in a safe place.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better work than the patient having a fever or being in a cold state of complexions; because cauterization is of those causes that help end moisture, so it is better to use cauterization with caution.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then extract the veins from that place where they were cut with care; and lay a dry cloth over them, and cure it with dry medicine so that the flesh heals and the fluid goes away until it is completely cured.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if, while you are opening another vein that is bleeding, then stop that blood from flowing; or with cauterization, or by putting something in the place of cut: strengthen your hand until the blood stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of those causes are not present, then pause the time-wasting over the area until the blood stops hurting, and place it in cold water that is very fast; and strengthen it as much as possible.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And for the extraction of veins, it is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterization, having two knives; because you have covered those two areas with care, and pause all, fire ignites, until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that water flows between the extremities, because they are not consolidated completely by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of cauterization:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	The edge of both knives is sharp.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But however, if the sharpness of two knives is better because it suits each one to cut quickly, and you do not cut the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So that in those where there is some roughness, the fire's heat is held in them and the flesh is gently cut off.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better than any other work and lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And be the space between those two knives the amount of the thickness of the knife.
Capitol quart.	Chapter IV.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment for sharp and sour tears in the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When it is sour tears, and the cause of that treatment is not in water; then the face of the patient becomes red, and walks like someone who is walking with ants, and his eyes become dry as if they were filled with dust, and the eyelids are scratched by the acidity of the tears, and they do not need this treatment for those operations, and they do not respond to it.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to remove his pubic hair from the front of his body, and then cut three slits evenly spaced according to the length of his forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the slit falls two times: the first slit is evenly spaced according to the length of a nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second slit follows the length of a small movement of the eyelashes that are on the eyelid, and the third one from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And keep your hand away from the incisions of the arceaux that are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is three times the size of a finger.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And to you there is a piece of sponge or dry rags that are used to absorb the blood from the wound.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then introduce the spatula's two sharp ends, and this is the shape of the incision for him:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the start of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	And cut off all the cartilage that is between two incisions on the nose, and then do so from the middle incision to the second one.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then take this spatula and introduce it into the first incision. Another instrument called a chisel is taken, from one side and not on the other side.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Then pause the layers of that from underneath the cartilage, and the layer of him is cut in two places, and then it is closed with a thread from where it comes out to the middle incision, and then cut off all the vessels that descend from the head to the throat.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May it be continued until it is finished; cut off all of the cartilage and then do so from the middle incision to the other one.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And put there a quantity of blood that matches the size of a finger; squeeze the blood vessels of the nose with ice.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then pause in each slit a little piece of velvet, and place it on the dust that is mixed with oil and vinegar and honey; let it not form pus.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the ligature and give a large infusion of cold water or tar, and then treat it with oil of roses and other things so that the plagues are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter.v.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the cure of ulcers by cauterization and to the vessels that descend from the insides of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When in the blood there is a hot cauterization and it continues, and sometimes the small vessels of the patient are exhausted; already, regarding their recovery, their eyelids can be weakened, and their hair can fall out, and in the forehead there is an acute pain that stings and pulls out, then know that these accidents do not come from the blood vessels that descend from within the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for them is this: command the patient to shave his forehead, and then cut a slit in the middle of it, a little one according to its length (and start cutting at the temple on the left side, cutting into the bone; and extend your hand from the eyelashes that are above it); then expose the bone.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the nose with sponge or dry cloth and then put between the two lips of the incision a piece of velvet or cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then wipe off the dust that is mixed with oil and vinegar from it, so that it does not form pus.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when the blood has stopped and you see that the pus has decreased, then know that you take two parts of flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together so that it becomes a paste; and administer this to these pla
Capitol .vi.	Chapter.vi.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the cure for water in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that cause water in the ears are four species: either it is mineral which seems like plant, so that it ferments and makes sound, or it is of a plant, so that it causes fever, or it is fluid-like, whether water or vinegar and oil, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when it is a plant that causes water in the ear or some other similar cause to those causes that do not match, and then pause the ear towards the sun, and if the water still exists, then distil it into oil of violets or sesame oil, and then administer the extract; and let the person sneeze at a particular time, and put the nose in the direction of the sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then pause the ear with some cloth or wool, and extend the ear towards the outside, for blood vessels that are visible can be cut.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not caused by the sun, then administer the extract with the instrument called a gentle epicyte, whose form is as follows:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is caused by the sun, this is good; otherwise, administer the extract with one part of soft paste.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not caused by water, then make a tube of aram; introduce the end of the tube into the ear canal and stop up its other end with wax and soft oil so that it does not leak but stays within the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then extract it with a small wind, for four visible vessels with water that we have mentioned.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	May it be that if it is not caused by the sun in this way, then take a piece of silver or gold and cut off a small amount; pause it on the edge of the ear with a little wax, and then wrap it around it properly.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then introduce that in the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not caused by the sun with all the causes that we have mentioned, then command the patient to stop eating and drinking anything that can cause pus or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut that off is this: command the patient to stop eating at the beginning of the meal and extract blood from the nose according to the virtue of it, and then put that between your two hands and turn it over, turning the ear towards the outside, turning it into a small slit in the root of the ear, smearing its skin with oil.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Let the slit have the shape of the moon and it reaches the water, and when the water is caught, then stop it with an appropriate instrument; and let that be closed quickly, and heal it.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause that enters into the ear is one of the greases that cause it to swell and become inflated, then administer the cure and extract; but if you do not obey me in anything, then take a piece of thin bone according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And then administer to that the removal of that grease that entered into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	Do not let water escape from your thought that it has already become damp with the vapor of the ear, and then pause it in a piece of cloth; and extract it with one part of soft paste or with a gentle epicyte, and then close it properly; for the extraction is a relief.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May the water that enters into the ear be used by the patient for sneezing at a particular time, and fill his ear with a little bit of wool, and if it is not caused by the sun, then take two small pieces of straw or hay according to its length, and burn them in a fire slightly; and let the patient sneeze on one piece of straw while holding another in their hand.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been drained.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already the water has been drained completely except that you take of paper or of a kind of cloth, i.e., and place one end of it in the patient's ear and extend the other end towards a fire until half of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then place another cloth and make so much water run through it until all the water has been drained, and then attach it to a tube that is connected to the drainer of the pus.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But if the animal needs to be killed to extract it, then do so with a sharp tool and cut it, and the cause of it is easier than all the other causes that are found in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But if the verm is generated in the ear, when you have finished treating it with water as mentioned above and in the book of distillation, then take care not to look at the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is any cause of the worms, then extract it with a sharp tool or a fine needle, but if there is no cause, then take a narrow tube and connect it to a wide one from which this is the form of it:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the narrow end into the ear according to the quantity that it suffers pain, and then draw out with a strong suction, and make small drops of water, so that all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey the above instructions, then you should take care and close the tube with wax as mentioned above; then administer the distillation that has already been distilled in the treatment of worms, and look at the water in the distillation book.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And be your effusion with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, from which this is the form of it:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	and make it narrow and in the shape of a tube, with a small hole on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus, if it is necessary to insert something into the cavity of the tube where it needs to go.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take a piece of string and wrap it around the end of it neatly, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or water that you want from these medicines in the tube – and this is in the ear –, and then insert the string with the oil into the ear, and squeeze your hand on it to force the oil out into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	and that water which is poured into the ear is already burned a little with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And take care that the cause that you will distil in the ear is not too much rubbed, for ear medicines do not suffer from water.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Treatment of Ear Aches.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children born of their mothers' wombs do not perforate, and water does this to them in some cases in the meat of the ear because of a plague or because of flesh there; and this ache sometimes occurs in the middle part of the ear trail, which does not see the ear canal, and sometimes it is found in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that ache which occurs in the middle part of it, which does not see the ear canal, is in difficult cases of difficult cure.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that one in which you can see the ear canal, take care to turn the patient's ear away from the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	But if there is any obstruction seen, open that with a fine needle from which this is the form of it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it is small in size, of which one side is sharp and the other not; and the needle is made of two sharp edges so that it does not hurt the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	But if the ache is caused by hidden flesh in the ear or in its meat, then cut it with a sharp needle and apply that violent ease slowly until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	But if the ache is in the middle part of the ear, then take a fine needle and burn it slightly with fire, and then put it into the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	But if you have felt any obstruction with water that the patient feels with ease, then apply pressure to it with ease; and take care not to damage the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a cloth of the second quantity of the width of your finger that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment on the ear; and make water for several days until you are sure of the solidification of the plague, or you can take some oil and dip it into cotton wool and spray it onto it and rub it; and if the ear is already infected, then take care to destroy the oil and replace it with another that you have wrapped in wax which is made of rose oil, so that the pustule is allowed to heal.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if a fever occurs, then dip a sponge or cloth in water and rub it on the ear, and use another treatment that is mentioned in the book of distillation to stop the flow of the fever, which is called "distillation".
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the Treatment of Aches that Cause Blinking.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Aches that cause blinking in some children are wet and in some they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	But if you have any that are hard and some that are soft, and cut these with a needle and place them on the edges of three-sided places.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is a flow of fever with pain, then you should cauterize those that are close to the ear with subtle cold fire.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is that the wounds and the wounded places are returned when there remains any cause of them; and when they are cauterized with fire, those wounds are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	On the Treatment of Blisters on the Eyes of Children.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Blisters that form on the eyelids of children are caused by any cause that is gathered in strength and hardness, and the larger they become, the more painful they are called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the inner eyelid and from above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Then the operation in them is that you should consider if the larger one appears on it in any way and extends to all parts; and the cause of it is hidden.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then pierce that with a needle from the edge, and then cut it from all parts with ease until it is removed, and then put a needle into it and tie it up.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not equipped with the incision, then you should pierce the eyelid only slightly with a small incision, and then do not see any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then you should patch it up with sutures; and heal that within a short time.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	But if it is small, you will not have any trouble with that, because the blood of it restores it and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if the larger one is declining in the inner parts of the eyelid, then lift the eyelid and suspend the larger one with a needle, except that you do not cut it open, and cut it from all parts, and if the eyelid by incision becomes longer, then there is no cause seen.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then make an incision, wash the wound with salty water; and treat the wound with water that swells up inside until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter .X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the cure for a blister on the eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnah is grays that is generated in the tunics of the eyelid, and mostly in children, it aggravates blisters on them and causes their discharge; and they cannot face the clarity of the sun because tears run to those.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you may often see them on their faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; and their eyebrows are moist, which has already been covered with swelling, and the beginning of discharge appears in it; and when you press the wound with your fingers, you feel the discharge inside.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And a way of operation is in that the patient holds his head back on his neck and another person ties him up and makes a hole, and makes a circle according to the amount that contains arthernach from the whole beginning, and places that above this and presses it with fingers, so that the discharge of arcernac in the middle of the circle is gathered, and then breaks into the middle of that humidity with a sputum that does not have a larger hole than the one made by flabotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	May the incision be completely covered so that you reach the arthenach, because in the lower positions arthenach is discharged through a crack according to the shape of white blisters.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then remove that with the drapes you have wrapped between the fingers on both sides at the front and turn it over between the right and left hands until it is completely removed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And keep that you do not adjust in the crack so that the sputum does not reach the wound and burns you.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May if your arthenach does not appear at the beginning of the crack, may you adjust in the crack a small one within which it processes arthenach; and then remove that as I have said; and then return drapes to water and rub and place them on the wound and sprinkle them with dust.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so that they grind salt and put it in the cavity of the crack so that the water that is left of that humidity is dried up.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that within until it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	May if an abscess is found in the wound, then cure that with plasters of cedar within until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of ways to treat a wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When, in the eyelids of blisters, the natural hairs are cut off and they become dry, then those noose on the wound and make a way for malady like this with frequent tears and moistening of the eyelids and canvas within until it is the cause of the destruction of the wound that is called touch-injury, and is cured in four ways: or by cauterizing with fire; or with acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter of cauterization; or it is done atactingly by incision and stitching; or with knives according to what eye hurts.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so you may often see them on their faces all the time, and on your left hand place the patient's head; if it is turned, that is good; and if not, insert an awl into that in which it is faithful to the beginning from the edge of the eyelid, and make the awl go through it, and so — near the margin of the eyelid where there are no hairs — near the hairs, and pull the awl up towards the edge with your left hand, and turn that towards you.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then break into the inner part of the eyelid where the natural hairs are inserted with a spatum that is turned by the lacrimal major into the lacrimal mendre; and then remove the awl and leave the edge of the eyelid moistened with small pieces of grass or drap, and then press it over the eyelid with your thumb, and be like this with a figure of a leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is good that the figure is according to the amount of helevatio of the eyelid, because each person has different shapes of his eyelids, because some have a small amount and others a large one, according to which the eyelid is moistened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then break into the spatum on the two lines you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal mendre.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your crack is near the natural hairs like this with its thickness.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the awl in one of the two angles of the incision, and then scrape that completely, and then adjust with a sharp knife or a thread-like rope, and wipe the blood, and make adhere what is surplus of the threads on both eyebrows for some enigmatic causes, if you want to do so, and if not, do not cure it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then leave the stitching of the threads within three or four days, and then cure that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want to, leave the patching without stitching, and cure that with water that dries it up and tightens it because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the patch and the aggregation of it; but it is better to stitch it. And so I have said about the ancient remedies of taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, if it is a solicitous place on the patient, it is good work, and it is not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And it is another way of sewing on, and that you mark over the eyelid a figure like this with a leaf, and then raise the eyelid with three separate and gathered threads according to this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	May if it is not possible here, hold the needles, and if the thread is not tied, then take a awl that has thread on it, and insert it in the middle of the figure, and enter the other one near the lacrimal major, and the thread according to what is near the lacrimal mendre, and adjust the threads between the fingers with equality, and then raise all the incision over that which is marked here with a figure as we have said.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two sides of the patch with stitching, and cure that within until it heals.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	May if an abscess is found in your incision or your crack, then that abscess with wax and like it, and moisten it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	In some cases the hair of the eyelid is converted, so that when you use it on that in which we have said about incision; but stitching is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Taxanir with knives is according to this shape:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And that you convert the eyelid and split the figure inside as I have said; and then, by art, make two knives or two thin stiles of the length that is according to the length of the eyelid and their width is less than that of the spatum.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already cut into the edges of any crack, where you have the thread.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And then add any thread with subtlety under water that is surplus of the eyelid, and tighten the stiles of any crack with firm tightness, and leave it for a while, because the incision by tightness will die and rot and decay within until it disappears.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	May if it is delayed, then break the patch with a sharp knife, and then cure the wound within until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then when it is solid, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the shape of two stiles that you will make according to this shape:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it has neither a length nor a width more or less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the raising of skin to make incisions when the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the skin is unnatural and hard, and sharp, perform the operation as follows: take a fine needle and pass it in at that part where it gives way to the subtle fiber; then adjust the ends of the skin so as not to be noticeable, and tie with a simple knot.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the threads should be the width of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then take another fine thread and tie it in a knot under the skin, and cut off the ends if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's head between your knees, and so as not to be seen, bring the wound close to the nape, since this is a delicate operation and small.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the root of the skin that has been adjusted, with care; and make it enter quickly into the eyelid so as not to tear the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then draw the skin inwards and insert it into a loop; take the thread twice or thrice, and don't tie it yet.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then take your hand away from there where the skin is being drawn out and looped; don't touch the patient' eye, so that the natural skin doesn't tear.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is being pulled looped and not torn, you will pull the looped skin above where it is tied to the thread, so that it doesn' tear when you draw up the loop.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Then let the wound be seen, since you will have pulled up the skin looped and tied to the thread; then tie it tight and cut off the ends, leaving them for two or three days, so that the skin may adhere to its place and grow well over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is too loose, then adjust a long piece of the natural skin, and raise it up; or you leave it there for a while, then raise it up.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter  .XIII
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the care of the eyelid that lies on top of the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the wound is in the eyelid and it becomes tight there, or on the right or left side, for a bad consolidation of plague or a sectioning or cauterization, and this is called "leporina," and that which happens by consolidation of plague or by sections or cauterization, or due to similar appearances, are natural or accidental.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then the way to perform the operation is that you cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of it; and place it between those two pieces of cloth, and tie them up so as to be healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And don' use any cure of it from the causes that dry or tighten; for if you make water return to its natural state, there is not a fire that can burn it in time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use on it from causes that soften; as, for example, fenugrec, and immerse it in water that is hot or cold and tasty, or apply astringent to it, which has been liquefied among some oils, and dip it into that bath, and treat with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perform all that can be done by means of water without consolidation, according to the form in which it begins to burn.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have described is nothing but a correction of the wound that does not return to its original form according to how it begins to burn in front.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter  .XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the care of the wound that is in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This cure, which is performed on the eyelid below, is called  "vertadieramente" cure; and it is either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	It may be accidental due to plague or a sectioning or cauterization, or from similar appearances.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way to perform the operation is that you take a needle with a double thread, and hold it in the flesh; and let the thread run from the tear of the left eyelid through the middle of the nose, so that the thread comes out on the two ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the skin at the edges with the needle and cut it with the blade; and make a wide cut with the scalpel.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the shape of the eyelid returns according to how it was before, then it is good; but if not, take a thread and place it in the split, and turn the eyelid; and make the two splits at the bottom of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	Then make the two ends of the splits meet at two angles of the incision, which has been made so that they intersect; and let the figure formed by them be the same as when they meet together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is a Greek letter: λ (lambda).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then stretch the flesh out by that amount which is the width of it at the bottom; then secure the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust those parts that are separate and stitch them up with a wool thread; and treat those with water that we have said about the medicines that soften, and wash within so that it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the cure described above is by a split or suture or cauterization, then you should make a flat split on the skin of the eyelid according to how it was before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate them with two cloth strips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the speech about the cure that is up or down, which takes place in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of a cure, and that is done in a variety of ways.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	The expert should always prepare the things in any way possible so that it returns to its original form; and if not, near that form, and the patient according to the operation and the instruments in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter   .XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the cure of the wound that is in the eyelid and if it is natural or accidental.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens in people who are sick and the eyelid is stuck to the white of the eye, and its movement and work are restricted; then insert a thread into the outer edge of the lid, and lift it up; or extend it upwards with an oil.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you cut the adhesion on a thin blade, which is not sharp in the incisions; keep your hand away from the eye so as not to disturb it during the operation, and leave the blade there so that it doesn' rub against the eye's sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Then let your incision remove that adhesion easily so that the eyelid returns according to its original form, and all of it is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then you put into the eye salt water that you wash with; or distill in the water of Zuni that is dissolved in it.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a cloth; and place it in salt water infused with oil, and let the third day be used for curative causes according to what is consolidated, and that is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter    .XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the cure of the wound that is in the eye and if it is natural or accidental.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that ice is second to two ways, for it either is nerveless and resembles hard subtile cipher, or is non-nerveless and resembles white frost which, when touched, can't be forced to stick, and the touch will cause it to go away; its onchuses don't stay.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And these spices don’t start until the lacrimal membrane, which comes little by little and covers the eye, stops the light and movement of air.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way of working the incision is that the patient stops his head in the air, and opens his eyelids, raises his eyelids with your hand, and collects the ice-onchuses in a few dupliquations and extends them to the edges.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And take an needle and insert it into the end of a horse or cow or sheep or goat hair, or something similar, or hard fat; double the tip of the needle little by little and leave it in the middle of the ice, and pass it through with the fat; stretch it to the edges, and cut off the hair at the tip of the ice; take that piece of hair and thread it onto the needle; and extend it to the edges, and pull out with the hair.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you will continue with that thread inside up to the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you will cut the nose in the base of the lacrimal bone with a sharp knife or tiny scissors and leave the flesh of the lacrimal bone exposed so that by incision it doesn’t produce continuous tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the ice is spread with a thin layer of oil or fat, then it is cut as if it were a piece of leather, and so that the shape of it is preserved:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And remember that with the knife you don’t touch the clear skin, and that the rupture isn’t deep, and that the pupil is punctured.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then incision gets into the foot a little bit of salt mixed with fine sand or something similar to cut off some hair, and leave it inside until another day; and then cure that with water so that it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the ice is not nervous and you can't put in the needle, or it doesn’t stay on top of the ice, then this special kind of ice is cured with medicines, and so it is healed with eye drops and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you want to cut that ice, then open the patient's mouth and take a sharp knife according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtility.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if the ice is rarefied and is hard to cut with a sharp knife or salt mixed with something similar, then distil it from your mouth in the hole of some hair, and leave the hole inside for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation on that ice until it is completely broken down, except for water, because then you leave it and cure the swelling at the beginning so that it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation on that ice with reason so that it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The removal of the lacrimal flesh, if it is a great problem in the foot, should be suspended with oil; cut that ice from one side, and don’t finish the incision so that the tears don’t flow continuously.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distill in the lacrimal hole something similar to cut off some hair until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of incision of a foetus in the womb and of water born of animal blood in the foot.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some blood mixed with urine is born in the eyelids of a cow and is placed inside so that it covers the pupil, or moves closer or further from the eyes, and presses the eyelids together like pillars, and is joined to a column.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation is that the patient stops his head in the air, and opens his eyelids and collects all of that blood with a needle or basket convenient to water, and then water at the beginning so that it is finished with the incision, and remember the foot that doesn’t cut off your work.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And be your incision the same way that you cut those or with a sharp knife which we have recommended in cutting the ice, or with tiny scissors according to which form it takes; and remember this chapter for guidance when cutting the ice.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then, when your incision is complete and all of that blood has been removed, fill the foot with salt mixed with something similar to the medicine that corrossives, and place it over the foot in case of a swelling caused by cutting off some hair within the womb so that it doesn’t occur.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is any cause of algardenices and it is hard to cut off some hair within the womb, so that you don’t cause a swelling, then leave the foot and cure that swelling with water so that it heals, and repeat your operation on that ice with reason so that it is healed, and make a scar in the animal flesh which occurs in the foot of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, remember that you don’t remove any cure of the foot by natural or accidental means through fire, and don’t put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering from those operations.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of blood collection in the foot.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	These veins are hard and cover the foot so that you can’t see your work, and the foot is kept longer for days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the foot on which the blood is strong and not another disease than blood, then collect that blood.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you order the patient to stop his head in the air, and suspend those veins with an oil or two according to your prudence; and make those oils double according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two oils gradually in one part according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then those veins are collected with scissors and dried with subtility, and abstain from working them for a while, so that the veins are not re-formed on the foot and are shredded.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And remember that you don’t cut the foot with the edge of a knife; and if your work is in the morning before the sun rises, and hold fast to your work so that you don’t cut off any blood vessels.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	Then when you have finished, then distill in the foot strong water or salt to corrode that blood which is re-formed from blood.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If water is not possible to collect at that time, then collect all of it with a needle and leave it for some days so that the pain of the foot is numbed, and ensure that swelling caused by cutting off hair is prevented.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the same way again if necessary so that it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing aridity to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat aridity with cauterization or acute medicine according to the narrative that precedes it and it is not healed, then don’t make it in it but prepare for a swelling due to the cutting off of hair necessary for maturity of it, and extract all moisture from it which is inside it and the air within it so that it can be discovered the bone.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is discovered and rusted or blackened, then you cut it with this instrument whose form is as follows:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp cap, and made of hard iron, and so made that it is sharpened with a point of lime or rounded with a point of subtility (and so made in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place it over the spot where the bone is infected, and turn it between your fingers, and gently press your little finger into it little by little so that you can feel the infection has been removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Then have a few holes drilled, and restore the area with caustic and drying agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the area is well healed and good flesh covers it and the scar is separate from the sound part of the body for ten days, and does not become inflamed or suppurate again, then you will know that it has been cured.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then instead of making an incision along the nose, do so in the shape of a V; and thus: for you to cut along the nose, then you make an incision following this shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The tip of the iron is triangular, and the handle slightly curved at the end; thus, when you cut, the curve follows this shape:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place it over the bone, and keep your hand near the lacrimal; and move your hand slightly forward from the handle, and gently turn your hand towards you so that the point penetrates all of the bone, and the patient feels a pulling sensation as it goes in; and thus, with this movement:
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with caustic medicines that dry it out as well; thus, if it is healing:
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	If the flesh does not heal over the area then the matter that has been discharged from the wound returns to the nose; therefore, place a little salt on the patient's nose.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 10.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the Reduction of a Tumor on the Nose.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the tumor is complete and nothing hinders or decreases it, then know that you should loosen the nose bandage, and continue with the following: and then blow into the nose regularly with steam, and then place a liniment on the nose made of oil of rose, aloe, sage, and zinc oxide; and then tighten the plaster over the nose with powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of making the powder is that you take sheets of sheepskin, and each sheet is doubled over four times; and make these sheets into powder.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place those sheets on top of each other according to the quantity that the nose requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then tighten those sheets on top of each other with a strong, tight bandage; and then continue with the steam treatments as mentioned above; and then remove the bandage at night, and let the nose rest in a warm position.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Perhaps if, meanwhile, the ligature becomes soft, then know that it should be tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the bandage at night as well; thus, you have everything said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the nose has already been reduced in size, then it is good; and if not, then repeat the plastering with powder and tightness and steam treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 11.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the Incision of a Tumor on the Eyebrow.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the tumor disrupts the eyelid, and it is large and prominent, then cut out the eyelid with a sharp knife as if cutting a hair; and thus prepare the form of a man with that; and then insert the blade into the root of the eyelid on the side nearest the lacrimal bone, and let it penetrate; and then cut along the blade, and take the first blade according to its position; and then continue cutting along the double edge of the blade, and tighten it at the end; thus, you have described the form of a man:
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the blade and place it over the nose with wool infused with milk of Magnesia; and let it remain until it hardens.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat the nose with water that comforts it, so that the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	In certain cases, a large bandage is placed over the entire nose, and is adjusted to fit the eminence; and it is pierced with a fine needle that enters through the edge of the nose, and runs the liquid albumin, and dips the nose and enters as well:
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then tighten it so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 12.
De curacio de alconati.	On the Treatment of Eye Diseases.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This malady, which is called alconati, is nothing but a disease that is made in the nose resembling running water, and it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	Perhaps the method of working on it is that you make the nose burn with a hot iron, and place your two fingers on its sides; and then see if the disease comes to the parts near the eyes, and if it does not run down, and if it remains dry, and if the light does not hurt, and if the patient can see; and thus:
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not run down, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If it is not prepared for the descent of the disease with water as mentioned above, then place a sharp needle over the eyes and pierce through the eyelids, cutting towards the corner of the eye (where it meets the conjunctiva) on the eyeball's corona; thus, the disease will be forced out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, once it is forced out, you will know that the water is being distilled in the nose; and prepare a solution of water, to which you have added honey or water in which you have already brewed fenugrec and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the other causes as well, so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 12.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the Treatment of Water Descending from the Nose.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	I have already mentioned the spices of water in the division and how to pierce them with a sharp instrument; then proceed as follows:
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then know that you should make the patient burn with a hot iron between his two fingers over a plate; and thus place your finger on its sides, and then see if the water descends; and if it does not, then treat it as mentioned above.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your hand on the eyelid of the affected side of the nose; if the water descends into the left side of the nose, then it is the left eye; or if it descends into the right side, then it is the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then place your right hand on the forehead, if the nose is left-sided; or with your left hand, if the nose is right-sided.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then place the end of your hand on the forehead, just above the eyebrow; and let it remain there until it hardens. Then remove it with a sharp knife and treat the patient as mentioned above.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then pierce into the nose's albumen, and feel that the albumen is already reaching the eye cause;
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Then know that the measure of the path of the albumen to the eye is equal to the measurement of the pupil within the edge of the dark ring, and it is the nose' crown; because you will see through the nose' pupil with clarity thanks to the conjunctiva layer.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then place the albumen within the space in which the water is; and then throw it down with another sharp instrument, and if the water descends quickly, then know that the patient's sight has been restored; and if the albumen falls into the eye, then treat it as mentioned above.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then wait a little; and if the water descends, then remove that other sharp instrument before the albumen falls into the eye.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	Then, when it stops descending and has hardened, remove it easily with a sharp instrument; and then wash the nose inside with clear salt water extracted from gems, and with milk of magnesia mixed with rosewater and albumin of sheepskin; and finally, tie the nose with wool infused with rozmarin oil and milk of magnesia.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	These are the days that we who live now must bear upon this world, over which there comes a cloud of death.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your body when it craves food for its hardness - for there are some men for whom hunger is harsh - then know that you should take the spoon which is called an albutro, and this is the way to use it:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore pierce that joint with your knife, and do not place your hand on the spot, and do not delay in applying the poultice to the soft skin.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then introduce the food as I have described.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must compliment your own work, preparing the patient's sleeping place nicely in a dark room, and prohibiting all movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place water on his head so that its nature is cool, and do not touch his hair to the right or left.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Then prepare the body according to its disposition within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then remove it from that dark room and examine the body closely, and return it to its place within the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not place water on him in the hour of the cure or at any other time; rather, apply the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	When you have removed water because it pollutes the body greatly and vigorously with regard to its sight.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	May it happen that a fever arises suddenly; then, if you remove the body before the seventh day, and apply water to calm the fever.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you shall wash his face and place it in a dark room for several days; it is in the dark room that it will be cured of its fever.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then remove it from that room gently and talk to it about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you should know that in an abortion the disciplinarian cannot excuse himself from seeing certain visions, and then you must be diligent about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already encountered some of those who are subject to the Art, and some said that they cause fire in the Air; and one says that he pierces the air with his knife, and water flows out of it.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But there is nothing strange in our country that has achieved water by piercing; and no water is produced from some of the ancient elements; perhaps it is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the ways of magical herbs so that they affect those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are made of iron or steel in its own right, and the two ends of this triangle are sharp, one end being subtle.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure for nose bleeding.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When various meats are pushed together in the nose, and some cause of it is gathered because of the weight of the blood; this disease is called polyps, since it resembles a mass of meat in shape.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of him is carnivorous meat, with the appearance of a lion, not with the color of the fox.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then place the foot of the patient between your thighs and put it on the sill, and open the nostrils with a pointed instrument; then cut the tip of the nose in those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then take the meat off the bone, and cut it with a sharp knife that has been greased; then, if any of it is left, take it with a pointed instrument easily, so that none remains except what you want to remove, for there is no reason to remove more.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	May it happen that a fever arises suddenly and is cool, then remove the water; or if it is a malignant fever, then cut and cauterize it completely, leaving no holes.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then remove any agate from the nose, sharp as a blade and as cold as water or as wet as you can.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	May it happen that the nose bleeds, and if it is a wet heat within the palate, then know that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	May it happen that if it does not penetrate further, then know that there is nothing inside except bones and cartilage; and no bleeding has occurred.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then place the knife firmly on the food, and cut it into pieces of the same size; then, between each piece, measure the quantity with your fingers, and hold the foot of the patient between your thighs, and insert an end of the knife into the nose from below or from above for any reason that may be possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then water will flow, and its odorant will enter the passages of the nose, and be exuded on its skin, since children are attracted to such things in school, and it is a cause that one wants to do this.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then place both ends of the knife, one coming out of the nose and the other inside it; then cut the meat into pieces with your fingers, and water will flow within that you know has reached the end of the meat; for if not, then place the knife back in the nose from below or above.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the knife, and take care in the nose to cut off the tip of a bone, and water will flow for three or more days within that which is irritated by the flesh; and let it be covered with ointment.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then at the end of this cause, place in the nose a pipe made of lead to drain it over time until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May it happen that if you want to use this cure, then do so.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument with which water and medicine are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Water made from silver or iron, which looks like a small flame lit up, as well as a small spoon and the meat resembling.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed pipe with a tube and the tube of the instrument that purifies being flat, visible; to which you can attach it when you drain the water or medicine from the patient's nose, and hold it in your hand while doing so.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	These are the ingredients of a good purifier: resin from the boxwood tree, white balsam, gingerbread, goldeneuse, long pepper, escallion, and ephetums with spice. Give with blood and water extract, and make pills; and if a pill does not dissolve in the drink, then remove it from the patient' nose while they are sleeping.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the treatment for nosebleeds in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The vision of a nosebleed in the extremities of the nose is magnificent and striking within a few days when it seems to be getting worse because of its appearance.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And then remove that foot at the beginning of its appearance; and if you want to avoid bleeding, then place a piece of meat on it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place over the spot, or cauterize or apply medicine that burns in its place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	May it happen that if the cutting of the nose is delayed until it is magnificent, then know if it is Lapidary, with its color being dark and its texture being soft, and do not touch that foot with metal, since it is a cruel fever; for the vision of this fever is great over the person who has it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the fever is sharp and not of dark color, and sometimes it can be cut in all parts; then remove the foot and cut the nose with a sharp knife, and cure the spot with water that heals and distills within it so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .xxvi.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the surgery of the nose and lips, and of the ear when continuity is interrupted by plague or similar causes.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Do you know that when surgery to restore continuity in one of these cartilages is performed, it succeeds in only a few men?
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So, when any such cause as mentioned above occurs to him, you should consider if it is fresh plague; then adjust the two lips of the patient with sutures and carefully heal the wound.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips that were severed by the wound are now healed, and each one is healthy again, then you should cut off the hair on the area with a scissors, making sure not to injure the skin.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle the wound with dragon's blood and turpentine, and place a plaster of silver or any other hardening plaster on it, leaving it for two days or three, and then remove it and replace it with another plaster, allowing the flesh to come away by itself from the skin, and carefully heal the wound.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of suturing is that you add the solution to restore continuity, or with needles as mentioned above in the suture of the belly, or you add the solution to the wound, and make sure to let it dry completely.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .xxvii.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the removal of those causes that cause problems in the two lips when they are split.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	This is sometimes seen in men as a result of the split in their lips: small hard lumps resembling grain; and some are small and some are large.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	And when you have removed the hard lumps from both lips, and cleared each one of them thoroughly: sprinkle the wound with turpentine until the plague is cleansed, and wash it with water that has been made stiff; then carefully heal the wound.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter  .xxviii.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision of meat that is sutured to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	This is a great deal of information about the removal of meat from the gums: when the young ones are taken care of by white milk, then you should suspend that meat on a string or thread and cut it off at the right time; then allow the blood to run out or the plague to be removed.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply a little turpentine or another drying powder to the wound.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that meat returns, then cut it again, but do not cauterize it, as cauterization will not help.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of teeth that cause pain.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When, on the surface of teeth that are split within, and between the gums, are some rough spots, and some small lumps are black and become yellow or green through the gum, and some teeth are loose:
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And when you have made the incision between your teeth and placed a finger on top of them to prevent them from moving, and rubbed the teeth where those spots are: if they do not cause any discomfort, then remove the blackness and yellow and other spots with a file; otherwise, leave them alone.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if the cause of the pain is in those teeth at the beginning of the root: do not repeat the treatment; but if it is in a later place, then repeat the treatment three times: first on one side, second on the other, and third time on both sides, until you arrive at the last segment.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Do you know that teeth require different shapes and forms of the roots depending on the operation to be performed?
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And because the roots of the teeth that split within have different shapes depending on whether they are cut between the teeth or in other ways: these forms of rasors must be properly prepared, which you will see soon enough.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter   .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Then when you have healed the tooth from its pain: extract it slowly and thoroughly, as there is no reason to delay the extraction of the tooth when it causes pain; for it is a substance that is eliminated in the extraction process.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Then when the incision is forced for the extraction of a tooth: you must carefully determine which tooth is painful; otherwise, you may extract a sound tooth and cause pain in it, and we have seen this happen in many operations on the teeth.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then you must carefully determine which tooth is painful; and when you know it well: cut off the gum from around the tooth at its root with a scissor, so that it dissolves from the gum completely; then remove it with pliers or small scissors little by little until it comes out whole.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then hold it firmly with two strong tweezers or a clamp; place the tip of the tooth between your thumbs, holding it firmly so as not to break it; and remove it with pliers or small scissors in such a way that you do not break it into pieces, nor hurt the patient's mouth.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not a root canal: then take one of those instruments, and remove it with ease as if it were cut at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	Then if the tooth is loose or corroded: make sure to use a scissor and a sharp string; cut off the root with the latter, so that it does not break in your hand when you remove it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And when you cut the gum completely around the tooth: hold it firmly so that it does not break and cause pain; then return to the patient' mouth; if you need to remove a tooth that hurts more than another, do so first.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And remember that you will not cause any harm by removing their teeth: for the great men who have difficult teeth to extract, and whose roots are long, or some of them, or by extracting one of them with a number of bones: this has been witnessed by many.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Then the extraction of it be washed thoroughly with water that is made stiff; or with a mixture of salt and water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is bleeding during extraction as often happens: then cut off a little blood and sprinkle it on the patient; or if you do not have it, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the tweezers and forceps must be small at the end from which the tooth is removed: it should have a fine grip on the tooth; it should not be twisted when used; they should be sharp, but not blunt.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And the handle should be large enough to hold comfortably: it should not twist when used; it should be sharp but not blunt.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of iron of Indian descent: the handles should be straight ends; those that curve inwards should be placed next to those that curve outwards; and those that curve inwardly should be shaped like the beak of a bird; and some of these curved ones are very small, so that they can be held comfortably.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the extraction of teeth and breaking of bones of the mandible that are broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	And when you should extract a tooth that is broken and causes pain: pause over the area with a probe for a day or two until the area becomes soft; then insert pliers or small scissors into the opening of the tooth: use tweezers or forceps with curved ends, shaped like the beak of a bird:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of them are made to go inside like with almond or olive oil.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey to him and pull with these forceps or hold them, then note that you make the cut on the root and open all the flesh and introduce this instrument which has no name, so is a small lever whose shape is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should be of thick end a little one, and not be embedded so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore if by water the root is dried up, it is good; and if not, help you with these other instruments whose shapes are these: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at its end where there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it is triangular and has a slightly pointed end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you are helped with this instrument having two ramps whose shape this follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments that will be necessary to remove teeth; because quickly it is made with this instrument which is assembled like a nut, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular end bent or short, which has some thickness, and not be embedded so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the dental instruments are similar to the others.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the artisans be wise and careful in their work, for according to this, it is necessary to make different operations and treatments; because there are many diseases that the old did not know or stop properly by using instruments of various shapes.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the bones of the jaw or other bones of the mouth are broken, it is necessary to take care about that in its place with water that is convenient for them of the instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of teeth, and help you with gestures of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should be of some thickness to small one, and be stretched or tied to the mouth so that it does not escape or run away until the bone is completely dried up; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines according to water.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if in the bone there is a small hole, then cut that from that hole and from its blackness, and take care about it so that it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the cure of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When prominent teeth are not in line with the natural course of their companions, their shape is wedge-shaped, and more so when they affect the elders or venerable women; therefore you should consider: if a tooth is not next to another tooth, and cannot be split or oiled, then break it; but if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument whose shape is this: it is similar to a pork tusk, and is made of Indian iron of triangular pointed end.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And be your incision with which you cut that in two days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not connected to another of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if prominent teeth are cut by grinding, then grind that with iron of Indian origin whose shape is this:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And all of it is made of Indian iron and the edge is slightly pointed; and are made with almond-shaped points using a sharp knife, grinding the tooth little by little in two days with ease, so that another tooth does not connect to it and become stuck.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then close that at the end, and cut that with razor blades.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth is broken on one side and the tongue touches it, then note that you grind that part which is sharp and worn out, and make it flat so that the tongue does not scratch or the word does not corrupt.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When a tooth is hit or damaged by impact or falling, and the patient cannot bear more than that which is attached to gold wire, and you have not healed with your medicine, then change it so that it does not get infected; and use gold wire instead of silver, because silver becomes green and must be sharpened again after a few days, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And be the wire in such thinness and thickness according to the amount that can enter between teeth; and the shape of the incision is that you take the wire and double it between two healthy teeth, and grow it twice around the wire between two gold fillings, or if one or two, then let the thread reach the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And repeat the incision as many times as necessary to reach the end of the tooth from which you started, and strengthen your grip with ease and care until it is not tight.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And be your tightening with which you tighten the wire to the roots of teeth that do not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut the excess of the wire with forceps or tweezers, adding them in such places, and making them disappear between the healthy tooth and the gold filling, so that they do not hurt the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then leave that stretched as it is with thread.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And if it is slipped or broken, then tighten it or them with another wire in such a way throughout all the time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the shape of teeth and the figure of an incision of two healthy teeth and two gold fillings, thus tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When one or two teeth move back to their places, and are sharpened as described above, and remain so.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not make this except for skilled and experienced doctors.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some are suitable for the root of a cow's tooth, and is made from them in the shape of a tooth, and is placed in its place where it fails, and is tightened as described above, and remains so for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the tongue that is seen in the tongue and prohibits speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This tongue is seen sometimes leaving the tongue for some time or is natural to him who has it, or happens accidentally because of a wound that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in it is that you open the mouth of the patient, his head is raised up; and then cut that nerve with a sharp knife according to its width so that the tongue does not stick to it.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	And if in that there is hardness or pain, and water stands because of the consolidation of the wound, then cut that with oil and make it smaller according to its width so that the nerve does not remain cut and remains soluble.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And take care that there is no made crack in the meat of the tongue, and here cut here is hard and bring water to flow from the blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the trace of the incision with water or soap or clean water; and then leave the tongue alone for a moment so that it does not consolidate again; and so finish this task, leaving the patient's tongue alone.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	And if there is a flow of blood, then put it on the spot with a bitter taste; and if the blood flows out, then cauterize that place with a common cauterizer that brings water to boil.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that one with other diseases as they heal.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a tonsil without hurting the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes there is an apтем on the tongue that looks like a small piece of meat, and it prohibits speaking; and when it becomes loose, it is great danger to the mouth; for it opens the way for food.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on him is that you make an incision in the mouth of the patient in front of the sun and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see that it is a red or black color, hard, where the patient does not feel sensation, do not touch that part as it is tender.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is white in color, where there is moisture, then put the vinegar on him, and scrape that with a sharp knife, and scrape all of it; and if blood comes out in the hour of your operation, then pause for three days, because it is acidic, until it stops bleeding.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then continue with your work until you have taken care of him completely, washing him with vinegar and salt; and heal that with the other treatment using water until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the Extraction of Abscess from Two Ears and on That Which Is Not in the Jaw and Other Abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it happens in the jaw, there are glands that are gathered together, which happen unexpectedly and are called two ears, which, when you treat them with water that I have mentioned in the division, and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of red color, of little sensation, do not touch that part with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is a red color and the root is thick, do not touch that part with iron because of the flow of blood; let it mature, and then either you pull it out or she cuts it off herself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is a white color, soft, and the root is small, then that one should be incised to see if it can be cured.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on him is that you consider, before your operation, if he has already healed his abscess completely or if it has decreased in any way; and then place him in front of the sun, with his head between his legs, and make an incision in the mouth, and the servants hold his hands behind, holding a noble instrument by which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or bronze, and it should be sharp with a point.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you press on him with your finger and show the abscess to yourself, and place the onion on it, then tie it with a knot, and pull it apart as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or if any fluid comes out when you press, then consider that one with the following form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	it is assembled with forceps, however, the extremities of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is at the end of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron in a particular way.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not with you, then scrape it with a blade, which should be sharp on one side but not sharp on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have made one incision, make the other according to this method of incision, and then the incision will be cured by washing with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is blood flowing from the incision, wash with water made from oak gorse or orange peel and similar to those of the causes of bloodletting until the flow of blood stops, and then heal it as if it were healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Some are located in the jaw and other abscesses are those two ears, and scrape them according to what I said in the incision of two cuts alike.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was born in her jaw, which abscess was of red color and had little sensation, which had already closed her jaw, and the woman breathed normally, but she had forbidden her to eat or drink water, and she was close to death if she did not stay like that for another day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess was already very large, having three fingers in length, and it was coming out through two passages.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I hid myself from him carefully and took one of his onions, and threw it at him, and a large piece came out, and then I incised that one where I could understand the other, and then I closed his mouth, and pressed his tongue, and then I tied the onion to that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut him open wide, and there was no pain from it except a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then I completely opened the jaw of that woman, and he began to drink water again, and then I stopped scraping that abscess for a while, and that abscess became in place of that one, which I had incised, until it healed over it.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I went and cauterized his jaw, and then I walked around and did not know that God was with me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the Incision of a Breast When It Is Swollen.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When it drains on the breast, and it is swollen and long, then it is called an upright bubble; and if it is thick and round at the base, then it is called a sitting bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	If it is cured with water that I have mentioned in the division, and your treatment does not work on it, and if it is swollen again and is soft, then consider that you scrape that one that is round; and if it is long and bleeds a little, of red or black color, and it does not hurt much, then consider that you scrape that one.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that one according to the way I have described to you of its whiteness and length, then consider that it is a new one, and press his tongue against the instrument with which this form is made, and then tie the onion to it, and pull it apart as far as you can.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And consider that you do not scrape that one unless it comes out naturally on its own, because if you scrape it more, it will make him talk more.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then the incision, use water with which I have described in the incision of two cuts, and heal it as if it were healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient was frightened by the incision on him, consider that you use water in cauterizing him with his own fear, and the way of cauterization on him is not but to pour sharp water, and it is because you pause the end of the patient's tongue against the instrument which I have mentioned, and then dip that into the water which I have described in the chapter of cauterization, and then heat that with fire, and do not let it get too hot or too cold, and then fill the concave part of the instrument with it:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	be it the extension of his tongue, which is concave, and pause the instrument with medicine on his throat, and the patient chews because of the medicine inside, so that it does not come out in a certain way, and so that he swallows it; and this will prevent him from speaking or making a noise in his throat, so that those who are near do not hear what he is saying.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the medicine, and press it over his throat for a long time, up to an hour, so that he does not get black or sleepy because of the medicine biting him.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take hold of it and wrap it over the end of the tongue, and dip that into the medicine, and put the tongue into a tube; so that the end of the tongue sticks to that tube, and then pour the water used in cauterization onto that tube, and let it dry out for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you feel that the medicine needs to be repeated, repeat it again, and Abstain from cauterizing in the circuit of the grape with the burning edge in border, and wash it with the water of friction, and cure it in front of the embrocation, and within that which is to be healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This type of treatment is more safe than cutting and less scary.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some eye problems are treated with water that is milder than cauterization and cutting, because it is cured with sub-smoking in this way: Take chamomile, hyssop, marjoram, rugosa, sweet marjoram Arabic, camomile, bread, and similar herbs to those, and combine all of them or some of them in a bowl, and dip them in vinegar, and boil; then the bowl should be well stirred, and placed in its place on the table, with a hole above it, on which a sharp tool made of metal is set according to this method; make it from silver or from iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the end should be inserted into the patient's mouth where the vapor can reach the uvula from above, so that the uvula becomes cloudy.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat on those spots again until they are dry, and be careful not to apply this treatment at the beginning of an outbreak of blisters, because it would be too strong for them, and don't make water, but rather declare a blister from his cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	Or if you don' have this instrument, then take a cane and put it on the end of it a closed pipe, so that the patient'a mouth is sealed, because the pipe of the water prevents the smoke from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extracting thorns and water that adheres to the foot, and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spots on the foot or spines of paynes or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then take water that is apparent from it, and let the sight rest on it, because your tongue presses against the instrument in front of the sun, so that the water that is in the mouth is declared.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And water that does not appear to your eye in the foot, take it to make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because it removes the attached cause of the blisters by vomiting; or have the patient drink a fishbone, or a raisin of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; or hold a sponge of dry sea-leek tightly to his tongue, and then make the patient swallow it whole, for if you remove it to the place where thorns are attached and extract them, then they will be removed without pain.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Or take a snake and hold it by the tail, and put it on a table and cut off its head; or take a pig and cut off its tail, and put it under the water.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	Or if you don' remove those causes that we have mentioned, then use an iron instrument according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thinner than a thin thread, and in the end of it there should be a cavity that you insert into his mouth easily.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And keep his head raised up high, and be careful that the touch of his jaw to the neck does not cause him pain, so that it reaches his teeth or bone, or that he swallows it with the food.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But the patient who inserts it is worse, because his knowledge of the place of the attached cause and pulling his mouth toward the instrument, all according to the quantity that is prepared for him before it causes pain.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .xxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of extracting blood blisters attached to the foot.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the blood is treated with water that we have mentioned in the division of medicine treatment and you don' agree, then consider on the foot of the patient under the sun, because your tongue has been pressed against the instrument that we have described to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you want to remove the blood blister, extract it with a small knife or a delicate tool carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it in that way, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the foot of the patient, and place a hot iron in the cavity of the tube, and pour water as many times as the blood blister is dead and stops on the foot) throughout the day and let the patient drink water.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a bucket full of warm water, and work the mouth with it, and wash the mouth with it; and don't drink any food or water for an hour after that, because the blood blister will soon fall off if you feel the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	Or if it is not removed by water that we have mentioned, then sub-fume the patient with camphor or menthol using the instrument that we have described in the sub-fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Make water, and add a little wine to it.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	It is another way of operating by sub-fume, that you take a bowl filled with water and carbonized wood, and the bowl is covered with a blanket, and a hole is made in it, and the end of the instrument is inserted into that hole; then perform the sub-fumigation; and make the patient open his mouth on the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the sub-fumigation does not cause pain to him until you know that the sub-fumigation has reached the blood blister, because the blood blister will soon fall off when it feels the sub-fumigation.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if not, then repeat the sub-fumigation many times, and prevent the patient from drinking, and eat salt foods and dry fruits, and don' drink water, and do what is necessary for him to be removed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument with which blood blisters are removed from the foot when seen; and it is similar to tweezers except that it has no curve.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the foot, and the end of it is similar to a pigeon's beak, which is sharp, but does not cut because when it presses any cause, it doesn't let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter.xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of surgery in the treatment of blisters and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Blisters are special spots, of different shapes, according to what they remind us of, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in piercing and cutting them in two ways, the first of which is for the species of blisters in themselves; and by the second, because of the moisture that they have.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is that they are placed in locations where the body is affected, because the blisters that form on the head are different from those that form on the foot; and the blisters that form on the flesh are different from those that form in a joint; and each of them is a game for surgery.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	Some blisters are some that, if not pierced, but rather mature by the healing of the skin.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Some blisters are those that, if not pierced, but rather mature by the healing of the skin. They also have blisters that are broken when they cross over each other, and do not mature according to their completion, such as blisters that form near joints, because the blister that forms near a joint, the person's limb is prolonged until it can reach water that is in the circuit of the body, and badly corromps the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it causes pain to that member; or is a blister near a main member, and if you delay piercing it until it has not healed into another main member; or is near the rear, so pierce it not healed; and do not pierce the skin that does not heal properly, but rather pierce it in a way that reaches the split at the back, and causes a fistula, or makes a hole in the term of it that does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	If you know the time of the operation for the abscess, then it is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is mature when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and a decrease in pulse, and the hard center of the abscess, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know that the time for operation is when there is pus coming out in the place where the abscess was and pus coming out from the cure of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And know that the operation should be done when there is pain in the long bone of the body or in the trunk, if the abscesses are located in the joints of limbs or feet, and in places where the ligaments, nerves, or tendons are affected; and finally, in all locations that do not reflect, for in those that do, use the method of perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But if the abscess is located in a bony place, then it is better to wait until its digestion has been completed, as I have already said; because if you perforate it before that time, you prolong the course of the poison in it and make the labia hard and deeper.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses should be perforated according to the thickness of the bone or body part that needs to be operated on, or according to which member it affects.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And when you administer a small perforation, and in large abscesses make wide or multiple cuts according to the variety of their size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And of the abscesses in which it is necessary that the cord be cut and sutured, do so when it has healed a little, so that there will not be any problems with it; because if you make cuts in them without doing this, trouble may result.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are not sutured, if they have three angles; and of those that are sutured, when it is done with the figure of a leaf, and when there are abscesses on the ankles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of these that are operated on with round or lunar incisions, and similar ones.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But those who have no head and whose abscesses are superficial, know that you should not make a deep incision; but if you must do so, then make it shallow.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected some pus, know that you should perforate it and not cauterize it; take out a little at a time, and on another day take out a little more, and finally take out a lot, and according to the amount of pus that comes out, make the incisions deeper or wider.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And mainly if the patient is a man of strong vitality, or a woman, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude; because the animal spirit has resolved to bring out the pus, and the body is weakened by it; so operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Keep this chapter in great caution; and when you administer the medicine to these abscesses, know that you abstain from using leeches or any other antiperspirant; but if the abscess is large and the cuts made are long, then know that you should put a stop to them.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess there is a piece of the cord that has been torn or cut, and it is sunk into the flesh, then know that you should stitch it up with old leather or linen thread; and when you have removed the scabs or the skin, wet them; and strengthen it on the third day; and finally treat it so that there will not be any more pain.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if there is a flow of blood during the operation, administer warm water and vinegar in which to soak a cloth; and place it on the area where the blood has flowed, so that it does not spread.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the flow of blood persists, know that you should administer the medicine and powder that I have recommended in many parts of this book concerning division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in winter time, and the area of the abscess is near a joint, then know that you should apply dust from vinegar mixed with oil and olive oil, and put it on the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	But if it is in summer time, and the areas are fleshy, then know that you should apply dust from vinegar mixed with oil or water, and all this should be done on the third day; and finally treat it so that there will not be any more pain.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary to know about the treatment of abscesses in general; but according to the particular way that each case presents itself, I will now explain how to treat each one specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter LXI.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the Incision of Abscesses in the Cord of the Head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the cord of the head there are small abscesses, and of two kinds: those that contain skin and fat, and those that contain bone only.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of these are blisters, and of those is pus resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain fluid resembling milk, and similar to it; and of those that are hard and dry.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the incision of all of them, and in the extraction of those that do not cause pain, you should use cauterization to prevent infection.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation of cutting them is that you should use the instrument in the form which I will now describe, which is called an entremes; then know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if the fluid contained is moisture, then cut it with a superficial incision according to this shape:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin the incision of the line between B and G; then when the moisture is emptied out, then scrape off that which contains the moisture, and do not leave any trace of it, for five senses return if they remain: because there are five senses in one.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And dip it in Egyptian oil if there is any present, or salt water; and fill it with water, and leave it inside for another day, because water corrodes everything that lies under the film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And dip it again in the oil a second and third time if it needs it, and leave it for another day; because you will not know if there is any left of that film unless you have cured the disease with oil, within which the disease is enclosed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	But if the abscess contains fat, then incise it according to this shape:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	A shallow incision with a shape like a croquet, and cut it between two lips of the incision and scrape out all of it, using your strength in extracting the skin that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your cauterization causes pain, then first of all I will tell you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And perform the incision and treatment of the abscess according to what I have told you; and if the incised part is very dry, because it is a small amount of pus and little moisture, then know that it is almost finished.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And in some cases of these abscesses that are located on the head and affect older men; because there is no moisture in them, which causes pain when you cut into one with a scalpel; but if it is struck with a hammer, it will cause pain and break out like a blister.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses that are located on the head and affect children; because their hair is different from that of adults, and the incision for these should be very shallow.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the puncture of those at the bottom of them in order that it be relieved to the patient's body from the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then approach those who are called to that of cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter.xxii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the section of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	The following are to be found: in the neck, in the throat and in the jaw; and some also occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those which occur in the neck, and all scrofula from that part of the body are to be removed, and with them also those which occur in the throat and jaw, and any other parts.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The substances of these scrofula are: some of them are blisters, and those which contain moisture, and the evil ones which do not yield to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore in that part which you have found to be of good disposition in the Treatment, of which the color of the fluid is similar to the color of the grape, and it is deep all over, not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the air passages, and it is not thick, examine that with a small scalpel from the lower part of the body to the lower parts of the body along the line of G. within the line of B., and cut off that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	It is more careful not to be cut into the veins or nerves.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And be careful not to cut into the veins or nerves; for if you were to cut into a vein or artery, and stop your work, then pause in the plague of threefold vinegar or other powders which cause a flow of blood, and examine that part where it is painful, and make it soft, and begin to decay.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood has been cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your work until you have finished it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Then ask the patient if there is any pain from the other small scrofula, then cut those off and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of a large scrofula, be careful not to cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	In advance, therefore, examine that with a sharp knife and leave it in place until it has fallen off of itself, unless it causes you harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the plague with cold water which you have already mixed with Egyptian oil, and then cure that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut off the whole scrofula, then be careful not to cut more than necessary; for it is enough to remove what is surplus.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is any surplus of the scar by reason of the size of the scrofula, then be careful to cut off its root, and then remove it, and add a bit of oil.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those scrofula which contain moisture, pierce that with a slight puncture here where the pus is seen to rise from the body surface, and pause the puncture of those at the bottom of them in order that it be relieved to the patient's body from the lower parts.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then approach the puncture, with oil and a similar liquid, in order that it may corrode the remaining pus;
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	Then when you see that the plague has been cleaned, then cure that with oil of generation until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter.xxxiii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the section of the scrofula which occurs in the throat between the lungs.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They said that this section in the scrofula is of little account, and I did not see anyone in our country who had that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But men have a tendency to be stubborn, therefore the extraction of the scrofula should be done with care, in order that it may not kill them, since all the veins and most of the body are affected.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have blisters on the lips or between them or on two ears; when the disease is not in the teeth, be careful of the section of the scrofula to avoid waste which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore when we want to measure water, let us mark off the section of the scrofula with three circles of the epiloot, or four in a small section for its length; let the section be made with a chisel and not with a saw, and this place is suitable for the section, since it takes away meat and the vessels of blood are cut.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the measure is small, then extend the cord of the throat to an ounce, and cut the cord within the channel, but avoid the vessels of blood, unless you see a cause for doing so.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then approach the section of the throat as we have described; and let a flame be raised over that part with oil, which is made from him, in order that it may dissolve it, and avoid the vessel of blood, unless you see a cause for doing so.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Then leave the plague open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore when the hour is right for a puncture, which is convenient, add two layers of cord to the plague, and cut that off by itself, leaving it alone.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then administer medicine which causes the flesh to heal itself.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	It is said by Albucasis that the greatest exposition of this passage which we have described is that you see that some of those scrofula have already come out of the throat of the patient, and the patient's breath is cut off, and some are to be cut off from the epiglottis so that it may breathe through that part, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by water let the plague remain open until the evil of the scrofula is consumed; and that evil remains for three days; then, after three days, let the plague be thus closed, and cure those within it which may be healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And the water which I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant hold a knife and cut off a part of the throat of the patient, and I was called to cure him; and I discovered the cause of the plague, and cured the blood which was caused by the plague.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then you confessed that that did not cut any veins or arteries, and let the wind escape from the plague, and I healed those within it which were healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if the servant did not return to his master in three days, then give him good medicine.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now let me tell you that there is no danger in the section of the scrofula.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter.xxxiv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section of the scrofula which occurs in the throat and is called a hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This scrofula, which is called the hernia of the throat, is a large one according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	It occurs in two ways; either it is innate or it is accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the innate there is no cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is of two kinds; one is similar to knots in the throat, and the other is like a scrofula which is caused by the knotting of an artery, and there is danger in both.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And don't let him make assumptions on the patient until he has made small cuts.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you must carefully examine this area and if you see anything that looks like a lump of fat, and it is not suspended to any vein, then cut it with your scalpel at the base where it meets the skin, and extract it from there; but if not, then examine all of his body, and treat the affected area with some curative medicine before healing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On section of the nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes, there are some specific techniques that I have already mentioned in the division of the body.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	I will explain here the difference between a node and an exit with doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	And so you will know that an exit is hot and painful, and has a violent fever and perspiration; and putrid matter which, when it stops the fever, the pain, and the heat, is complete.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But in a node there is no heat or fever or pain; it is covered with a thin layer of leather-like skin, which is its own natural cover.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And its color in the body is second to that of blood; and its beginning is with a vein, either large or small, and it is made up of two kinds of spirits: one dry and the other moist, and their colors are according to what I have already said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So, when you approach the cure of a node, you should extract it and examine its beginning with the instrument called an intromiser, according to which I will explain in the next chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the way to examine abscesses and all nodes; that is, you take this instrument and insert it into the area affected by pus, and you stir with it little by little until you are sure that the instrument has already penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally return your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and extract the intromiser and consider what is remaining in its path.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if any of the moisture remains, whatever color it may be, then you should carefully cut it at the surface according to what I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture remaining in the intromiser's path, then you will know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it on top of the cut surface according to this shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	as I have taught you, and suspend it with nails, and cut the core from all parts with ease, and save the skin or the sack, if you can, over that one; and extract that blood to the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that blood, and you will see it flowing out, and then you should extract it little by little until it stops; because if it flows continuously, it would be difficult for the patient to survive.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if it causes any pain, a little or too much, the node returns according to its own nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that it causes any small part to cause pain, then completely corrode it with some sharp corrosive powder and strengthen the corrosion, and place it on the area affected by the abscess, and treat it with some other cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then you should cut its two sides and extract it with the blood that comes out.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse at that location is pulsating or not pulsating, then you should bandage it and apply the vinegar to that spot for three days in order to stop the pain and allow the wound to heal; and then return to cut what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the necessary forms of the instruments for section and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those three types of intromers, two are large, one is medium, and the third is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The shape of a large intromer: It has an elongated shape with a sharp point at one end, like a needle, and it is used to pierce through tissue.
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The medium-sized intromer has an oval or round shape with a blunt end, similar to a knife blade, and it is used for sectioning tissue.
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The small intromer has a flat, triangular shape with a sharp point on one end, similar to a chisel, and it is used for cutting and peeling away layers of tissue.
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	If you sharpen them properly, with a sharp edge and slightly curved ends, so that the instrument easily enters the node.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of experience, which are simply known as alberneds, and one of those is called birid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	Of the three types, two are large, one is medium, and the third is small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The shape of a large experiment is like a flat circle or oval, sometimes with a slight indentation at the center, and it represents a complete circle or a curve.
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The medium-sized experiment has a rounded shape, often with a slightly pointed end, like a drop of water hanging from a blade, and it represents an arc or a curve.
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The small experiment has a flat, triangular shape with rounded corners, similar to a leaf, and it represents a curve or an arch.
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Let us remember that these are for abscesses, hernias, and fistulas, as well as boils, which are of the bones or other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are round, large and small needles, sewn with linen thread, and made with lemon resin, or iron or silver, and the majority are made with lemon resin.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black plums, which it is agreed that for those they open the fistulas in the concave parts where they are reflected, which are reflected in their own light.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	Of the three types, two are long and thin, and the third is medium-sized, and the fourth is short, according to the amount of width of the fistula and its narrowness.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The shape of a long experiment is like a thin rod or stick, sometimes slightly curved, and it represents a length or a width.
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The medium-sized experiment is made with a flat, rectangular shape, often with rounded edges, and it represents an area or a surface.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The short experiment has a triangular shape, sometimes with one side slightly curved, and it represents a depth or a height.
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of nails are of two kinds, some are simple, which have only one curve, and there are three types: large, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they are called orp nails, and there are three types of them.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they have two curves, and there are three types of them.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they have three curves, and there are also three types of them.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The simple large nail has a curved shape with one point at each end, similar to a hook, and it is used for piercing or holding together layers of tissue.
Forma de unci simple migier:	The simple medium-sized nail has an oval or round shape with a slight curve, similar to a knife blade, and it is used for sectioning and peeling away tissue.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The small simple nail has a flat, triangular shape with rounded corners, similar to a leaf, and it represents an arch or an arc.
Forma de unci orp gran:	The large orp nail has an elongated shape with two curves and a pointed tip at each end, like a pair of scissors, and it is used for cutting tissue layers.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form a hook from silver or lead, shape it like this:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form a hook of silver or lead, shape it like this:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form a large hook that has two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form a small hook that has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form a small hook that has two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form a large hook that has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form a small hook that has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form a small hook that has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the shapes of the scalpels that cut and scratch knots and warts; there are three kinds, each one larger, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of a medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of these are sharp and the other ends are not, they are not held in such a way, but so that it is quickly made in theexcision of knots fear of incision of veins or nerves, and for this it is cured of the patient and sometimes there is a little relief by the drying up of the wart.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the shapes of the poultices, and there are three kinds: large, medium and small, thus:
La forma de magda gran:	Shape of a large poultice:
Forma de magda migier:	Shape of a medium poultice:
Forma de magda pauc:	Shape of a small poultice:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	When made from wax and resembling rays, which is made with alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is on the sharp edge punctured with hidden spice and on that course inside and outside, when you want, thus:
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of the spatum, which are placed between the thighs in order to perforate the warts and not feel the pain of the patient, and there are three kinds: large, medium and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of the wind instruments with which the flow of blood is stopped, and there are three kinds: large, medium and small; the forms of the feet:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	When made from wax or resin, round and of a certain length, and thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these kinds of wind instruments should be large, medium and small, so that by their stopping the flow of blood quickly, and then when you first start practicing medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, you do not use them to stop the blood from flowing throughout the body, but only in certain places, such as the skin folds, legs, and feet; also on the skin of the chest, breasts, and belly, and the shoulders, which are covered with hair.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some small wind instruments are made in the shape of small scours like this; with them the blood is stopped when made by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some wind instruments are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter xliv.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the treatment of male breasts which are assembled from female breasts.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some wind instruments are inflated breasts of old men with fine skin, and then inflate the breasts, and assemble the breasts of female breasts, and Roman breast implants, thin.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you agree with me, consider cutting those which are divided by the lunar line according to this form, from the line B within the line G, and then remove all ugliness, and then employ a cure for incurable disease, and then join the two lips of the wound together, and heal that within which is to be healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast declines and splits into two parts and is softened by its size, consider cutting it in half from top to bottom, like a figure of a moon, where each half is contained within the other one, as if the main line contains the smaller one according to this form of the line from B within the line from G. And then remove the skin which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the bleeding, and administer what is necessary for the treatment of a sore that needs suturing, and powder it so that it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not agree with me about cutting that which I cut from the worry of the patient and from the flow of blood, consider cutting it as I have done, immersing it in a corrosive solution, and then join that which it has corroded, which is made of the grey, and then heal that within which needs to be healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter xlvii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of warts that come from the inside out.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those warts that come from the inside out are of the species of sores, dry skin, which is a sort of crust.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those few that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture are cut in half from top to bottom according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when all the liquid has been evacuated, consider it a cure for scurvy, and join it again another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then let the cutting be kept in place, and be cured with a suitable ointment applied to water, so that it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the wart of the node is there, and of the sores, consider cutting it off from above, as I have said in the section on scurvy.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	May consider if the wound is extended to the area that needs to be heated, then administer it according to what I have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter xlix.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the perforation of warts that occurs through an artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken and the cord is compressed which is over that, consider it a wart seen from above, as I said before, that inflammation and warts are caused by an artery or vein; for when the warts occur through an artery, they are long agglutinated in the preon of the body; and that when you cut them off with small knives, you feel a strangeness.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And what happens through a vein is seen from all sides.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And cutting through this wart is wrong, and mostly in places where the skin folds, and on the shoulders, and in many parts of the body; it is big, so that its treatment with iron may be avoided, and what is at the ends, or at the top, is to be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	May consider if it happens due to inflammation of the orifice of an artery, cut it in half; and then open the cord, and free the nerves, so that they are uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then let that needle pass through there, and let it go into the other, and join the artery with a double knot in two places; which causes an injury to your heart in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then cut off the place between the two threads with a sharp knife, so that it stops the blood completely while being inside, and dissolve the wart.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a cure which is caused by fire, so that the threads fall down; and heal it with a suitable ointment applied to water, so that it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the wart is caused by incision of a vein, consider it that you have on your hand what you cut off from your hand, and then let a needle pass through there; and make a double knot in the middle, so that you extract one of the two parts of the thread, and join the wart with one line according to what I have said before about the use of a double knot.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	May I then fear that they will tear the thread, let him insert the needle first and all the blood should be cut with the first incision of the needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the wound in its place until it is well and when you see that it is already healing, then cut off the excess of the knot, and let it remain that way.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place over him the pulse which you have dipped in wine and oil, and administer the cure which is made with calamus and inkwell until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Take care of the wound that happens due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	As soon as you see that an aposteme happens in the artery and vein, and apparently an aposteme happens in the nerves when you hit them or due to excessive work, and apparently.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	It is done by hand in the places of the assistants or of the tail, or in any place where the joints are massaged.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a painful apoplexy, and it resembles the color of the other limbs, and it is in the major parts of him that he loses consciousness, and when it is treated with violence, he feels a kind of stupor in him.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an apoplexy that occurs in the front of the body, and therefore the knot is left, and he becomes paralyzed all over, and does not go forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore from those who are in the joints do not cover that it is enfused with iron, for it would produce a strong counter-action.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But he who is on the head or forehead let him be with a needle.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a slight apoplexy, then you should put him in the foal and cut off that which is rotted.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, then you should suspend him with a chain, and extract that which has rotted, and then stop it; and sew the wound, and heal it quickly.
Capitol .li.	Here is the next sentence. Please provide the translation for this line as well.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the apoplexy that occurs from the mouth and occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Introduce a those who have swelled bellies and other parts of the body that are similar to funguses, of which the root is small and the head of those who are big; and also those whose lips are swollen, and those who are small, and those who are swollen in many places.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	You have already seen one, and in his abdomen there were two things that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between them as to whiteness, their roots being small.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those people were turned inside out and they bled constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore you cut off those people and sewed them up in eighteen places. and the other had one.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in cutting them up is that you consider if the patient is hot, and the color of his skin is white, wet, and the roots are small; then cut him with a sharp knife, and if he bleeds, cauterize him. Because if you stop bleeding, cauterize him.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is a little bit scared and frightened, do not cut him with iron; but rather take recently made lead, and tighten it on that part which has rotted, in the same way as you have told us; and let it remain for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then tighten the lead thread tightly; therefore, do not stop tightening the large lead thread until it is cut and fallen by itself, and because of that work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the root is thick, then in the incision of him there is no cause for fear and anxiety, and more so in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you cut off most of it, and then cauterize him so that he does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then heal the wound in which the plague has occurred.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to cut off that part of the flesh which is of a dark color, has little feeling, and looks backward, for that part is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	Then I remembered the case of a man who...
Capitol .lii.	Here is the next sentence:
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of treatment for a high umbilical hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The eminence of the navel is caused by various things; or due to the fissures of the navel which is on the abdomen, and the thread or intestine comes out according to where it breaks elsewhere; or due to blood flowing from a vein or artery according to whether it flows forward or backward, or due to air being trapped in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to the fissures of the navel and the thread comes out little by little, then the color of the apoplexy resembles the color of the body, and it is a painful pain, and you can see a variety of things.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	But if it is due to the escape of the intestine, then observe that part of the body which has just been mentioned, and if you press it with your fingers, it will return; and it becomes very heavy at the entrance, and it is a strong cause of great pain and work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to moisture, then it is painful and does not stay in place when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted or fixed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then the following signs appear: the apoplexy turns black and declines gradually.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to flesh, then the apoplexy is hard, large, and durable; and it remains according to a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to air being trapped, then the touch of him is painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider if the eminence of the navel is due to blood flowing from an artery or vein, or air being trapped; then be careful not to treat it, for in that place there is fear and anxiety as I have taught you in the chapter on apoplexies treated with an artery or vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the eminence of the navel is due to an intestine or thread, then order the servant to keep his back straight, and he should stand with his feet apart; then cut off all the apoplexies up to its edge with a sharp knife in the same way as you have instructed him; and extend the large apoplexy of the navel towards the two shoulders with a strong grip; and tie it firmly around the navel, and put it around with a rope firmly.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then cut off the middle of the apoplexy by extending it over the navel and inserting your hand into that part and pulling the intestine; and if you have caught it with your hand, then stretch it outward and pull it away from the navel.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have caught the thread, then take it with a grip; and cut off its excesses.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is against your artery or vein, then turn that part around and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them firmly in those two threads in the same way as you have made an incision around the apoplexy, so that they can penetrate; and tighten the apoplexy into four parts with the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to, stop the needles and let the place heal on its own until it is healed, or cut off that part when it becomes thin; but if you want to keep it longer, then cut it off with a sharp knife, and if it needs to be washed, wash it thoroughly; and heal the wound in which there is blood.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is made of flesh or by moisture, then cover that you make the absces to be herewith it and drain the pus or the moisture, which is there, and promptly cure that it covers and solidifies the place.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter li.i.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the treatment of the skull.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	I have said, in the division, of the kinds of skull and in what way it is to be treated with medicine, and that it is an innovator in the treatment to do it by iron so as not to be ulcerated; and I have said that a skull is conceived in the main and with caution in the treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And they said that some skull-heads are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, namely, when it is in the breasts or in the crotch and similar to the members allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it is starting small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and big, do not cover it because I cannot heal that wound nor have I ever seen anything like it, nor that it has come into contact with water.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is that you go ahead and place the patient and purge him of black cholera with some pills, and promptly bind it if there is a manifest re-occupation.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And promptly prepare the patient for the operation, and prompt the surgeon with the tools that will cover him; and promptly cut from all sides good thorough examination so that it does not cause any of the wounds of him to break open again.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the pus run, and do not wash away that leeching, and squeeze the places, and abstain from that gross blood throughout your body or with the tool with which you can manage the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you have a contrary feeling of that gross blood of a vein or an artery, then cauterize that within so that the flow of pus stops, and promptly cure it with the other treatment within so that it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the treatment of hydropesis.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already said, in the division, of the kinds of hydropesis of water and the signs of each kind, of the treatment with medicine.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is not but the kind of algals alone, and it does not approach iron to the kind of tympanist or to the kind of hypopares, for water is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this kind of hydropesis with medicine and do not confer your medicine, then consider that, if it is already achieved in the patient's recovery, or it is another kind of illness, namely, if it is in his throat or belly and similar to those, then keep back from giving it iron, for there is a fear about it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see that the patient is of an exuberant virtue, and in him there is no other illness but hydropesis only, and not child nor old man, then the way of the operation on him is that you raise the patient between your hands, and the servant raises it to its belly, pushing water out from the penis by means of a sponge, and promptly perform a spasm according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it should be of two sharp parts long, from the尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖端尖
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And now consider whether the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, because it seems that you have cut away three times as much at the navel, on the right side of him, over the fifth rib.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of dropsy is from a hernia in the belly, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three times.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if it is from the mesenteries, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not cut away over the rib where you want to place the patient, so that the superfluity does not run to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And now pierce the entire cord with the instrument, and now enter into that section, and lift your hand up to the spoon between the cord and the scoop, and you shall empty out that one; and if the quantity is a finger or less.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And now pierce the scoop until it reaches the desired place, for that is where the water will go.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now remove this one and now enter another instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It is similar to a silver tube that is very thin; it is made of silver or tin or lead, and at one end of it there is a small hole, and at the sides of it there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and its end is turned back according to the feather-like method, so sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it is an armilla, because when the instrument reaches the water, then in that moment it must be lifted up on the instrument, so that it evacuates the water in half a measure, for if you evacuate from that less than you reach in that moment, very much weakens the patient by resolution of his animal spirit, or happens to him five times closer to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from that according to the virtue of it and according to what you mean by the dispositions of the disease of the pulse of it and the goodness of it.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And now remove the instrument, and keep back the water which causes this because it is kept back by the cord that keeps back the hole that is above the scoop about which I have told you that you should pierce it according to this method.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And now repeat the instrument for another day if the patient is tolerant of water, and remove from the water a small quantity, and let it flow gently over fear, and beware of an error within that does not run out of the water but little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are afraid of the disease, and let go a great quantity of water, then that one should be buried in dry sand, and its froth on the bath, and wait for a long time under the sun; and that one should be cured with drying medicines within.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And now cauterize over the stomach, and the mesenteries and the belly remove water from the patient, according to what I have told you in that water there is preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LVI.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the treatment of children who are born with the places of urination not pierced.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some are born with the penis inside the womb and the head of the mix (or is not straight or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So therefore it is necessary to pierce it as soon as it is born with a small spoon according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And now place on the hole an iron pin of lead and connect it, and do so for three days or for 3000.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him rise and urinate; and now return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the lead, then it is possible that the urine which goes on that place, does not allow this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that one whose hole is straight should be cured with an iron pin of lead, as I have said, for many days within which it is increased in size.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the hole is not on its place, should be led out, which causes this because of them, that one who is born with the head of the penis is the end of the testicles within it, so that he cannot urinate at the front, within it; and is not a generation, for then the semen cannot come to the mother according to its rectitude, and is a disease that is slow.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the way of doing the operation in it is that the patient should be placed on his back, and now extend the penis of him with your right hand for the purpose of its extension, and cut off the head of the penis from its place by means of a sharp knife, or do not cut any part, so that the water of the penis comes out similar to the head and the hole falls into its place according to what it reaches.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of the flow of blood, because it is not safe for him; and now pause at him with water that he cuts off the blood, and cure the plague within which if it is cured.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the treatment of the scrotum on the penis and the corruption, blackness, and adhesiveness of it.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Are seen in the penis and is a prominent piece of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of that one, one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, you shall suspend it with a small oil and cut off that one within which it grows whole; and now place it on a piece of cloth under water, and now wash that one with Egyptian ointment; and now cure that one with the ointment every day until it is cured.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the albater is malignant, of a red color, then do so that you prepare cauterization near its incision and the reason for it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the albater is in the scrotum of the penis, and one part of it is inside the scrotum and the other part is outside, then do so that you hold the albater which is inside at the beginning within which it hardens; and now cure that one which is outside, because when you cure that one by holding the scrotum, it is not certain that it is not torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And already there are seen in the genitals and in the scrotum blackness and corruption, therefore do so that you conquer all that has already been blackened and that is about to corrupt or is already corrupted; and now place it on a piece of cloth close to water, which is made with flour of sesame and with three times finely ground eruca and trita.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And now cure that one with the other treatment within which it should be cured.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is a flow of blood, then administer cauterization with the moon according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Because cauterization with fire is in two positions, so it is in the flow of blood and in the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and has been destroyed all at once in that hour, then do so that you introduce a tube of lead into its meat so that the disease urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the scrotum to the penis (and this adhesion does not happen unless it is in that one whose scrotum is detached, and on it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion happens for plague or for abscess) cut it out with an obtuse knife so that it dissolves the flesh and frees the head of the penis from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to cut off those beautifully, then do so that you cut away with a sharp knife the head of the penis and the scrotum, and now is because the scrotum, when it is thin, is very easily pierced by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis as much as possible with water, so that it does not adhere to anything else.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then clean the skin with a wet swab until it is solid.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the washing of children and of the treatment for those who have circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not enough for continence: but since it is part of our operation and our will, and because it is really useful in children, we must set out a better method and lighter course if we want to recover what has been lost through their fault.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the children of the freemen do not circumcise in some of their countries, because they do not use circumcision in their laws, but because they have acquired it by experiment, which is why I have amazed most of the artisans and barbers with circumcision and purification from the foreskins and scrotum; and they use a clean thread and a sharp scalpel on the foreskin.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have seen all these ways; and I do not find a better way of circumcision than with the forex, with a clean thread, because the hair slips off more easily above it, since the cord of the prepuce is between two tunics, and the towel is above them, and it is easier to force another cut there, and it will surely cause more pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the circumcision that is done with a knife, and which is done by men, is not safe to cut off the end of the male member, because it goes very deep into the flesh.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the knife, you will surely hurt and corrupt your own operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the child's foreskin is short by nature, and it does not look like that which requires circumcision; and I have seen this one.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But of the circumcision that is done with a knife and a clean thread, the goodness, experiment shows me that this is not true circumcision; because the sharpness of the knife that cuts makes it so deep that it is difficult for it to come out; and therefore, when you press your hand in proportionate length between two sharp things, and cut it according to a comparison at a certain time; and it is done by compressing the skin to form a shape containing the foreskin of all the penis, and which does not make an error from all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first operation is that you should hold the child firmly most of the time if he is small, so that it does not move; and that you should put the thread in the skin of his penis only a little bit, and that you should release him on the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then do this with all the care in the world so that it receives your intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then do this with the child between your two legs, prepared and not nervous; and hide the scissors in your hand or on your thigh, so that the child does not see them or any of the tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then put your hand on the child's penis and blow into the foreskin, and pull it out as far as it goes; then circumcise him from what is added to the skin of filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then double the thread and tie it well; then bind a little of that thread from one side, and tie the other end with a good knot, and cut between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then raise the foreskin up a little and cut off the head of the penis; then pour a little water from a cup on that little piece, because it is better; and put powder thereon, and over the powder put oil of rose that has been freshly boiled; and leave him until the next day; and cure him with the treatment until he is well.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the knife for circumcision, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the extremities not be sharp and the others be sharp; so that there is no edge of the claw, and the length of both sharp things be like the length of two hand-grips held together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in circumcision is that it cuts off the foreskin completely, or it should be cut off; because it is a very deep cut.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then I say that you should put your hand in the shape of a hook before the place where the thread is tied; and cut according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your hand, then take it out with a knife and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if they have passed three days, and it is swollen, then do not cut it; but leave it until it has come down, and wash it with water, and cut it with ease; and circumcise it according to the preparation that you have made for yourself.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And keep away from the head of the penis, because it will not be good for it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Then care for that child with water so that it is cured of the fever of the powders which I have recommended in the treatment of the powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if circumcision is done with the foreskin over the measure, and follows the shape above it, then do not know it to him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But care for that child with water which we have said must be cured.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the treatment of urine held in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is done by obstruction due to fear or cold, or due to powder or food, and similar things, according to what we have said about ways of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and the bladder's retention is due to fear which already lies in the neck of the bladder; then I say that the sick person should be made to lie on his back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the sick person's legs on your two sides and raise his belly as high as it can go; and strain the urine as much as you can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then let the neck of the bladder be constricted and expelled through the passage behind; so that the urine is completely discharged.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the urine is not dissolved by water which we have said is violent; then I say that the cause is on the sick person; and you should deliver it with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It is made of silver and very thin leather, like a long finger in length, and at its end like a needle of ash, so small as to go through a thread; and make it very sharp.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of delivering urine through it is that you should double the thread and tie it well; then put its end in the hole at the end of the leather or cane by a good knot; and introduce the end of the thread into the cannula with haste, and cut off what is superfluous with scissors if there is any cause in the leather, but insert it into the cannula with force along with the liquid.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Then lay him on his back, and wrap his bladder with cloth; and put oil of roses on the penis and pee; then wash it well.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then introduce the cannula with ease until it comes into contact with the head of the penis; then double the thread above that point and tie it well; then insert the thread into the cannula until it contacts the bladder, and that is enough unless it arrives at the cause that is empty; and if it does not arrive at the cause, but goes in the wrong direction, do so according to this order: first make a small hole in the place where you want to go.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And so stretch out the bowel slowly, because urine dries up the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	So take out that one for cleansing urine, and use a ring, don’t stop making the water go in until the bladder is emptied entirely and the patient is given relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .lix.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality ofbladder cleansing with a water-filled bladder and with an instrument that agrees to water.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When a bladder ulcer or abcess appears, or a perforation has occurred, and you want to distil water and medicine in it, then use an instrument called a clamp-holder, and this is how it is done:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	unless at the end of it is deaf, then it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three holes: two from one side and a third hole on the other side.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a tight place, where water is collected, and as much as it opples is added there, except that whenever there is a cause to remove moisture from it, it is removed, and when it is expelled long, according to which clamp-holder is used, oil of naphtha is applied to the ends of the vessel in the sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So whenever you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clamp-holder in the moisture, and shoot at the water that is pushed forward through its holes, because the moisture is shot into the cavity of the clamp-holder.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And so insert the end of the clamp-holder in the rope according to what we have said in the ring; and so shoot the moisture into the water that is shot, because that moisture arrives at the bladder and at the patient's navel as well.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Form of the subtle hook to which the bladder is hooked, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, which looks like a small feather at the top, and place a small bowl inside it neatly.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And so take a bladder by movement, and place the humidity you want to crystallize in the bladder, and so connect that one between two clamp-holders with double fastening, and boil the moisture over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And so insert the end of the crystal hook in the rope.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And so place your hand over the bladder with the moisture that is to be shot upward, in order that the navel may not be touched by that moisture that is to be shot up.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you don't have a bladder present, then take a piece of pigskin and make a circle of it; and pierce that completely all around; and so insert the clamp firmly in those holes, some turned, and so add the ring as it was added before, since you are not stopping the water that you want to introduce moisture, and pour and water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And so put that one in the instrument and make it on the bladder, and express your hand within so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter .lix.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of urine.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division of urinary ingredients and the cure of it with medicines, and the difference between urine generated in the lungs and urine generated in the bladder, and the signs of that one.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have already said about urine in which catarrh operates, and its section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the urine generated in the bladder itself is that which is retained in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will now present that one with a clear and concise exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Thus I say that urine generated in the bladder mainly comes out with children; and of the signs of it is that the urine excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the navel rubs its ring, and there are visible traces of it; and at the water there is a sound like a rattle.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is difficult to cure children with that, until they have reached twelve years old; and it is difficult to cure the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people it is half-cured by water, because it is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that one whose urine is greater and the cure is easier; and if it is little, it is opposite to that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Thus when we come to the cure of that bladder, cover at the beginning of that bladder what we have said about the hook used to extract all the content from it; because that crack prevents the spread of urine by means of a probe.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And so take the bladder from behind with a probe and place it in its cavity, or that one jumps from one place to another.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And so insert that one between your hands prepared, and the hands of it are on the sides of its contents, so that the whole bladder is turned downward in its holes.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And so turn that one and all of that outside.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the urine in the space, then sit down soon after sectioning it off.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you don't leave it completely wet from behind, then cover that one with a ring of oil; and rub that one with oil, and insert it in the navel of the child, or the half-grown youth, and place that one on the navel.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And turn the urine inside until it is outside from behind.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And you turn that little by little, until the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And so press that one with your fingers on it, and shoot that one outside through its holes; and after the place where you have sectioned it off.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the minister to press the bladder against his hand; and order another minister to extend the genitals towards the holes on his right hand, and pull back the ring that is left behind the genitals, from the place where you make the section.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so insert an inkwell into it, and this is its form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And so split it into the water that is between the genitals, not in the middle place, and return to the back of the left hand; and make the section over that urine and the child's words are in the rear, and so make a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and narrow inside, according to the amount of urine that is generated for it, and no more, because firm pressure splits the child's words that are at the back of the bladder, and so forced out.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you should know that there is no water for which one to lean or turn away; therefore, the excretion of it is difficult by means of water.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And that urine is like milk, and is round, and its excretion is less frequent.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Thus if it is that one which is to be leaned or turned away, place in the section.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not like that, then cover that one on it, or hold it tightly on it with a firm grasp, at the end of which you are to push out that one; or insert something sharp into that one from behind.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you can't stand on it, then increase the height of that one slightly, and if you see a flow of blood, cut off that one with vinegar dissolved in three parts.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the urine is more than one, then at the beginning you shoot your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and so section it off on it; and so insert a small amount of water; and apparently make four, if there are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If there is a great deal of pain, you must be unaware that you are cutting into an area with a large nerve, as the patient can suffer either from living with the pain or from frequent urination due to a blocked bladder, since the area is not completely solid.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Then may the minister expel what is inside as well as what is outside, or engineer a fracture of the leg with pliers in order to extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe juice and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rosewater and rubbing alcohol, so that the wound may heal more quickly.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then return the patient to his bed on the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when he has been unwrapped, clean the area with water and oil, and apply a poultice of vinegar and oil within which may be healing powder and tar.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Then if in the wound there is an ulcer that hurts and burns, and from which urine escapes (and this is known by the exit of urine), then cut into it very narrowly with a sharp knife, since if it remains it may cause blisters and gangrene to develop in the bladder, and putrefaction to occur.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and in opposition to all kinds of poultices, with water that carries away the medicine within so that it may heal.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And in all hours of the day you have applied both pillows and adjusted the medicines that were placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the pain is slight and it is located in the middle of the foot, and there is no urination, then do not attempt any kind of surgery, since three times has this treatment prevented surgery; and if you spray water on it, and if you insert a steel needle into it lightly, for this is the way:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of a triangular shape, pointed, and firmly inserted.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then return the patient to bed, so that the pain does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the needle into the foot with ease in order to pierce it.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Then turn the needle in your hand slowly, and you will pierce that small spot with it, and then pierce another spot on the other side of the foot, since the urine is soon relieved.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then place your hand on it where the pain is on the other side of the foot, since that spot is tender and there may be a rupture due to urination, and the patient will be healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Then if this treatment is not suitable for you for some reason that prevents it from being applied, then return to the patient's side and apply another treatment.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then cut into the pain in the foot between two pieces of cloth.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then remove the bandage and clean the wound with water.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to return the patient' side bandage to his body, but it is to prevent the pain from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage above it, since when the bandage is removed, the pain returns to its location, and causes a wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	Then for this reason, when you remove the bandage above it, you must raise the foot up, or else it will return to its original position and cause pain again; so do not take off the bandage above it until then.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of extraction of pain from the female patients.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Pain in women is usually slight.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Then if you experience any pain from any of those treatments, the treatment for that person is difficult and should not be applied using certain methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of these is that a woman's strong body makes her difficult to handle.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	Another reason is that you cannot find a female who will drink medicine when she is pregnant or breastfeeding, or is married to someone.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you do not have any female doctors with this skill, mostly for surgery.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth reason is that the location of the surgery on women is far from the site of the pain, so you would not feel any pain during surgery, and there would be a risk of death.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	Then if necessity forces you to do this, return when you have found a female doctor who is skilled in this matter, and only a few are found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Then if you are deprived of that person, search for someone who is gentle and subtle, or present a female wife who is respected in the matter of women, or a woman who practices this art well.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then present her, and order her to do everything that you command, from the examination of the pain until the beginning; which is why she should check if the woman is pregnant, then return her to her husband' side, and let her feel the pain.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find that person, remove her from her husband' side, then order her to mark the area.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	Then if she is not pregnant, order the wife to place her left hand on her bladder, and press it gently.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find that person, gradually remove her from the opening of the bladder to its edge with her finger, and let her feel gently where it hurts most.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then place her finger gently on the area where it hurts most, and let her feel where it is located in that spot, and order her not to move away from the pain with her hand.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	Then the incision should be small at first; then insert a needle into that area, and if it hurts, adjust the incision slightly according to the quantity that you know the pain will travel from that point.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	You should know that there are many types of pain: some are small and sharp, others are long and round, and some have edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Then you should know how many spices of pain there are for each kind of pain that you can feel on your body.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Then if you want to check for fever, place three drops of vinegar on the spot and inspect it after an hour; then resume your operation before the pain disappears.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Then prepare yourself with the instruments that are said to be used in extracting pain from men for your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	Then if you want to check for fever, and you know that the discharge of pain is due to the opening of an artery, then place some powder on the area, and apply a pressure cloth tightly; do not repeat this, since a strong person may die from blood loss.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Then when the pain becomes less sharp, you return to your operation before the pain disappears.
Capitol lxii.	Capitol 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of surgery on hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is nothing but an addition of moisture to the skin, which is left behind by the genitals containing water, and it is called cyphac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	In some cases, it is in the proper skin layer which nature has prepared in the middle of the genitals, separate from each other like two husks; and this is the codena of the genitals between the skin containing water, which we have called cyphac, and it is not water but a substance like honey.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to debility which occurs in the genitals, so that this substance is infused into them, and sometimes it happens by injury made on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture is not moted in color, for the color of it or is declined to citron or to bloody, or rust, or is black, or is thick white, and is that water which is most.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the membranes by which it is drawn out are these: for if it is in the white cipha that I have said, then the apoplexy is gradually declining a little towards length as well as with figure of a bull, and appears on the genitals, since the moisture is present there.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper pannicula, then the apoplexy is gradually departing from the bull, and for this reason one supposes that it is another bull.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the genitals and the white cipha, then let him put a cushion.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And as you wish to know the color of the moisture in the apoplexy that is placed between them, then let him examine the color of the moisture at the edge of the incision from which it has come out; and according to what it has come out of the edge of the incision, judge from that what is inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the cure of it by fire, then let him order the patient to be fidgeted if that is possible, and often wash his clothes.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then let him be raised on a bed a little higher for some time, and let him put some sheets under him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then let him be placed on the left side of him, and let the minister follow on the right side of him, who extends his cane to one of the two legs between the genitals and the part where the wonder of the belly begins.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then he takes a long spear and cuts the genitals at their root along the length near the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Then the section should be made according to the rule of distance from the line that you wish to make on the genitals, as far as it reaches to the cipha white in all its extent.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Then let him extract it, and observe, and keep for this that you do not scratch it; and your extraction from the edge of the bull should be suspended a little more finely and carefully examine the extraction according to the quantity that is possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then he pierces the cipha completely with water by a wide perforation, and removes all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then he separates the two lips of the section with a finger, and extends the cipha to its extremities; and do not touch the genitals together in all their extent, and extract it in that way that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Then extract it in all its totality or in pieces, and primarily its lower part, since if you do not scrutinize the extraction with care, the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the bull is made to come out of its root at the hour when you have finished the section of the cipha, then return it inside, and then join the two lips of the genitals with a suture, and then care for that as well as for the other illnesses, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the bull is corrupted by some other illness, then let him be lifted up by its suspenders, and extract it, and then care for that with water which we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is gathered in two parts, then you will know that they are two hernias; therefore examine those parts according to what you have done to the other; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then you should wash the wound and immerse it in oil or rose oil; and put another cloth over it which you have immersed in wine and oil, and spread that on the genitals and the wonder of the belly; and open a towel and powder, and lay those open by means of this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then put two clothes and make them wet with wool or water; and attach those extremities by means of a belt or of wet wool, and attach them to the underwear of the pants, and the one of the extremities should be taken from the rear between the legs, and the other to the part where the panty begins, and two extremities should be placed on two cushions which are left, and two extremities on two angels, and all attachment should be made in the belt of the underwear.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Some people treat this hernia with surgery instead of cutting it out; and it is because you should cut the genitals with a fine knife and make an incision according to what we have said; then you should make an incision in the form that I have described, and if you discover white cipha containing water, then make cauterization according to this method:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is placed in a Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then the cipha should be pierced, and it is burned in such a way that all moisture is discharged.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then the cipha should be extended with needles and extracted with needles, and extracted by burning with a subtle fire; and extract it according to what is possible for you as far as you drive out all of it; and guard against the fire that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	You will know that this operation is closer to saving and further from blood loss, and better than an operation with a section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you have discomfort during the section or during cauterization or blood loss, then let him know what discomfort you have in return; and cure that with which it agrees for him.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the hunchback is not very great, and does not expect the second operation for its horror, then administer an incision according to what I have said here; and it is when it is certified by you, according to that which has been said of signs, that this hernia is fluid.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then let him be placed on a raised platform, and pierce the apoplexy in the part that is lower for a long spear, and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	Then make the incision wide in such a way that all the water flows out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then let him be placed on the area where he has cut it, and let him leave it, so that the water runs away from it.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then care for that in such a way that the illness is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if discomfort is to the excitement of water in that hour when you pierce it: and water does not come out except by that which the white pannicul in the orifice of the plague makes discomfort and prevents the exit of water, then let him put into the plague a small or instrument with which the water is extracted from the plagues; or adjust in the constriction of the plague a little one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	You will know that water returns, and it is collected in a vessel within a few months or years; and when it has been gathered, then pierce it according to that method which I have said; for the hunchback will live its days that way.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of Section on肉状 Hernia and the Treatment of It.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You will know that in the section on this hernia is more dangerous to perniciousness in the major cases; but it is seen that its dismissal is and be saved by it for the better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	I remember the operation of the apoplexy and the spices used in it.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the apostems come to those whose genitals are joined together and occur for various reasons: or for acute excess of fluid, which is poured into the genitals, or for a blow.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the apothema according to the color of the body, and does not turn pale in pain, and it is a heavy apothema.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And a heavy apothema is the lapidated one, of which the color is dark, and there is not a feeling of heat.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some come because of the knotting of the arteries, and because of the swelling of those where it is already perceived the return of life, or because of the swelling of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which comes from the swelling of the arteries is known by the disappearance of the apothema when we press those who tell it; and it does not seem that this touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which comes from the swelling of a vein, by no means has its disappearance due to pressing those who tell it;
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that this kind of apothema be caused by a section and on the other carns; and it is because you place the knot of the genitals, and approach the knives to their joints, and extract that of white cypress, and remove the suspenders of the vessels, and tie them together, and cut off those above all the joints of the knife.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the meat has already been hardened at those places, then you cut off that meat and cut it up.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion for any reason in the middle of the genitals, or between them, then you cut off all that adhesion and cut it roundly.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is the birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you cut off all that which belongs to him, and extract the testicles thus: you take them by the scrotum and hold them with one hand;
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with rosy oil and clean it well; and take care of that other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the Cure for Hernia, which is due to heat.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	There is an apothema wrapped in something that resembles grass for the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to move or walk on the patient's back.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure for this disease is due to fear because of which there is a return of life.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, you may say that surgery on those second ones, having first performed it on the first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should place the patient on a raised platform; and approach the suspenders of the testicles to their joints; and hold the knot of the genitals with your hand between the legs that are stretched towards the knees; and keep those other servants who you are, and stretch them outwardly with force.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then cut with a sharp razor across the middle of those vessels on the right side where they are uncovered vessels.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then remove all that in one piece as if we have said above in the extraction of arterial tissue that is in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then fasten there one needle which is twice as strong, and tie that in the first place of those places where it happens to be vital, and tie another veil in the last place of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then cut those at their middle part with a right-hand cut according to the length of the body, and remove that which is joined together with the corrupting and putrid humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then care for the wound with a cure of the other wounds that you want to heal by producing them; for it is not good because of water.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if all the vessels are cut off, then the testicles should be extracted or, because of water, that they are torn away from the vessels; for they would lack nourishment by the cutting of the vessels and would wither away, or because of not being fertilized.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXLV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the Cure for Intestinal Hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The coming of this hernia is because of the cutting that is done in the middle of the white cypress which is extended on the belly from side to side of the navel's miracles, so that when those bowels break out through that breach they go into some one of those bowels.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And that breach is either from the middle or from the extension of it; and these two species come about for various reasons: or because of a blow, or because of noise, or because of clamor, or because of a sudden elevation for some heavy reason, or because of the resembling.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of that is, when it comes from the extension of the middle, that it comes little by little over a long time and not suddenly; and it is an apothema within the navel because the middle cuts into the bowels.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it comes from the cutting of the middle, for at the beginning there is a violent pain; and it is an apothema that makes a sound different from what is near, and the body trembles because of the extension of the middle.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some come out with the bowels' cloth, and it is called this intestinal hernia zyrbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some come out with wind, and some run in the bowels' fissure; and here it is re-absorbed, and at the water is a great harm to the patient, and some cause bad and greater pain when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the cure for these diseases due to fear, so that he may escape the danger of being caught.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of performing that operation is that you order the patient to return the bowels to their cavity if he obeys your return; and place his hands between your mas, and raise the feet.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then tie the knot which severs the genitals at their joints, and cut the knot entirely by the long; and fasten there two blades of a knife according to what you wish to eat; and then place those blades on both sides where you would cut according to your desire.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the cutting is according to quantity that it is possible for you; then from that take the testicles, which would be taken away through the hole.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then remove those white cypresses which are hard to cut at their joints, where they are uncovered; and place the knot of the genitals between them to keep them from moving.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you cut the testicle with the knife that is between cypresses; and which is hard to cut at its joint, leaving the knot of the genitals between them to keep them from moving; and cut off those adhesions which are behind the testicles.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then cut off the knot of the genitals at their joints, and stretch the white cypresses on its sides with your left hand, and lift them up to their joint; and command the servant to hold those testicles in front of you, and dissolve that adhesion which is behind by a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	Then examine the genitals with your hands to see if there is any cause of the bowels being wrapped in the hard white cypresses.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you do not find anything wrong by touching; then place that one on your belly from behind.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle that is strong enough to break four threads, and put that one between the middle of the cypresses, which is under the knot of the genitals, and cut it; then tie those extremities together where they come out from the needle, making them cross in the shape of a cross; and fasten them together with some thread.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap their extremities and attach those with violent pain to the bed, and those vessels that cause them not to be able to transmit any cause so that an apoplexy does not happen from here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And another thread is attached according to the first thread, three inches from here; and these two threads leave the loop that is of the testicles the quantity of their size, and are cut all around according to the roundness, and are taken away from him the four.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut in two places that loop that is of the testicles by section from which run blood and pus, so that this does not happen again as we have already said in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer soaked wool in oil, and place it on the wound; and that thread that we have said is placed (and some of the loop white is cauterized, which we have said to place next to the cutting because blood may flow) and leave the thread inside so that it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	Perhaps if the bed-clothing is late, then water should be boiled, and placed on it according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with the other healing of wounds within that it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter. LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	Of the windy hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this windy hernia, there is nothing to be seen that has been burned on the healing of it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it is done thus as we have said in the hernia that is on the leg; which is to say, that you place the vessel next to the section carefully; and then cut on its own edge with oil into which run pus and blood, so that the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And heal the wound as we have said within that it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter. LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the droop that happens in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some break in the ankles thus as we have said, and the place is removed.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not put any of the intestines on the genitals; and if you do so, there is little; and return to it in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	Perhaps if the time is prolonged with it, a split appears in the loop within that the intestine is put on the loop; and this happens because the loop stretches, and then becomes soft and the place runs pus; and it is removed.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the healing of it is done thus as has been described before.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some are healed with iron according to this way: and it is that the patient jumps on your two legs between your hands, and then cut off the place of the split pus by section for the length according to three inches.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten the white loop that is under the testicles within that it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then pull the thread and place it on the edge of the loop, and pull it from the navel at the same time.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then cut off the two edges that are on the end of the loop, and adjust it with a stitch from one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the end of the thread, and do not cut off the loop completely, nor extend the thigh, nor any other cause as we have told you in the healing of the entestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And that is healed with the healing of wounds, and when you cut off the threads, wash it and restore the wound within that it is hardened; for the loop contracts and the prominence of the split is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to being saved.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter. LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The testicles of some men are softened by water because the flesh between them is softened, and the watch is kept.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	And then, in the healing of it, let the patient lie down according to his two legs, and cut off all the loop that is softened on the natural loop; and then make a double stitch with it.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut off the superfluity of the loop that is softened by three or four cuts and a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut off between the stitches; and then heal by healing of the other wounds within that it is healed, and let the threads fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter. LXIX.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that in our law castration is prohibited, except for the reason that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except by two ways, of which one is that this is done in the science of the doctor when he asks about the healing of him on whom it happens; and the other way is that we need to castrate other animals for our pleasure because of them, as with donkeys, and horses, and pigs, and animals similar to them.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting off or splitting by section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	And in that which is done by cutting off, the way of the operation is that you should cut the animal's tail with a sharp knife within that its genitals are softened and made weak and let them hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand within that they are relaxed and do not appear to be cold by the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	And in castration done by splitting and sectioning, be sure that you have the animal, and press the testicles of it with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspenders, and cut off above each foot with a section within that two feet process in front of it.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut off those that are pus-like to you; and take away each excoriation.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave on the loop any cause, but leave the loop on the vessels that are under them.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of castration is better because it is done by cutting off, for cutting off strengthens the loins so that the beast does not desire to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then heal the wound within that it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter. LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the healing of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: one is because it appears that the space in the loop of the testicles is cut; and this is a figure of a woman's cunt, for which there are two testes.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some of that man has urine in the loop of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	And in women it is one kind of sex: and this is because the figure of the woman over the penis is as two testes of man a little less than half of what it was before; from the man's figure and his two testes.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the healing is according to three kinds: of the two men, and of one kind of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you cover those meats adjusted within that it removes the taste of it; and then heal those with the healing of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men of whom you see urine in the loop of the testicles, there is no healing or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter. XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of limping and of meat prominent for reasons of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Limping that is strong is adjusted on natural causes within that it is stretched and it does not stop the watch; and in some women, it is enlarged to a great extent as it is done in men when they copulate within that it is spread out.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you have the superfluity of lancing your hand or finger and drain it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish in incisions, mostly in the membrane of the brain, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then properly cure that with the cure of the wounds before it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Might a newborn child is a child that lies in the womb of its mother until it fills that, and firm is to come out before the parts of the forethought according to appearance of cow (and therefore I will call this "cauda malautia"); then properly cure that with incisions before it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter .lxxii.
De curacio de alratica.	On the Cure of Gout
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	A gout is that the ring of the female is not pierced, or it is a small hole.
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is by gout that has preceded, and this is caused either by ill-prepared meat or by subtle rust or spice.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is either in the womb of the mother or in the legs of the child, or in the pus on top of it, or in the pus below it, and also prohibits bleeding and engaging in sex and childbirth, and firmly prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of this is done by looking at the moon, if the opposition appears, then surely; but if it does not appear, then you seek that with the help of tools or from a beam.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the opposition is by subtle rust, and it is between the two lips, then you cut and break it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And that you place over the two lips powder, and place the fingers of both hands in front of them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back with her knees open, and place your hands over them with force until that subtle rust is broken and the opposition is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then return the lamb to the place where you keep the olive oil and place that over the area, and rub it with your hand every day so that the place of incisions is not consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the rust is thick and spicy, then you have to lance it with a needle of lead or a leaf of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the opposition is by food, then suspend that with oil, and lance it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And are given to you the medicines that stop the flow of blood by biting, also with an acacia, and blood of dragon and endives, adjusted to milk of cow.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a wide lead needle that the plague is not consolidated excessively.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it by the two sides and administer four times of a day with warm water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then properly be cured with another cure of consolidation before it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And in some cases it happens during the conception of other meats, and then properly lance according to this way.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for hard meat, that hard meat in the womb has not caused a contradiction to be made in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter.lxxiii.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the Cure of Hemorrhoids and Thrombosis that Occurs in the Vagina of Women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are the appearance of small veins that run from the openings of the vagina, and if they become swollen, they are called acute hemorrhoids, and if they are old, they are called chronic hemorrhoids.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	You have already heard what is said about those and their signs, and also say those that receive the cure and those that do not receive the cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Then say that hemorrhoids and thrombosis are when they are in the womb and do not appear in the sense of the woman, then in those there is no cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the opening of the vagina over which a woman feels pain, those are those who are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	Then place the woman in a cloth of friction and place those with the scissors or an ugly cloth, and lance them with the razor blades and cut them with the razor.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Then sprinkle on those the flow of blood from one of the powders that you lance with a bite, also with an acacia and similar to these.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then wipe your feet with a damp cloth for an hour, then place that in warm water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then let that be boiled in a broth of sweet herbs and pepper and cloves and similar to these.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then return flour of wheat and make a paste with honey and wine, and put it on the two legs with your hand.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is separated, then let it be; and otherwise, put it together with two windows, and make an incision on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then return the lamb and immerse that in juice of coriander or of wild carrot or of grape must with your hand, and let that place be cured within it; and this place is cured from within.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if the meat is of harsh appearance, then you have to lance it with water that appears from there according to what I said in the engagement of engagement.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that within so that it is cured.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter.lxxiv.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the Perforation of the Vagina in the Womb.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Small veins occur in the womb, and if they are hard and painful and ulcerous and pustular and wart-like and painful and thorny and other small veins.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	I have already said these diseases and the signs of those and the signs of those, and the cures of them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	Then I say in this treatises of perforation how you do the operation with your hand if you want to know how to operate.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you have to consider if the pain of the perforation in the beginning is acute with percussion and blood flow, and if that hardens and becomes painful over it, then do not pierce it, and cure that with water that helps within the maturation until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you have to cut the woman on a bench that has two benches; and lean her back with her legs spread apart from the waist, and pause her knees below her, and tie them with a thread next to the water.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the woman follows behind him and administer the instrument with which you will open the opening of the vagina, the shape of which will be according to those cases that will be proper.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument that your hand be on the ring of the vagina of the woman, and that which enters into the vagina is not more than the ring of the vagina and all the child.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the ring of the vagina, then you have to place over its texture in the ring of the vagina so that it does not prevent the entry of any instrument into the ring of the vagina.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Then you have to place the water that runs in the instrument from above and the minister has the instrument and turns it until it is filled with the opening of the vagina.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	Then when you feel excitement, and it is touched with your hand, and it is wet, then you have to dry that with a sponge.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	Then when the flow is stopped, then you have to place in the pus a needle dipped in rose oil or green oil and stop the bleeding in the section in the ring of the vagina.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And he dip his hand in clean water and rub it on the head.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then, if it does not heal by itself within two days, put a paste of it into the wound and wash with water until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some are washed with milk and water, until it hardens like a crust; then dip the wound in water in which raisin or barley seed has been soaked, and dip it again into the poultice.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the wound is deep inside the head, you are forbidden to use any medicine on it until you have washed away the blood that has collected there; then you may use the water in which raisins or barley seeds have been soaked for a long time.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Teaching midwives how to bind the wounds of women according to the diagram, in order not to cause nature to be disturbed.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife recognize in advance the natural figure of childbirth by the signs of the woman; and it is because when you see the woman express herself at the time of delivery, and she has a desire to smell the air, and above her there is something that comes out of her, and she hurries to give birth to it, then know that this delivery follows the natural figure, and that it is this one which comes out from above her head, or hangs down from her navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So that the woman's belly is relaxed, in order that the fetus may gently descend because when it comes out over her head, it comes down; then let it be delivered, and with good hygiene deliver it from those excesses.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	May that which is the other part of this natural figure be unlawful, because when the fetus comes out it is on its feet and over its head; and the mother's back, or the breast, is before her head and her feet; and her mother with one hand. or it is on its head and her mother, or her navel; and it has a firm hold on the side of her head, like those natural figures that are not lawful.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is for the midwife to be wise and skilled in all matters, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you will show all these figures, and what is hidden in them so that it may be understood by water, and rest on top of it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is brought out over her head by natural effort, and this delivery is difficult; and sometimes the virtue of it has already been destroyed, then let them cut off the hair, or let them apply fenugreek poultice, and wash with water.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then the midwife will place herself between the woman's legs, and cut off that hair with a small blade, or rub it with her own hand, until she has removed all the moisture from it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Then press on the woman' belly so that she gives birth to the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	May she not deliver; then let the woman be crusted with a poultice of foxtail and a poultice of fenugreek applied.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And let her be put in the crust until it hardens, and make her sneeze with a towel, for sometimes the fetus is stuck inside; and close her mouth and nose for an hour, because after this the fetus will come out by itself.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if two more of the fetus are stuck at the beginning, you shall decrease them little by little with ease.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	May she not obey the instrument; then let her sit on a stool and lift up her feet, and let the stool be placed on the ground; and the woman be held so that she does not fall down with the shock.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the fetus is not turned inside and dies; then let them be cut out of it, and take out the fetus with it, for it will come out easily.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the delivery of the fetus on its own feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus comes out on its own feet, you shall encourage it; then make this little one turn over and over again, then pick him up with your hand, and put one of his legs into your mouth to pull him out.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	May the fetus come out between the legs; then you command her to contract herself, and make her sneeze with a towel, for sometimes it will come out by itself if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not stuck with water that I have described; then you return the little fetus little by little until you reach the second natural figure, because this one will come out easily with a slight movement.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to use all the water that I have described; then take a poultice of oak and of gum dissolved, and pound it well in the mortar with a good blow, and put it on the navel of the woman, from the bottom of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And let him make a cut in the water that flows, so that he may achieve the hypochondriacs.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When the contractions of the woman become less frequent; then apply to her sniffing with mint and stopping her breath.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When you have sniffed her with mint for an hour, then let her sit on a stool, and make her sneeze, and open her mouth wide, and press the lower part of her belly slightly; because the fetus will come out easily after this.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Delivery of the fetus from its own feet and legs.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus comes out in this form, then you will encourage it to contract little by little; and let the woman sit with her back down, and her feet up, and her legs stretched out, and her knees bent, and her head between her legs, and her hands behind her back.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then press on the woman' belly little by little, and take out that which is under her legs from between her ears, until it is ready for the delivery of the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not stuck; then pick up its legs and move them violently, and press that which is under them little by little, until the fetus can come out with the contractions of the woman.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then encourage it to contract little by little, and order the woman to contract herself until the fetus comes out.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Delivery of the fetus hanging downward from its own feet.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	She is to be put in a state of relaxation; but if she cannot be relaxed, then lift her up and let her go down.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If she cannot go down; then let her lie on the ground, and encourage her to sneeze with a violent blow, and administer those which I have described to you of the poultices.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the birth has come; then let her sit on a stool, and study how to put the woman in relaxation, and take the fetus into the natural form, and encourage the woman to sneeze, and command her to contract herself until she is stuck.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Delivery of the fetus on his back, with his legs and feet spread out, and his head between his legs, and his hands behind his back; the feet being higher than the head.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Then let the midwife hold the fetus, and let her turn it little by little with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is stuck; then let it be turned over and over again, then pause on the navel with that water and those poultices that I have described to you.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then order her to contract herself little by little, and when she has given birth to the fetus, let her sit on a stool with her back turned to the light, and let her be slightly bent forward, and order her to sneeze with a towel.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the fetus prepared over the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it begins to push out of the mother according to this method, consider, and then you cut the second one with your fingernail before it is evacuated from the moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the neck, then you cut that of the umbilical cord so that it is not held and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then you push the fetus into the opening within until you hold it, and sends the woman that presses herself several veils, and the lord outside if not light, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or a bunch of fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twin fetuses are natural, and sometimes there are three or four, but this one is strange and hard to believe; there are five causes for a fetus to be dead, and not alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count them, even if they are multiplied, a second one, and separate them with a string, distinguishing those entering the navel of each of these; And sometimes veils are separated by chance as it is a fetus naturally light, and some veils are separated by chance as it is a natural fetus light.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult for them to achieve the pregnancy and reach the water that we have spoken of natural figures, then you care for them as we have said.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the woman is subtle and makes water that facilitates and subtlety, and tardiness, and is ingenious according to all figure according to which it is prepared of the engineer bringing salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that it is formed in the womb from embryos and Aborted are.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some are formed in the mother's one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and ten times, and it has been verified that a woman can get pregnant six times, and another ten times altogether, which causes pain to be felt by measuring the glorious wise ones.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this covers that is in the science of the woman how strong it is to that small similar to water, and therefore stops at water that is small that covers.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXVII.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the removal of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus with water that we have said in the division of medicine and is not outside it, and you necessarily use surgery with hand, then consider if the woman is of healthy virtue and is not from the accidents for which she is a lost cause.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then consider that the woman is lying on her side, and her head is turned so that her feet are raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should hold those two parts or be tied on the side that the head does not extend too far for the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you wet the mouth of the mother with water to drink, and with astringent of althaea and fenugrec, and with semolina.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then you dip the woman's hand in water and in astringent, and then bring it closer to her body, and then close the door where the nails of the fetus are located.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	You place it in a convenient way: then consider if the fetus is prepared to put on its head, and then you fix the nails into its holes, or into its neck, or its mouth, or its palate, or leave it with a beard, or its fork, or the locations near the ribs, or leave them in the hypochondriacs.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if you send it over its feet, then place it on its back or side.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Then consider if the nail is on the right side of the body, and pause the curve at that place which is between the ribs of the left side, and bring it with ease and fix the nail in one of these places that we have said, until it reaches the cause by water.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then you pause and fix in the position another nail, or third if necessary, so that it is a trap, and not an extension according to its rectitude, only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Then it is better from the beginning, so that the light of it is relieved in this way as it is made in the natural way of its root; and it is necessary to extract it with care, lest there be an infection.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Then consider if it is in water that the extraction is softened; and if any part of it is held, then consider that the woman dips some string what we said to the oil, and brings it carefully and turns it with a stick, and dip it into water that is held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the fetus is lost, then consider that the nails are switched; and do so in such a way as to put all the fetus out.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	And if the woman is relieved in front of the other one, and it is not possible to reduce that by the curve of it; then consider that it be wrapped over that; and you extract that within that all is out. And cut that or at the junction of the hand or at the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	Then consider that you draw the other hand and the two feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the fetus is large, or happens to the curve in the extraction, or it is on top of the water that is adjusted; then consider that you dip between the fingers spiky and sharp, and cut the head, and extract the water, or remove this one with an instrument called "alundada," whose shape will come close to the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter which is suitable for it.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Then consider that if the fetus is of large head by nature; and then consider that you cut that with a tool, or take that with an instrument "alundada," as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is out and is curved by nature; then consider that it be cut within that water that is spilt on the feet.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if it does not complicate or die by nature, then consider that you cut the head as soon as possible according to your power.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the fetus is left in the womb it is an abortion or it is in the water; then consider that you make a hole where the moisture is located.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the fetus is over its feet, then the attraction of it is light and the direction of it towards the mouth of the mother is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if it is curved by nature above the belly; then consider that you extract that with cloth in which you wrap around your hand, and cut the belly and remove the water within that.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other members are held and turn the head; then consider that the woman brings her left hand; and if the mouth of the mother is open, then bring it with the right hand, and take the head with some string, and throw it into the mouth, and then dip it into water.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is curved by water that it is like in the apple; then consider that it does not disturb above it; before you consider, bring a stream of moist air.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer emollients; and follow the patient in water that softens and moistens.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is over its rib; then consider that it is curved: and give to drink water that we have spoken of in the living fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be cut out and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And as for any causes left inside the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer the medicine that we have talked about for the cure in the eyes, which happens because of the main cause.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of blood from the eye, then it should be washed with stinging waters and then administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in her womb who was dead, and on top of that a pregnant veiled woman, and when the fire died out, the other one also died.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Then it happened to him after a long time an eye discharge in his testicles; and it swelled up inside that fire, and began to burn.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat him, and I medicated him for a long time, but the plague did not subside.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I stopped it with some causes of strong attraction, and he discharged an arm from him, and after a few days, another one; and I was very astonished, because in the womb there was no arm.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I cured the plague and extracted all of the bones, the woman remained in her own position, and I treated her in this way for a long time, and she got some relief from the pain of one arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not think it was strange, but because in that there is science and helping the sick with artificial means for a cure, administer medicine.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	of the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the dead fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of the turn that is opened by the mother:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of strength in which you are bent over, and in which bending there are two turns at both ends of two limbs.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this turn, however, must be less rigid, and it can be made with a boy's rod or a boy's stick.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the length of each is a palm and a half; and the width of each is a palm and a quarter, and the thickness of each is a palm and a little more; and the width at both ends of each is two fingers, or a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two additions are to be placed in the mouth of the mother so that she can open herself when you turn her two prescribed turns.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another shape resembling that, but less rigid and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Be made of wood or sticks according to the appearance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But in the end of him there are two additions like this, and the length of each addition is a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with these, then place her on her back with her feet hanging down, and it will be between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your mouth with the instruments in the same way as you would with forceps, according to the quantity that you want of the taste of the mouth of the mother before the medicine reaches it.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of the turn that they called the little ones:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The shape of the push that is pushed with it:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The shape of the grip that holds the head tight:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled with forceps that have teeth at the end, like this, and some veiled women are done with them in this way according to this shape, with teeth, and they are cut off and held tight with them.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The little shape of the grip:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The shape of an uncircumcised penis:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The shape of an uncircumcised penis with two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The shape of the grip that holds the head of the fetus tight:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of the staff have two extremities on which the head is abseced:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All of these instruments are exercised, and when the spices of that are multiplied and prepared by the artificers, how much is put in the operation and how much is put on men for their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not work of those instruments that is what it is necessary you should prepare, because the need for these is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	The extraction of the second.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second is kept you command to the malady that it retain its ale, and approach that he stinks with condition, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of him and over his nostrils, and if by this it is out, good is.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a wave and pierce in the covering a troch and stop in that herbs burn the mouth of the mother, so soothing and rough and it comes out and chamomile and Arabic and cassia and linden wood and saintly herb.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the wave, and stop it on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And approach a cannula of cane in the mouth of the mother, and keep that within which the evaporation comes to the concavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And approach that he stinks so as has said, and the second is gone out with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Mays if remains close this cure and not is discharged, then you command to the woman that it submerges its left hand in olive saponaceous or in a mixture of mint of altea, and approach injects those in the navel and seeks after that the second, and when he encounters it, then you take and extract that little by little Mays if is annexed to the preon of the mother, then injects its right hand that have repeated, and when has found the second, extracts that little by little according rectitude so that the mother does not catch again the violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	In advance of which is changed to right and left with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And approach be adjusted in the quantity of attraction, because it will obey and will evade attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed, then we have repeated the cure with sneezing and with medicine of the wave with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	May if is not forgotten by all the causes that we have repeated, then you keep that not you do again to her in a sequence of abstraction, but when it comes out from him to the mouth of the mother lies in the cushion of the woman, and approach cristallizes that with oil and tetrapharmacon; because this will putrify that appropriately days and is dissolved and is forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	May when they are putrifying, it is of him elevated bad odor to the head and to the stomach, and that leads the malady; and then approach are administered sub- fumigacious and convenient to water.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May some of the Ancients are already putrefied sub-fumigación of nasturcium and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument am which the woman is sub-fumigated is what it is necessary you retain menstruation and the second:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Be made of virgins or spayed one.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And be stopped the subtile extremity in the navel and the wide extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigación is stopped over the braziers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that within which it is consumed that sub-fumigacion and repeat - another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	The cure of the rear end of the unperforated child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	May children are not born yet and their rears are not perforated, those which already has made subtle and bright.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	And approach to the woman that it perforates its rear with sputum in advance, and keep that not it touches water.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And approach stop over that wool of smoke in the wind and oil; and approach cure that with oil within which is bright.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	May if you fear that it will be bright, then approach stop in the troch a cannula for some days, and prevent that when the child will want to change.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And that happens already bright of the rear because of consolidation of plague or of abscess; and then approach is cured with water that we have said of the cure and the dung.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	The cure of the fistulas that involve them.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that are involved in the opening of pus is put into a sequence and thickness of those that are involved further from the rear or in the space of one opening.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or some drops.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And with that sequence is aged and is corroded by the acrid white or subtle putrefaction, and some of these fistulas are penetrant some.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrant are recognized by water that is discharged of them for the egress and for ventilation; and some times use the exit of the woman, and strongly is discharged of them from those.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And so of those fistulas some recognized in the space penetrant into the bladder, and within the meat of the urethra; and so of those penetrant into the junction of the navel and into the neck of the uterus.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And water in which the fistula is penetrated into the rear and not penetrant, it is what you put the virgin's saying in the rear, and injects tries of spayed or of iron in the fistula when not it is used.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	May if in that is used, then injects tries of spayed or of horse hair within which you feel the attempt or the hair on the virgin's saying.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that one completely or process any cause of egress or wind or ventilation, so as has said, then you know that it is not penetrant, and then prepare for the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrated into the bladder or within the meat of the urethra, then the sign of it is completely of urine of that and prohibition of that at this moment that the place to the medicine is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	May if it is penetrated into the junction of the navel or within the bone and injury of pain in the opening, then the sign of it is what the attempt penetrates here if not it is used within the bone, and injury of pain in the opening of the rear; and that of it is putrifying always; and that it does not enter into that medicine, nor is consolidated with oil.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas penetrant is not cure completely, and the cure of those is work and vanity of the medicine leaves about which are closed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	May if it is not penetrated and is not aged, then the cure with iron is hoped according that you have recommended, and that already has heard and has used.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is what the woman dances between her two and raises the cambas of him within them, and the coyssas are inclined to the navel of him, and approach injects tries of spayed or of iron if it is used in the fistula aged, within which you know the place where the attempt penetrates.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that woman turns the man around, then you approach injects the virgin's saying in the mouth.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in the virgin' s saying the attempt has already penetrated here if not it is used in that cure, and then you know certainly that that is penetrant; and then do not work in that cure, because it is not in that cure.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some say that it is healthy for some men to be tough.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the medicine by which one hopes to revive him, you should ignite a subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula, and in this way, when it is preceded, and enters into the fistula until it reaches within that it comes into contact with the flesh; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that they are all attached those tissues that are like feathers of a goose.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then heal those with bandages wrapped around that it reaches all of those tissues that are attached, and then heal those with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if healed, it is good; and if not, do not heal them in any way with another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the attempt enters and does not reach inside·l the master says that it is in the anus, and between the attempt and what is velament of flesh or of skin, and sometimes the fistula in something that touches the surface of the penis, then dry the penis from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if they are dried, and if not, separate them by a knife, and it is released through the fistula into that part where the tip of the attempt reaches, and thus the attempt is freed and cured.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulated tissues that are attached to a tube of a goose's beak, and they do not leak due to some other cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if the flow of blood comes out between you and your work when you are inside those tissues, then the milk that is and of the pus should be cleansed with a sharp instrument, either by fire or by acute medicine, because cauterization by fire fixes well: so it is attached to those attached tissues, and it removes the dry excrescence of the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then heal those with bandages wrapped around or with a trisse of flesh inside that place gets swollen, and then quickly heal the plague with a strong fire that generates and consolidates hard flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And thus medicines in which there is stringency and excision; when they are restored, they are already healed, and you do not fear repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus' surface and is elongated, then the master says in the anus and examines it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if the attempt is a hundred and between you and it is velament of skin or of flesh, and it is about to penetrate, then there is no operation in the syno in which one does not have trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer it in a way of three methods: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it out within that you can reach the cavity with which one can possibly enter the fistula, and if necessary, separate them by a knife so that they do not cut the skin containing the penis, and to come across the patient's back slightly of their own will; and then heal those with water that we have said, because it is strong medicine that heals; or to elongate that velament and make pus that you dry out within that you can reach the anus' cavity, as we have said, either by the attempt or by another instrument with a sharp end, and then clean those fistulated tissues that are in the section within the anus, which you can do by perforation; and then try to restore the whole plague with a cut, and if the pus hole above it is not consolidated, and the fistula opens at the base of the anus, and leave pus out through the patient's back.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases the fistula ends according to this method: when you enter the attempt into the fistula, and it is at the back of the anus' surface next to the penis, then take an attempt with a sharp end, which is thus how one prepares wounds according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and put it inside the envelope of five fields or into those; and then enter the attempt in the envelope within that you can reach the cavity,
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates in the back of the anus slightly inside, then you take out the envelope from there, as you enter the master in the anus; and you pull out the end of the envelope and adjust its two extremities evenly, and you cut them both, and you leave it there for a day or two, and when it bleeds more, put it back into the flesh, and you can see those tissues that are between two extremities of the envelope that fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then heal the plague within that it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrate, then make it so that it penetrates in some way, as it is not your task to do it so that you do not cut the skin; and then make it so that it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of a pointy thing for the fistula to split: its curve is sharp and the other end is blunt, so that you do not cut it where it is unnecessary, as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of stitches of hemorrhoids in which blood runs out in the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids as if they were made of wood, or because they are made of fat flesh.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are small and large, and the blood flows from them at any time, and they are just below the anus, and on their two ends.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that are outside the anus are according to the second: because they have little moisture, and from which yellow water or a little blood flows continuously on the skin, and according to the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for those inside the penis is that you order the patient to sit and press within so that the penis relaxes, and the hemorrhoids will appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	And then you cut yourself and hang them on a nail or what you have in your hand, and then cut off their branches.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails are not holding them because of their moisture and softness, then take them by a sharp or rough edge of a cloth, or a piece of stone or wool, and pull them out by the roots, and cut them off at the base where they join the body, and dust over them some powdered herbs appropriate for cauterizing, so that the blood does not flow; or cauterize them according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then heal those with the other cure before they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey the exit, then christen the patient with a small biting, and wash it with water that is in the penis and which obeys the exit slightly.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is slight, and it is because you pick them up with your fingernail or pick them up with a nail, and cut them off, and then heal those with water that we have said within that they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And that person who performs the incision, let him prepare sutures for them according to this method: take an envelope wrapped with a field and put it in a needle, and then pull out the emorrhoid by its two ends, and wrap the two ends of the envelope around the head of the needle, and so stretch the emorrhoid strongly, and then cut it with the needle, and you leave it there; and then remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one of them uncut, so that the excess blood runs from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place on his rear side a drape in rose oil or in wax; and that one over the back, and commands the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And he lets fall that which is inside a box; and when it falls, he heals those with oil or with another cure within that which is to be cured.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Such things as are seen happen because of drying up of a wound or because of constriction in nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And with this old medicine that is not good for those things, let it be that you cut those things at the tip of a spit or at your own nail into moist humors and fed upon those by pus from above, which one forbids to consolidate; and he heals those within that are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then let it be that you cut those things with a very sharp pus that the first within that are to be cured and are inflamed, and he heals those within that have been cured.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of ulcers, as much as is needed.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that if it is red in the whole body and more so in the legs and feet, and especially on the toes, and also because of which there is pain throughout the entire body, then one should be concerned about the liver.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then let it be that what is incised there is removed from the nail bed or with oil, and that it is cut off from its root; and he heals that one.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second that precedes in the foot.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May be a wart is a small, round, painful swelling on the surface of the body, and such things are seen in many children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And for the treatment of it is that you spread and incise it or that you open it with a chisel or within what is inside a box.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are removed in both directions with the instrument that I direct.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May be a fungus is a small swollen area on the skin, and when it comes into contact with something, it feels like a fungal infection, and it happens all over the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And for the treatment of it is that you take a tube from a pen or from a whip, and press hard, and place that one on the fungus within the circle of the tube, and then turn your hand around the tube; and he heals those that are on the side of the meat by pressing the tube against them, and cutting off the fungus from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, make it with a steel or iron tube according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	May be the tip of the tube is made to go in easily, silent (if it is not a piercing one), wrapped around what that turns it from side to side.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the fungus as we have said in the cauterization of athyium in the capitulum of cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the shape of the instruments that are used to administer therapy.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some are made of silver or lead or fused or hammered; and some are made of small instruments and large according to those with which they are administered, because those that are administered in the treatment of small children are small; and those of those that are painful or painful are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The shape of a large crystal:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	May be the tip of the tube is wide according to this way: and its distance from where the bag is tied in such a way that it may fall there several times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of it that is to be inserted into the anus is silent  (if not pierced) and is turned slightly toward the outside, being a small opening on one side and a larger one on the other; and that which is on the edge of the anus is made wider according to the thickness of the rays and larger at the end.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	May be the bag in which are held the medicines of animal bladder or of sheep's skin, and its handle be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	May be the opening is made with sharp edges as it is turned; and if the space between the edges is large according to the thickness of the finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And it is inserted into those sharp edges with a strong thread of a red wine, which should be of the color of blood, and adjust to one the bag; and when it is placed in that one the bag, it is made straight on the tip of the crystal between two different and strong pressure, and he cuts each hole: May be the quality of cutting through one is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and you must not let it fall too much or become too sharp.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient is to be raised on his two feet, and the bed lifted up so that the feet are over the footrest, and the minister takes the bag and presses it with two hands and forces it out into the body until all of it that is in the crystal is emptied; and he removes the crystal and the patient moves his legs away from the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it out of the body by force, keep as much as you can; and if it sleeps in that one for all a night, it is a sign of recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	May be if you cut those things with a sharp knife according to the treatment of flatulency and the pain of the gut, then do so within the crystal that is to be healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are in the anus painful hemorrhoids or pus-filled cysts, then use a very small crystal; those of those with which children are treated are made small.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of blisters.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already said and done in the division of the treatment of blisters that it is convenient for the foot, and I say thus the treatment of those with feet and medicines according to the complaint.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	And so I say that blisters are different according to what causes them and according to the place where they occur on the body.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes of blister formation are due to heat of the weather, or incising a space or a knife, or striking with an axe, or with a spear, or similar to those that cause blisters.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May be blisters that are in the places of the body are due to a blister that occurs on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment of some blisters in order that that reasoning and rule may be applied to the other blisters.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple blisters of the head, because the remembrance of the composed things will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	And so I say that when it occurs on the head a simple blister is not broken, then consider: if it is because of heat or similar, and you have already tied up the knot so much only and it is a large blister and you are worried about a pus blister forming over the head, then you rest and take a light diet for some time, and do not delay taking medicine; and extract from it according to the quantity of its virtue if there is no other cause that prevents you from taking light food, especially if the blister is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And it is the flabotomy of the opposite of the infected part; and keep the patient from eating rich food and from eating thick foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	May we then of the minuteness of the matter for any cause, let it be lessened by the food and not brought near to meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause over the wound if it bleeds, a drop of rose water or wine let be put on it or in it which is dried up.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	May we then if it is certain that the wound bleeds, pause over it, if it is recent let him sweat and put air on it not having changed that powder which I will recommend to put small.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that powder, then pause over ashes wet him up until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	May we then if the wound is large or by cut of a blade and similar things, and the lips are not closed by pustules, let those be sutured according to what I recommend about suturing them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	May we then if the wound is already discovered from the bone and pen, and it does not retain it but only a small suspensory, let that be cut and cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh to its place instead of coden, and command the patient that he eat food that is dry: cheese and fruitlet and similar things until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if the putridness in the coden does not adhere to the bone, then let you cut all of it and remove it, and cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	May we then if these wounds are artery or vein from which the flow of blood may come out, and it is not cured by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you do not cut that that does not heal, let you cut it with a blade, or let you pierce it; and if necessity forces you to put what we have said, let you cauterize it so that the blood be stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, the cause of them is little; therefore you put on those this powder, for once solid they do not change before the air.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the way of the powder is this: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts of non-extinct resin; all mixed together and well shaken, and if it is a wound filled with pus and confined by good constriction so that it does not adhere to it and coagulate on top.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And let you put those on the powder and leave it there, and not remove it while it is still like that so that it does not bleed, for it is not needed to be removed before being healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some time later pour oil alone into the wound, when there is no need for you in present olive and dragon' blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation should be done in large wounds when it is convenient to pause them on those and make them straight, and only recently wounded wounds whose air has not changed them.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has changed them, and mainly when it is in summer time, then do not put this powder on, but cure those with oil that we have said, or let you pause over them with a hot compress, or let you pause over their ankles with flour of ordi soaked in water and honey until they are healed; and let you cure those with other treatment until they be healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	May we then if a fracture in the bone occurs and it is small, then you extract oil with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	I will direct the cure of fractures in the head in the poison water.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds in the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	May we then if a wound occurs in the neck, let it not be treated differently from medication, and for wounds in the head when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	May we then if the neck nerves are cut or an artery, let them be avoided with treatment of water that causes violent contraction, and also to rub it and oil that is bitter and similar to it for nerves do not grow there.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And let you not pause over the wound for any cause of all is fresh, for the substance of the nerves is fresh and the continuation of it is to the brain, which is the pus of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is cured with light medicines, then let it be washed with double water, and put some drops of rose water in it, and wash it when it is washed with double water and other things to be mentioned below, and rub it.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	May we then if the wound is large, then administer sutures or tie up the lips, and let those be cured with powder until they are healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	May we then if the wound is deep or it occurs in the pus that is low broken, then pierce it in the place most sunken.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	May we then if the wound is already an artery and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry that, or pierce it, or cauterize it if necessity forces you to put water on.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	May we then if the spine of the neck is already broken and all of it, and the veins of the neck are only saved, then you adjust the lips of the coden with sutures on the cane of the neck and do not touch that; before doing so, make that one equal to its natural figure, and let those be strengthened by stretching them decently, and leave those for a few days; and let those be cured with rubbing in which contraction and excitement are caused until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	May we then if the wound in the bone has already begun to heal, then strike that, and if it has fragments of bones, extract all that you can; and if it is not covered with cloth, leave it until the wound is healing, and let those be separated and its relief be obtained.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent then put on it this powder that I have recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	May we then if the wound has become a fistula, then let those be cured with oil that will bring to mind that which is mentioned in the chapter of the head.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds in the neck or similar things when it is between the shoulders and has become a space, a cut, a lance, or similar things.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a cut of a lance or a cut, and many times deeper, then consider whether the patient has fever, for the wound is dangerous. You will know that the wound is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the wound is recent with his sanc, then let you pause in it this powder for the first hour, and do not tighten that so that it does not retain his sanc in the depth of it and return to the pulse, but let you rub it gently, and leave that for two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the oil is not with you now, then let you pause in the wound a blade for sucking water that it has of humidity; and do so that the patient sleeps on the wound so that water runs through it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	May we then if the wound has passed three days or more and there is no spasm of the patient or tremor of the heart or constriction of it, and many times other good dispositions of him, then you will know that the wound is healed; and let you cure those with water and other treatment until they be healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	May we then if the patient's healing is not finished and time has passed, then you will know that it has become a fistula; therefore let you heal those in his head.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is by incision of a space or a cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then cure that with water preceded by sutures if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquellas pessas, si so separadas.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, leave them in place so that the plague can be removed later, which is a relief.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other plagues that happen to the other members, healing in therapy is the healing of water that we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plagues of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the belly is great, little, or mild.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	With a great hernia, the intestine or nerve of the intestine comes out and the suture becomes more violent and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small rupture is difficult to repair in any way, and if you do not prevent the intrusion of them at their place, because they are open and thick, it will be difficult for the instrument to enter.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the smallest rupture is mild, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the hernia, and so it is difficult in the two mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that surgery on the belly is done in four ways, and two stitches are common that also correspond to the stitches of the other plagues of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other specific stitches communicate with the others, but only one is specific in the surgery of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each explanation and description.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the plague is small and no cause has been found of the hernia for it, and it is difficult to reduce it, this is done in two ways: either because the rupture is very small, as we have said, or when the hernia swells with cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when water is like this, then you must scratch it in such a way that you dip a sponge or a damp cloth in tepid water alone, or that you take some water from the sea, and cypress, and mustard, and mix it with the hernia before its swelling is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some ruptures make water come out, and it is better than water alone in resolving the swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when you see the swelling resolved, then you humidify the hernia with water that is slightly warm, because water relieves it for a little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If the instrument is not suitable for this therapy, then you will have to cut off the rupture with a small instrument in which the hemorrhoids are embedded.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first treatment is best when it is appropriate that it is not cut, and there is no need to dry out by habit.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	About the instrument, tell me its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	Does the hernia possess the edge of the instrument or another way? The one end is acute, and the other end is not acute, and the subtlety is thin, and it is not the subtlety of a blade, its edge being somewhat blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the hernia is enlarged and comes out of its place, then you must reduce it according to its natural shape in its own place, if possible above water, because it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	If the rupture is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, then you should put the patient on their back with their legs raised above their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should place the head of the patient and their feet higher than the parts where they are.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And apparently if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you should pause your intention and consideration momentarily so that the part where the hernia is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And so you should prepare water for the large and small plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In the small plagues, pause the water that is at your disposal, and so that the minister is between your five fingers, which has the entire rupture together with it and adjusts the lips of it, and so you discover the cause of the stitch in place where the hernia occurs.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common way to sew: one that you hold the needle, or consider the needle according to the quantity of the plague's width; and so you leave the end of the rupture of the little finger, tighten the needle a little, or other than what you put into the two ends of the thread, leaving the ends of the threads inside, as long as you put that the needle enters that part; and you have added two ends of the thread and four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And so you tighten the thread a little in the circuit of the needle, and some ruptures are made from two parts together, and so you add the two lips and the plague by addition; and so you leave the thickness of the thread and you fix another needle in it, and so you tie that with the first needle; and you do not stop making water if there is a need to make needles while you have not completed the entire repair of the plague.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the small needles are between grace and subtlety, because the subtle needles cut the flesh easily; and the thick ones are a difficult instrument in the thread, so that by water you make them be of both subtleties and graces.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And I do not know that the needle is fixed in two opposite ends of the thread, because flesh does not easily cut easily; and the plague may become established before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And the stitch should not be prolonged so that the plague is not prevented from being consolidated.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And so you should insert the ends of the needles so that they do not cut the patient in his sleep; and you pause on the stitch of all parts, which hold the ends of the needles; and you leave them where you know that the plague has been consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of stitches with needles are more convenient for small plagues because they only require one needle or two or turn them around.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	If the second stitch is done in a similar way: and so you provide for four ends, of the thread and two extremities of the cord, in one seam, with a needle that is wrapped in both grace and subtlety.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And so when the needle enters these four ends, you should reduce the needle from that part where it began to enter, so that the thread does not come out of its first part and does not separate; and the stitch should be according to a sutura de drap with which the draps are strong.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And you should leave between each stitch the quantity of the smaller thread half.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This stitch is good for men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	With this stitch I healed the plague that had affected a man in his belly, who was stabbed with a knife, and it was a rupture of two palms of his navel; and so I reduced it after twenty-two hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or less, and I healed that patient and it was cured; and so you should drink water for its cause to be discovered.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other limbs had not been healed; and by a miracle of faith, because I did not heal that patient with medicine, but I put him on the plague for two days, and he washed himself frequently with water from honey within which he was cured.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two special sutures according to the narrative of the Parable.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And that you begin the suture of the tendon, and introduce the needle from the outside into the inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so with the needle penetrating into the tendon and in that place of the knot according to prescription and in length of all the thread, and leaves the end of the thread in which you have introduced the needle; and make it penetrate into the other extremity from outside to inside in the other extreme of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so when you have finished that penetration, then do another penetration in that extremity of the tendon from outside to inside; and leave the end of the thread that is in there, and make it penetrate into the other extremity from outside to inside; and leave the end of the thread that is there, and make it penetrate into the other extreme of the wound from outside to inside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate with that one of yours in which you do the penetration in the tendon in the extremity of the wound that is in the inside where everything enters.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side and make that one on the other side with the needle that penetrates in the tendon, and take out the needle from the knot, and make that one of yours in which you do the penetration in the extremity that is on the inside of the wound; and take out the needle from the other side of the tendon.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one and another, and make this one inside that other; and do all of those things that are there according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of suture is that you sew with a needle through the skin, and that you make one stitch on the tendon from the outside of the extremity; and leave that other stitch inside where it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second type of special suture that you will direct is called "Galia", and it is from the speech of him and for his recommendation; it is that you sew that second stitch on the tendon in the way that doctors do, adding all the thread to one side of it convenient according to nature; and apply the extremity of this one to the other extreme of it, and here is done according to what I have directed you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	And when you have the needle in the extremity of the wound that is in front of you from outside to inside, and make that one penetrate into the inside in this thread, and leave two extremities of the tendon; and then turn the needle around and make that one penetrate from outside to inside in the other two extremities of the tendon.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn those cushions around, and make any of them penetrate from inside to outside in the other two extremities of the wound that are on the opposite side;
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suture is better than common suture with thread, and it is a type of suture from which I have reminded you before.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of "Galia".
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they call it "sutura del ventre", which is corrected with two needles, so you introduce the needle in them, and begin to make the puncture from this side according to the suture of those whom you have directed to sew with your hands; and make that one penetrate into the other side according to the method of suturing with hands.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when there is a rupture in your belly, the suture of it is more difficult than that of other places in your belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the judgment of the medication of gout is the same as for the other gouts.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And it is caused when you get the gout recently before that air changes it, and reduces the hernia and sews it up well; then apply over that blood-red dust.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already changed the gout, then apply over that with water and those who are in it, so that they do not make a hard lump and fall out, and that they are consolidated tendon and wound; and then treat that one as you treat the other gouts according to what heals them.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines, then apply over that for a little while, because it begins to burn, and change that one of those every day, as I have taught you, according to what heals them, because you do not need any other medication when gouts are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you are afraid that the gout will spread to other limbs, then apply that you immerse wool in oily solution with a quality of water, or in rose oil, and leave it there; and apply over those places that are between the joints and leave them wet.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your hernia, because it is not visible, then apply a black stain on it with the vi stiptic, and more so if the putrefaction has reached the hernia and there is an outlet penetrating inside the cavity of it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that those who are in your belly are more likely to heal than those who are in them are in a small belly; and that those who are in the belly are more likely to heal than those who are in them are in the gut.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the hernia called "gynecomastia" does not receive the gout that gets into it from all sides; and here is due to the great number of veins that are in it and to its size, which is small there, and to the proximity of that one with nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	And if what you are doing for the gout is the same as that which I have directed you to do, and you reduce those hernias according to my prescription with hands; and if it is the recent one, then reduce that one according to my method of reduction with hands.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	And if it is passed on to that space and has already become black or green, then apply that one with a string over the place that is corroded by it, so that blood flows out; because in the belly are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then cut off that one with the other string, and make two extremities of the string hang from the part of the wound where they are at the outside; so that on your side is not attracted what you need for the repair of that one, because it is necessary to make a small hole in the belly through which flows out blood.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of gout when it happens in the hernia.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a small disruption in the hernia and it is possible that it will return to those men; because I saw that one which was stat plaguat (gout) on his belly with a lance, and that gout was old and made a fistula, and it came out from its stomach and had a fever and a feverish feeling.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And then you see that the treatment of it is not certain for its healing; but leave that one inside where it is cured and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And then I saw that the place was consolidated, and I left on your belly the accident of the bad one in his stomach; and do not do anything else, but enter into a bath and exercise yourself in it.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And they say that when there is a small gout in the hernia, then apply this method: and it is that you take a piece of cheese with a big hole in the middle; and then place those two pieces of cheese on the mouth of the hernia, and stretch them; then when you put one over the other and squeeze them together, cut off the top part of it because it adheres to it and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another formiga next to the first one; and do not stop applying those formigas like this according to the quantity of all the gout.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then remove that one and cover it with a cloth; and those attached caps to the intestine, until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And now it is possible that the intestine is latched onto a thin thread that comes from the animal's intestine; because you take hold of the end of these intestinal threads and it is sharp; and it is because you grasp the end of these intestinal threads, and it is sharp, and then you wrap the end of them in a thread, and then you put the thread around those needles and tie them together with that thread, and then you cut off that part.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This way of stitching with sewing needles is only a secondary and backup method, but it is a reliable and hopeful one.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	Maybe if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the thin intestines, because then there is only suturing and not healing completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of cure for the swelling and the fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any swelling or pustule that becomes red and swollen, and is a ulcer, and does not heal and keeps getting bigger all the time, and does not dry up, but rather gets worse, in any member, is called a fistula in general, and we call it a boil.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula in truth is a hard, white, and painful wound, and it is concave like the pain of a bruise; and for this reason it is called an alcus rizat, that is to say, a wound.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in men's wet wounds, which keep getting bigger; and the moisture dries up in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes that moisture becomes dry, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And sometimes that moisture becomes dry and hard, and it is little and thick because of one of these nine reasons: either because of pain in the flesh; or because of maliciousness; or because there is hard tissue between it and the lips; or because it is due to a leak; or because the wound is infected with matter that comes out; or because the medicine is inappropriate for treating it; or because corruption spreads in the region, causing a plague; or because of the nature of the region itself, which makes the treatment difficult and delays healing by nature; or because there is an ossicle, or multiple ossicles.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I I have shown all these causes, and they are linked to those, and the treatment of them is discussed in the text on medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And I have shown you how to treat a fistula, which is done by surgery with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; because they reach the large and small arteries, or nerves, or bowel, or bladder, or any of the spinal bones, or any of the joints formed by two bones joined together, and this is due to the nature of the hand or foot. And from these similar causes arise those that affect the near parts of the main member; and they are called fistulas according to their location.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore of these fistulas, the second type is difficult to heal and does not respond to treatment, and it takes a long time to heal and requires work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of the fistulas is very deep and does not reach those locations that are mentioned above, and you wait and trust in the healing of it, and want to gain knowledge of it; then try to pierce or sew it, and if the fistula goes according to plan, and you inquire about it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	Maybe if the fistula is very twisted, then investigate it with a thin iron rod, because an iron that has light weight and can move the body's shape is easy to curve out of the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is not very large or terrifying, it is not in your power that you can examine it with an iron rod.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then clean the opening with a sharp knife, because the moisture that you clean out goes to the other openings and runs from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then inquire very carefully, according to which method you can understand whether there are bones or nerves here; and it is the concave shape of the fistula that is far away or near, or it is a fistula with only one opening and it is over this; completely covering the whole body with your dressing, and inquiring about the causes and the accidental factors of the swelling.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	Then when you have considered all these causes at length, then go to the treatment according to confidence: and it is that you consider if it is a fistula in a nearby part or far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or any of the places I have mentioned to you and said.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you clean the fistula according to what has been said before in the description of it, and those who have been said to be in the fistula; and from those who are in the fistula, some are born in the opening of the flesh, or in the teeth and similar things, and heal them within it.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	Maybe if the fistula is very deep, and is following its course, then clean it with a sharp blade as much as you can, and then remove all corrupt flesh from it; and then introduce sharp medicines into it, and put them within the concave shape of the fistula, which you have understood with an iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	Then put that medicine into the fistula, within a few layers of cloth, so that it corrodes everything that is rotten in the concave shape of the fistula because of the acute medicine.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore it with clean clothes that generate healthy flesh within which is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	Maybe if it is not healed by water, then you cauterize it according to what has been said before.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	Maybe if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must examine it, then you clean it according to what has been said before; and if you do not find any cause of vein or nerve or main member as I have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	Maybe if the bone is discovered and it is in some corruption and darkness, then you clean out all that corruption completely; and then heal it with water so that it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and it gushes out completely, as when it has dried up, you know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and then you discover again in a second examination and very carefully the reason for it and the cause of its origin; and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it has been healed, then it is well; but if not, you know that the corruption is in the depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and then in that you must keep looking for a cure.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	Maybe if the bone is corrupt it is small, or if you can reach it; then throw it with sharp tweezers that are useful for this purpose and to cut off any part of the body that is corrupt.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if it is only bones, then very carefully remove all of them, and do not leave any cause that can harm you with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Maybe if you have any opposite causes of the moisture, and in their cutting there is neither fear nor mistake; then cut those limbs or flesh if it is here, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Maybe if you have not prepared yourself to cut the bones of your body, then pause over the wound with a knife that can be used for this purpose; and let that wound rest while you cut the limbs from the flesh and limbs, leaving the wound in place where those bones were cut from the body, and keep the wound covered so that it is not healed, and keep the section that you have cut in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Here is the translation of the first sentence in this text:
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
Forma de serra:	The shape of the saw
Forma de autra serra:	Other shapes of saws:
Forma de autra serra:	Other shapes of saws:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another great line:
Forma de ray:	Form of line:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The shape of this line is according to the shape of the starry claw, and the points of it are according to the shape of the althazic points.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And there is not a need for anything else than that those be cut if they are rotten at the joints, or if it is the large open mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of the main razor of the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of the lesser razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a lateral razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another proper line: Be it done with a certain line that is made like an arc and its sharpness is forged from iron, and the member is made like a knife in a proper way.
Forma de lu:	Form of him:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor in which there is a depression:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved extreme end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of a set of teeth which are engraved on the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another lesser incision:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incision; this one resembling a line, and its extreme end is a little saw, and it is exhibited in places on the bones' edge:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a line that goes to the shape of that which pierces the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extreme end is triangular and has an acute tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian iron, and its appearance seems to indicate that all the causes that we have mentioned of razors, of incisions, and of saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incision's extreme ends and of the locking of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extreme ends may be pierced or, for an intrinsic cause, or for an extrinsic cause, or if you do not cure those diseases with those medicines, and if sometimes the corruption does not affect any part, then it is said that the patient should remove that member from within which the corruption arises, because the bad influence goes away by water from death or from a malicious thing, which is a greater defeat of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that person is that the member becomes black within, so that it is cured when fire burns it, or if you cut off that blackness near that part which causes the corruption, or if it is removed far from that part which causes the corruption in that member which affects all the body; and therefore, cut off that member.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And in general, if it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous things, then such as from a scorpion, or from a bat, or from a rat, and from similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or piercing is at the extreme end, then you should cut off that part and not give space for the corruption to go away, so it does not enter the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And if you are affected in the arm, then you should cut off that part of the edge of fire, and not give space for the corruption to enter into the body's fire.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead of that member, then cut off the arm in the junction.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption or the vice moves the patient's body, then that person dies; and a quantity of virtue is administered in order to cure it.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And if the corruption occurs at the foot instead of that part, then cut off that part within one of the feet.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it is in the heel of the foot, then you should cut off all the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Or if it is in the instep, then you should cut off the instep within the junction of the instep.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already affected the heel, then there is only one remedy, and that is to remove it; and let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way of cutting off a member or sawing it in half is that you tighten the ligament at the joint further, and then strengthen another ligament on the spot; and extend the ministering ligament to the spots further apart, and then strengthen another ligament on them; and then separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, and then cut off or saw it.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	That is done with a sharp knife, or with a pointed one, in order that the ligament may not be cut and that the patient' harm may be adjusted and that the swelling may subside quickly.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Or if you are working while there is a fever, then you should cauterize the place with care, or put on it some powdered resin; and return to your medicine until it is finished.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind that member which is infected with a ligament that suits it, and cure it within so that it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I recommend to you that you go to a man in the service of whom this mistake occurred, who is black in his leg due to a fire that was burning together with him.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	That corruption first occurred in his foot, which extends to the whole body.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself in advance to cure that member with the same urgency as his pain and his thirst for it, and he cut off that foot within the junction, and fire healed it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time passed before it occurred to him that corruption in the man's arm occurred by accident.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he went to me, and then I repaired myself by applying a medicine on the body, with the change of the man' mind; and the excess of that medicine did not affect him, and it began to act on the other arm which had been affected first.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he called on me to cut off his arm, and I did not want to do so, hoping that there would be no effect from that excess medicine, and yet I had to cut off his arm at once, because the man' evil was greater than his good.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And then he left me, and returned to his own country, and sent for me that man; and I cut off all of his arm, and it healed him.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I will not add any more to this narrative except that it is useful for me who can understand it, and that it may be beneficial for others.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of cure of diseases and quality of clisterization with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When there is a swelling in some large members of the body, and the space of that swelling is prolonged within so that it does not collect pus, then it bursts and pierces, and drains off the pus from it; and if it opens up towards the back as if it were a vein, and if it opens up in the way that the skin separates, and does not come into contact with bone or nerve or ligament, it is called an abscess, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Or if the space is prolonged in such a way that the corruption goes into another member, then it is called a fistula, and not a lump.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that you cut off all that cord, and more so when it is softened and made thin with a cloth; and you ensure that it does not stick to the place because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Or if you hope that the cord does not adhere and that that corruption has not succeeded by a last consequence, and if it is opened in front, then you cure it with a clister.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you are considering has an unpleasant odor, then clisterize it with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil, honey, and vinegar mixed together; and place it in a vessel, and apply fire to it until it boils and reaches the top.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And so you take from him that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and make a clister with it to the stomach, tighten its orifices, and leave the medicine with him for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then extract it with care; and make water for so many days within that it purifies the stomach and restores the appetite.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some enemas are made with ash-water, when you do not have this medicine present; and that you take the ash from wine, and put it on the water; and mix that well, and make a clister with it within that you swear that the stomach remains stopped.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash-water, then make a clister with water and honey and mix it with three parts of senna; and make a clister with wine and honey mixed, since honey has the property to purify and wash, and wine adheres to the stomach, and especially when there is an excess of constipation and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have made water a few times and are satisfied that the stomach has been restored, then make a clister with water in which the flesh adheres to it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And that you take a remedy of daphnicum and dissolve it in rosin and wine for stipticism; or that you make a clister with some medicines and anoint others that have the properties that I have already described in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the stomach are narrow and cannot receive the clister, then you widen them little by little with a small iron; and place a few folds of cloth coated with Egyptian ointment or basil ointment on it so that it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the orifices are wide, then you stitch together the lips of the opening and leave the quantity in which the clister is added to the stitches.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the arm branches out is raised above the nipple, then dry that place with a poultice in which the arm is forced to move upwards; for when the arm is constrained at the breast, the flesh becomes engorged.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the stomach completely around the hip, then you should pierce that member so that the arm can move easily according to your desire and your clothing; and so that it is not held back by any cause of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are placed on the stomach, conveniently wet with water, so that those applied to a cloth are spread out.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And make the cloth of a size that makes it communicate completely with the entire stomach; and cut with a sharp pair of scissors on the right side of the opening of the stomach an edge wider than the opening, and stretch another cloth on top of it, wet with lion's ointment according to the quantity of the edge; and place it so that it is distant from the opening of the stomach by a distance greater than the width of the arm, and leave it there for several days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And if you want that which is on the opening of the stomach remains stopped throughout the day so that it does not leak any water that causes a swelling in the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And to know if the water that runs from the arm is little or much, whether it is digested or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And while you are at it, consider the position of that stomach, whether there is pain in it, and if so, whether it is accompanied by swelling.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medicine has been prolonged in such a way that you see the matter that is adhering to the opening of the stomach already adhered, or if it has become attached, then every third day, and when you remove the cloth, change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Consider if the opening of the stomach is large enough to let in a subtil virus; do not despair of the attachment of the flesh, for healing is acquired, because some people heal quickly and others slowly.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the arm is digested after a few days, you will know that the stomach does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the stomach occurs due to prolonged causes, then you should adjust the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance or property, make them dry with daphnicum ointment, when there is an excess of addition of poultice.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last to be cured is that you take daphnicum ointment and dissolve it in rosin oil, and put it on with a small brush, and use that one.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And you will soon see the effect of this action, for when there is no arm, use daphnicum ointment, honey when it is thick within that it hardens, and use it; or that you take mirra and aloe, and mix them together, and grind them thoroughly on a plate, and sprinkle them on the cloth and tighten them over the stomach; and sprinkle the honey that you have ground together with the myrrh on the cloth and tighten it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes you give them a long-acting aristology of the lilac from heaven (and it is the lilac from heaven) and flour of erba centaurea, and use that simple or prepare it, grind them together, and pass them through a sieve, and sprinkle them on the honey that I have mentioned; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the stomach is prolonged and has not been cured with this medicine, you will know that corruption is in its pocket, and if it is in the bones or in other hard members or at the joints; then you cure it with a surgical incision, as is done from above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the Cure of Parathyriditis and the Application of Ointment and Incision on the Toe and its Section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Parathyriditis is an apothesis that does not allow the nail of the foot of the hand or the foot to fall off; and if it is prolonged and its treatment is not successful, or it is an apothesis from apothema, or it is corrupted, and the finger becomes corroded, and the nail corroded, and the tip of the finger becomes black; then cut off the extremity of that finger, and its color will turn dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have made a division of that finger with water as I have said, then cut off all the excess that is rotten from the nail, and cauterize the wound with fire, because cauterization is beneficial in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and if the additions of the nail are already causing the flesh to separate at the joints, and if it begins to putrefy and to rot, then stop prying the nail off the flesh with force; and cut off that part of the nail that prickles the flesh, and push that away, and place on it a poultice that heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If corruption has already set in the bone, then cut off that bone and extract it, for no time is there when the bone is not corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if corruption and rotting have set in on the finger, then cut off that finger according to its length, so that you do not lose memory of it; and cure it within that it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If there is percussion or atricio on the nail, and if that pain is violent, then cut off the finger of the hand with a transverse section through the nail, and be careful not to cut into the flesh that is next to the nail; because you will make the finger fall off, causing severe pain, and this leads to a premature birth in the wound. And cure that place with water that soothes pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May's dit is adjusted, which is born in the legs of some men, very little meat is present everywhere, and very little flesh is there in the feet or very little in the hands.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth of some of them is in the nuts of these words.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	May' who was born in some of the nuts of this word does not get hurt, and he who is born in the joints is very well grown.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are born with flesh, the section is light, and it is because you cut that part with a knife.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	May' of those who are born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult, and so you should keep away from the incision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May' in that who is born in the nuts of this word, cover that you cut at the beginning the meat of him with a round incision through the bone, and place it near one of those saws that are convenient to water, and then cure him from inside so that he is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	May' consolidation that happens in these things between them is seen or by the birth of the man who is born there, or by the consolidation of plague or by fire, or by similarity, therefore when you dry up that consolidation so that those things return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Then place between them a thin layer of lead so that they are not consolidated too much, and separate them, or place between them a thin piece of wood so that it is hardened according to what needs to be done.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And in case consolidation happens in some of these things in the palm, then dry up that consolidation according to what needs to be done and form it into the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of the incision of veins, such are varices.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins wrapped around thick, filled with sad fluids that come from the joints of the body, and most of them enter into the legs, and especially in those of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then administer purge of black cholera from time to time with strong vomit, and draw blood from the patient from the basal vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	May' the cure of them is according to two ways: one is that he be cut and that black blood be drawn from him, and the other way is that the vein be lifted and all be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of him is according to this way: dip the leg at the beginning with a tail that blood comes out from it, which is resolute in the leg, and dry up the vein in one place, or two, or three with an extensive incision, and lift black blood from above the knee at the beginning of the leg at the part where it joins to the thigh with a cloth, and then dry up the vein in one place, or in two, or in three with an extensive incision, and lower black blood from below the knee at the end of the leg at the part where it joins the thigh, and then take out as much as you want and that the patient can tolerate, and which has a medicine effect.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then bind him up, and order him to abstain from black cholera-inducing foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the cure by phlebotomy when veins are filled and the patient feels ill.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May' the elevation of them is according to this way: if you cut the leg of the patient, and then place him in a bath, dip the leg into water so that it swells and veins are filled; or exercise him strongly through exercise, if a bath is not available, so that the member is scraped.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then dry up the vein in the right place by incision in the long or in the back of it, or at the bottom of it, or at the top of it, cut off with a knife.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then open the vein with a blade and squeeze it from all parts until blood appears, and that is how that color changes towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then pour out and from the vein you will get that white thing which is called cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then place there below it a tray so that it rises and is taken away from the vein, and hang that white thing by an ounce of gold.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then dry up another incision near that incision for three cuts, and then squeeze the vein from above of the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then lift that one up and cut it in the back section of it, and then squeeze out that one and lift it up from where it comes out through the second incision, and then take out that one from the section that is on top of it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Then take out that one from the section that is on top of all or at the bottom of all sections, and it is all extracted; then cut it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey me in taking it out and lifting it up, then insert a double sharp needle into it and tie it off, or turn the patient over on his back and take it out with your hand to all parts where it is placed.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Keep in mind that if it is broken, then cut it difficult to lift that leg and it comes back on the patient by that wound.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of it has come out, then place over the spot of the plague that is submerged in water and oil that is red and not red, and cure that one from inside so that it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the wine is contracted without having tortuosity that is wrapped around the parts, and it is not according to what we have said, then place over those parts where there is no tortuosity of him and the places where he is wrapped up, and then suspend that one with a blade from all parts so that you lift him up completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Keep in mind that your incision should not hurt the vein and that wound, because it will be difficult for you to lift that leg; and serve your prudence with it.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision that is dried up:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of the white cord:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be acute, because it will hurt the vein; and it is of coarse flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein for its subtlety; let us have such grossness when we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of a leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in flat places when it rains in Arabic lands and dry lands of little moisture and in which there is no grass or shade.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is very well generated in other parts of the body, except for the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The gestation of it is from rot that comes out of the vein when there are snakes and worms and snails and vermin generated between the vein and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The sign of the arrival of it is from this vein that happens in the leg inflammation with great violence, and then the place is swollen; and then the vein comes out from the part of that swelling as if it were the root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when you see the end of him, then cover that one piece of lead from which his feet hang in two dragons, and do not break that one and leave the lead suspended from the chest.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And when you see that there is some cause for concern outside the body, wrap it in lead and burn it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then cut a piece of lead and wrap it around it; and do not cut that which has been burnt from the outside, for if you cut it, it will contract and penetrate the flesh, causing pus and bad ulcers in the place and a malignant ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it may be treated gently and be taken out little by little, except for the last piece of lead from behind, so that there is no cause for concern in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein I have extracted in some men who were of the length of five hands and of two fingers, and now it has come to me that I extract one of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut in the hour of its medicine, then introduce a needle into the center of the lead and pierce it with a long needle through the body, so that all the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the place for several days with medicines; and then cure it with the treatment of ulcers.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has bumps, and mainly when it appears in the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes out from each hole, and is extracted from each hole.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore cure that one as we have said above in the division and at the water that is said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of sections on worms that are generated under the skin and it is called a bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in some countries bovine disease because the worms are found in the bowels and they are few, but one is born between the rectum and the flesh, and enters the whole body, pushing and breaking down, and showing itself to the outer side of the skin.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of it is by putrefaction of certain humors, so that worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms are generated in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the maliciousness of it, for when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and has come to the throat, then suddenly it breaks out into a sore in it and destroys the throat, and where it does not break out, worms are found.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore, when you want to treat it and extract it, then do not do so unless you have walked around it and observed its appearance, and then find out that you strangle it tightly and press it firmly, and then dry it on it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is pressing on the flesh and you do not observe it, then pause a cauterizing fire over the place where it is, and the most feared cause is the corruption of it as we have said above.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that the disease has come to the throat close to the throat, then strangle it tightly with a rope, and then dry it on it, and extract it; and let the patient use medicine for evacuating the bad humors, and keep away from food that generates putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of sections on disease that is not serious.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our country "not serious", and it is a painful disease that appears in some members, and then changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that second thing that I recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	A woman with disease was brought to a town, and I discovered her arms, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm, and it continued to grow larger for an hour, and then smaller, but more quickly than if it had been air, as if it were liquid silver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then she went out of that person's pain in that place and came back to her body, and then he sat there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moved into the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I told him that I would turn it around all over the body, as you have seen me do; and he was very amazed by the change of direction of the arm and the speed from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I have already seen ahead of that second way, but this time, however, I saw the changes from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I did not see it with my own eyes as it was in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And you did not think it was there, but by water because the woman was from a nearby village, where the bodies are cold and the veins are open, and in this way the movement appeared to your eyes.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear like this reverse cure in those who are delicious and have soft veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you want to cure it and the patient feels pain, then do not appear to him as we have said above, then strangle that person and dry it on it, and stop up that opening, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat that person with the treatment of the body and the water that you expel, and with pills made from fermented wine and others that resemble it.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extracting the arrow.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are different according to their spices, and according to the places of the bodies in which they have been shot, because their diversity is that some of them have large tips, and small ones, and concave ones, and flat ones, and that they are solid; and that some of them have three angles, and those to which they have tongues.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the places in which they have been hit is according to two ways: because the principal members with convex shapes are the neck, heart, and chest, and lungs, and breasts, and bladder, and similar ones; but when you find that these death-like symptoms appear in some of those members, then you avoid extracting that arrow from them, as I have recommended to you before, then if you do not see those bad signs, and the arrow does not become hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it and cure the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the nerves of the face when the arrow hits them and pierces the bone, and is extracted from the mouth, which is over the neck, because it happens with violent sudoration, and blushing, and dizziness, and loss of speech, and vomiting of colic, and suddenly the word disappears and is destroyed; and a white moisture resembling pus comes out from that place, and there is a similarity to the secretion of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore, if you see those symptoms, then you abstain from treating and extracting the arrow, unless it is outside the body.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the arrow that hits the heart is so near to the left arm that it is stuck in a hard place, and there is no pain; and suddenly the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse's movement, and black blood comes out from the plague, and freezes the extremities, and makes a noise, and faints; and if you know that death has taken hold of all.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the members when the arrow has struck the chest and is coming out from the other side in a frothy plague, and those vessels that are close to the throat open up, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes hard and asks for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow hits the veal that is on the foot, and the pain then is close to the small toes, and it stops up all the limbs' muscles with great pain and a sigh, and does not move any of its members.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if he swallows the dart in his stomach, then let him eat no other food until the pain goes away.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if he swallows the dart and it gets stuck in his stomach, or if there is a rupture of the plague, or hernia that has broken out, then there is no hope for the extraction of the dart.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the dart enters the bladder and passes urine outside, causing a rupture outside, then there is a strong pain on the patient's thighs; know that it is deadly.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May the other members also suffer as it is with the face, the neck, the jaw, the shoulders and the back, and the spondylosis of the spine, and the hernia, and the pelvis, and the legs, and similar limbs; are saved according to the major dispositions when the dart does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venenous dart.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend that you watch out for the nature of these darts, so that you know how to treat them accordingly.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This is the cause, for in a man a dart enters his eye at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him through another opening, cut off his ears, and he was healed, and nothing happened to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another dart from a Jew which had entered his eye at the root of his nose, cut off his eyelids, and the dart was hidden; it was not visible except for a small end sticking to his eyelash. It was a sharp dart of the Turks, with an iron point, such that there are no ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And so the Jew remained, and nothing bad happened to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another dart from a Christian which had entered his jaw; it was an Arabic dart, and there were no ears; then I cut off two teeth next to each other, and that was where the dart was hidden; then I extracted it, and he was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another dart from a man which had entered his belly; I thought he was going to die of the dart, but after thirty days it did not turn for any reason of its dispositions, so I cut off the dart and it healed him, and nothing bad happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom a dart entered his two legs; it solidified the plague on him, and after three years the dart entered the space between his thighs.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom a dart entered her belly; the plague solidified inside her, and it did not change its dispositions according to nature, and the woman was not going to die because of some natural causes.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom a dart entered his face; the plague was solidified and broke out, causing pain here and there, and it looked like these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the dart from the king's princes which had entered his right nostril; it had already fallen off to the right a little, and the whole of the dart was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to heal him from within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I removed the plague of the dart with a sharp attempt; and then I inquired about it with careful intention, and did not feel it; but then he felt a pain at his right ear, and then I knew that that pain was from the end of the dart.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied ointment to the spot with an astringent and digestive power, confirming it to myself that the spot would stop the spread of the plague, and heal it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And nothing bad happened in that spot, which was significant because the dart had entered that place; and I continued to apply ointment there for several days and nothing bad happened; but the plague was consolidated at the same time, and it broke out of its cavity by space for five days, until one day he felt pain on his nose, and he told me: "I feel a pain here."
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied to the plague an acute corrosive medicine for several days and then I cut off the top part, and then I inquired about it with careful intention, and I found the end of the dart which was sticking to his nose.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And I applied to the plague by means of that acute medicine for several days and then I saw clearly the end of the dart; and it passed to me at my hands in the space of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then the plague was amplified, and I had to reach for scissors, and then I removed it with a gentle movement of forceps, according to how those things are done in the end of this chapter, until I extracted it; but then I restored that plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors said that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it; then the plague was consolidated, and he was healed completely, and no bad thing happened to him because of any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some darts, so that you pause here and there, for those things are not understood by me, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those things are not understood by me, as they are not explained in this book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the master knows little about it, and here he knows what is present, and there he knows what is absent; and he has a new operation and new instruments to remove foreign causes from the art when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And I say that darts are not released from the members in which they are stuck, but according to two ways: either by attraction of the place in which they are stuck; or by the contrary of the other.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that dart is released by attraction of the place, or it is a dart proceeding from a meat-like place, and is thrown and released outside.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the hour when it happens; then be aware that you will have to wait a few days until you can find the meat which is around it, and that is where its attraction lies, and its egress from it.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And apparently if it is stuck in bone and you do not obey the hour when it happens; then leave it for a few days and repeat the process of attraction and movement every day, and then it will be released.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey the hour when it happens over a few days; then be aware that you perforate the course of the dart in that bone from all sides with a sharp tool, until the location is amplified by the dart, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the dart is stuck in the bone of the head and has already penetrated into one of the chambers of the brain, and appears on the surface of the skull; then abstain from extracting the dart, and leave it for a few days, because if the dart pierces the skull, death is prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the dart is not stuck in the bone of the head and has not penetrated into one of the chambers of the brain, but passes inside it; then leave it for a few days, and nothing happens to him because of those accidents; then you will have to remove the dart by attraction from his body.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is stuck and you do not obey the hour of extraction; then administer taravels in the course of the dart as I have said before, and then heal the location until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow has already been shot into the body and if it is causing pain, then you should question whether or not you feel it, and if you do, then draw out that same arrow with more sharp instruments which are suitable for drawing out an arrow from the body.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it because of the constriction by the bladder and its length, and there is no bone, nerve or vein there, then you should cut through the flesh until the arrow can be reached easily.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is stuck in the ear which is held by the flesh, then you should cut out the flesh entirely and carefully pull it out; and devise how to get it out if it cannot be taken out due to the ear being broken and twisted.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you remove the arrow from any place where it is stuck, then you should use your hand with forceps to completely cut through; and be very careful behind the first cut so that the arrow does not break and so that its removal by you and its extraction are difficult.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot reach it with your hand, then leave it for a few days so that the cuts heal; and then try again because when they have healed, it will be easier to remove.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If the flow of blood causes you pain, then administer that which we said about cure in the book.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your virtue of cutting veins or nerves or strings, and administer medicine to you in any way which is possible for the extraction of the arrow; and do so with ease and calmness and patience and caution as well as care and advice.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And let the arrow come out so that the patient is according to the figure according to which the placement of the arrow in it should be according to which it is easier.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not possible for you, then administer medicine which is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	If the arrows that are shot from one side are pulled from the other side, or if you have already shot some of them from one side to the other through the skin, cut off the tip of the arrow with sharp scissors and then throw it away; because it is easy to remove lightly.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it has been stuck in the bone, then you should cut the meat with an instrument according to the opposite direction of the arrow’s placement in the bone, and extract it in that way.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Otherwise, leave it for a few days, and then try again until it burns.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the tip of the arrow is in that place, then you should push it out with your hand.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the tip has fallen and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it into the concave part of the patient’s foot, and push it out with your hand.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrow is concave, then you should push it out with a sharp instrument inserted into that place, because the arrow will come out easily by doing so.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then cut off all of the flesh where it is stuck, if you can reach it, and then clean that place with water which is suitable for cleaning.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow has entered into the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the rib, and is close to your hand so that you feel it with your touch, then cut off that part, and if you are able, remove the arrow, and then if the patient feels pain, clean that place with water which is suitable for cleaning; and then cure that part until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of forceps used to shoot arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Hold the ends of the bow with your fingers, and when you pull back the bow, they will make a sharp noise as they cut through the string.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those are made special threads, large, small, and thin, according to the size of the arrow and its flexibility, and according to the width of the opening; and according to the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The shape of a pointed instrument inserted into this concave end so that it is relieved from the arrow’s placement inside it, and pushed out with a sharp tool.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The shape of pushing out from the end with a sharp tool:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	in this way that it is relieved from the arrow’s placement inside it, and pushed out in this way.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of bloodletting by veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which the blood is taken for bloodletting are those which are used to take blood, and they are: of which are in the head. The following are the veins which are in the head: two pulsatile veins which are in the ears, called auriculares; two herbs which are in the temples, called temporalibus; and two veins which are in the eyelids of the eyes, called lacrimalibus; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is in the tip of the nose; and two lines which are on the cheekbones, called maxillares; and two veins which are on the lower lip, called labiales inferiores; and two veins which are on the upper lip, called labiales superiores; and these are the veins which are called allic; and two veins which are under the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	If there are veins to be taken for bloodletting in the arms, then they are: five. If one of those veins is a cephalica, then it is not suitable for bloodletting; and the people call it “the vein of the head”, and it is a deep vein, and it is a major vein, and it is composed of a ramification from the basilica, and another ramification from the cephalic; and they name that vein “the great vein of the body”, and the basilica is called “the vessel which is stopped in the chest”, and it is named “the citil” (cital), and those call it “the vein of the belly”; and it rises from the arm, and is placed on the flexor side, and that is the one which is bled; and the saveola, and it is the vein that goes between the auricular and the little head, and it has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of those is which runs from the back part of the head of the wild animal; and the second one is called a deep vein, and its location is on the flexor side of the leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is on the back part of the leg; and there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The healing of the veins which are close to the ears is gentle and quick, and it prevents the occurrence of minor headaches and the spread of bad smells from the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of the vein to be taken is according to your eye: it is that it should be cut from the top part of the patient's head, and frayed there with a sharp knife until it bleeds; then tie the patient's head tightly in a scarf, so that those veins do not appear close to the ears; and if you feel the pulse of those two veins with your fingers, then draw them out.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the knife, and it is that which is inserted, and then you should push it into that place where the vein can be seen, and then pull out that same vein within its cavity, until blood comes out; and if there is a need to cut the skin of the foot or leg, then do so until you feel the pulse of the vein.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand up to the vein and the cord above the split, and cut off the vein with a sharp scissors.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And be the length of the incision twice as much or less than this quantity; and make a cut from the sunken part as far as you wish it to go.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then tighten the pulleys and allow that part to be raised which needs to be healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And what has been said at the beginning of this book about incisions and their cauterization is repeated here.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Of the two veins that supply blood to the foot, one is the ancient and bad one, the other is the true one; also of the eyelids, constant headaches, acute fluid excess flowing into the veins.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of the blood in those limbs depends on whether you take it by force or not: if the pulse of the limb is felt and shown to be strong, then you know the blood is good as described above; but if the pulse is weak, try to find out why it is weak.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you raise the vein above the part with your finger, and insert the bloodletting instrument between the two veins; and raise the vein up to its place; and cut that part also in the two veins as you have done in the other limb; and let the blood flow according to your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then take off the tourniquet from the patient's thigh; and let go of the pulse for an hour; and put the pulleys on it and tighten them with force, and let that part be raised which needs to be healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And what has been said at the beginning of this book is repeated here: the reminder of that limb and of those limbs, and their incision, and their cauterization.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the bloodletting from the vein of the forehead is appropriate for the ancient diseases of the face and for emigrant, rigor, and putrid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the bloodletting depends on whether you take it by force or not; if the limb is tightened with a tourniquet and the vein appears, then you know the blood is good; but if the pulse cannot be felt, try to find out why. There are two ways for this: either you strangle the patient to prevent the pulse from being felt, or else you cut the vessel that supplies blood to the limb, so that it stops flowing and no pulse can be felt.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then pause the cut just at the top of the fossori (the vessel) on that vein and strike it with a pen or some other weapon in such a way as to cause bleeding, and let the blood flow according to your need; and then take off the tourniquet from the patient's head, and tighten it with force, so that that part is raised which needs to be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some vessels are cut with a blade for bloodletting, however, the bloodletting is not done from the extreme parts as it is done from the other limbs; on the contrary, it is done from the side which is closest and most easily reached; and that part is bloodletting according to the transverse direction, because the bone is close and strong, so the vessel would be cut if bloodletting was done longitudinally.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	Of the two veins that run along the eyelids of the eyes, one runs from the eye to the nose, and the other runs from the eye to the ear; they are used for bloodletting from the eyes, and they are good for the ancient diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the bloodletting is that you take it by force with a tourniquet on the limb; and then cut those vessels which are good for bloodletting, and stand over their heads.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the bloodletting is done in one direction only and a little at a time because in that way there would be no loss of blood; but if the bloodletting is done longitudinally, then the extreme part will break, since it is very strong.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then let the blood flow according to your need; and place those pulleys on it and tighten them for an hour; and then take off the pulleys from that part.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Of the bloodletting from the nose, one runs to the head in cases of severe fever and sudden headaches; and to the ancient diseases of the face, and especially when they are old-fashioned.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the bloodletting from the nose is that you take it by force with a tourniquet; and then put your hand on the left side of the patient's nose and cut the bloodletting instrument in such a way as to cause bleeding, and keep it there; for the vein does not appear here, and the pulse begins to flow soon afterwards.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Finish the bloodletting little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; and then tighten it with force for an hour, since that part is restored a little by little.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Of the two vessels that run along the side of the body, one runs to the leg and starts to form a leper; and the other is the cause of ancient diseases, irregular movements, and bad corrosive ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the bloodletting from those limbs is that you take it by force with a tourniquet on each leg; and place the doctor over the head of the patient, so that the patient lies on a couch.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then cut the vein in one direction with a wide blade, little by little; and let the blood flow according to your need or to any quantity that you wish; and then do the same for the other leg.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then take off the tourniquet from each leg and tighten it with a little bit of force so that the limb is not suffocated; and let it rest in its place because the disease is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	Of the bloodletting from the veins that run along the body, one runs to the mouth and is responsible for small pimples and pustules in the mouth, and bad ulcers and cracks; and it causes bad ulcers on the nose and the rest of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the bloodletting from those limbs is that you cut the patient' s nose in front of you, and then tighten it with a tourniquet on the right side of the nose; and move the upper lip to the left and look at the two veins which are on each side, one under the lower lip and another on the other side; and observe how black they are; and then cut one of them by means of an incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Then if you are in doubt, leave it to me; I will cut the one that is most prominent, and that which shows a pus like substance.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And then make the incision of the two veins on the sides of the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Also, cut and incise both veins that run along the sides of the mouth.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Of the two veins that run along the side of the tongue, one runs to the head and is appropriate for pre-focaciosa diseases that occur in the throat; it is also good for diseases of the uvula, and for those of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bloodletting from those limbs is that you take it between your fingers in front of the sun; and then raise the patient' s tongue; and look at the veins on either side; and observe how their color changes to blacker; and so see which one needs to be bloodletting.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then cut each one; and remember that you should not take it by force with a tourniquet on those limbs, because they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are bloodletting in the neck are those from which blood runs in all men; and the bloodletting of them is done in two ways, either by means of a blade that cuts with force, or by applying a hot stone; and then cut the vein with a knife, and then see if it bleeds. This is the way to do it.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this method is appropriate for cutting and of those special veins and the subtlest ones according to the width of the veins and according to their constriction.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of bloodletting with a blade:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	then bring the leg up again to its original position, and place a bandage around it tightly;
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	and this is the method of making an incision in order to drain the fluid:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	and this type of phlebotomy is of small depth and has a fine end, so it is suitable for phlebotomy of small veins that contain small blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	may the improvement of phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because it removes the blood from the legs that are left with a hole in the groin and from there that goes to the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And let the phlebotomist be careful when performing that phlebotomy, because it leaves an artery behind and if he makes a mistake and pricks during the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery, which will cause blood to flow, so that one should not perform phlebotomy with a sharp instrument.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then you should let it flow and move to another place, or look for a small vein; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm, because that is clear; and dry it out with cautery after phlebotomy.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May you want to perform phlebotomy on the arm, then let's look for the stricture of the arm that touches the place where you know the place of the wrists, and bring it close to your hand; and bring the arm down and dry out the vein with a sharp instrument as mentioned before; and be careful not to cut into the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you stretch it with force, inflate the place that you have stretched with your hand; then that inflation is an inflation of the artery and so it bursts.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows during phlebotomy like a child's scream, the blood is thin; then you should know that it is the blood of the artery; and let' stop the bleeding by moving it away from that place for a long time; and if the blood stops flowing, strengthen the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient away from humidity of the foot, and be careful with him and do not harm him for a few days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	May if the blood does not stop flowing, and you do not have medicine for it, then cut the artery, because its end is contracted, and the blood stops flowing; or take a piece of a fig, and press it on, and stretch that end with your hand and a powder within another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood has stopped flowing, then it is fine; and if not, then heal that place with water from which the blood is drawn, in order to remember the place of the powder that stops the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of the flow of blood is difficult in small places of the foot and due to the contraction of the limb of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	may phlebotomy of the black vein is beneficial that removes the blood from the cerebrum and leaves the body; because it is composed of veins of the head and of the basilic vein, as mentioned before.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And let the phlebotomist be careful in performing phlebotomy of it, because it leaves behind a nerve; and if he pricks during phlebotomy and injures that nerve, it will cause stupor, and its recovery is difficult and it may not heal completely; and this nerve appears with the feeling; and if it is hidden from some people and is thin and does not show itself, then let the phlebotomist stop phlebotomy at that place where he made an incision to drain blood, and avoid injury of the nerve with your hand.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you will cut it in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The improvement of phlebotomy of the cerebral vein is that it removes the blood from the head and prevents the hernia of the neck.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this way, if you want to perform phlebotomy by puncturing with a sharp instrument or with pressure, because it is the safest of all veins; because it does not leave behind any artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is necessary for you to perform phlebotomy that you do not puncture the top of the foot too much, and look for the place that is less sensitive, and do not cut it with a sharp instrument at first; because if you do so, you will damage it with pressure.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is difficult to stop blood from flowing in some people, when phlebotomy is not performed at first; but this cannot be predicted beforehand.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	may the quality of phlebotomy of that vein and its complications are considered in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first one is that it is done in the conservation of health and with the hope of healing; and to perform phlebotomy at the beginning of spring, during spring, autumn, and at the beginning of winter, when there are signs of congestion.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it is performed phlebotomy on the third day or as soon as possible after three hours have passed from the previous one.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	May phlebotomy that is administered, but when it causes discomfort and necessity, or at noon or at night, always at the same time and continuously.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And that is not phlebotomized before the age of twelve years, and women are not phlebotomized after the age of seventy; those who have already reached the age of sixty are not to be phlebotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to be phlebotomized in any way, let' discuss the budels before phlebotomy with a leon; because in them there may be a retained wound that disturbs the veins, and so they do not draw blood from the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not phlebotomize patients who are sick and have a fever or an infection; nor those who drink alcohol excessively, or who are constipated, or who are weak due to fasting or long hours of work, or for any reason that causes loss of blood, or in the body, or animals.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider in subtle ways before phlebotomy if the blood is thick, due to diet and drinks; and because of medicine, if that is possible with it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter into the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise for any reason so that the blood becomes thin.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause phlebotomy of the foot at the beginning of the day, which is around three o'clock in the afternoon; and this is the time when the blood is thinnest.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And remember that the foot of the patient in this day is to be avoided from any accidents with animals, such as anger, fear, and all other physical accidents, such as work and unnecessary eating and sleeping.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And on the same day, it is to be present in the use of perfumes and odors that are common among men; and of balsams and other things according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is softer or that of the patient himself who should be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then the patient's arm is extended and rubbed by the phlebotomist twice or three times; and then the limb is tightened with a belt, and wrapped up twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	Here is the translation of the text:
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then tighten it, so that whoever is to be bled should wipe their armpits together before the veins are inflame and evident to the touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the bleeder should wet their blade with a little oil especially for this; and place their left hand on that vein where they intend to bleed, leaving the spot where they will perform the bleeding slightly exposed so that the blood flows out a little, and the sound stops when the veins are clamped because those are the ones that cause pain when squeezed with force; and it is discovered by the bleeder; and if the bleeding does not stop, then the bleeder should lift their blade.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, for all these reasons, the bleeder must be firm and attentive in all these cases.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then stop the bleeding, especially if the vein is found in a visible place, otherwise, go to another area a little bit away from that spot or above the knee cap, if the spot is not visible.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the spot is inflamed or the patient shudders, then leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature, because it will attract more swelling, nor go into the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then perform the bleeding again if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the vision is small and the pain is subtle, and you fear that the amount you want will not be achieved, then go back to bleeding at that spot again according to the second right angle and adjust a little bit in the vision, and do so with haste before the spot becomes inflamed because this spot is inflamed in many people.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if that has already become inflamed, then do not perform the bleeding again because there is no excuse for you to do so; and place your hand on any part of the foot, because it refreshes the body.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And apparently administer oil in all the bleeding with which you bleed the veins that should be prohibited from being clamped by the cord of a saint, and make water from tar and sage when paused from one of those on that spot, because the saint softens and twists when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the spot of the bleeding there is a large swelling, because visible places occur, and mainly at that spot which does not bleed but that visible place, or in the vision of a vein a little bit, and then you cut, and pause over that spot sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly burned, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And when water is made from the blood of a saint from that vein in a supplement or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it remains in that place for a few days any blackness or greenness, there is no water; and if you want to, pause over that spot of olive oil and rosewater dissolved, or of myrrh or calament or something similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And because visible places occur so that swellings and bumps occur which require bleeding from the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And so place your hand over that spot, and if it becomes soft and swollen, then tighten the compression on that spot, and then that eminence is evil and bad; and then remember to pause over that spot of water which we have mentioned, because a strong flow will come from the saint's artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then use oil to stiffen it, so that the spot remains hard, and then treat it with other treatment before it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And when you extract from the saint all the amount of his virtue, and according to the victorious color on the saint above it.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the saint is black, then leave it to run until it is light; and if you make it thick, then leave it to run until it is slim; and if it is hot, then leave it to run until its sharpness diminishes.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if that is full and strong and has a need for saint's extraction in a visible place, then the bleeding from the vein should be increased and the bleeding performed.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And if that is sweet, then do its opposite, and when you extract it in two visible places, then make the second right angle tight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing to be administered in a vein bleeding is that it is cut transversely, not punctured.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this way of bleeding is saving from saint' flow and nerve injury, and it is more praiseworthy and saving than bleeding according to its length and depth.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which is accustomed to happen faints, then perform the bleeding before it with a little bit of water infused in milk of magnesia or simple oxymel burned; and extract the blood from him in three visible places or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is cold and dull, then drink before the bleeding with a little water infused in myrrh oil or in scented honey, and if it is stale, then drink with a little spice-flavored water, and with other aromatic flavors.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if faints occur due to bleeding, and it is caused by the saint' blood flowing out, then drink water of meat and a little aromatic water; and use spices, and control his feet with that hand.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes which we have mentioned in the division of faints for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to try his arms and dissolve his saint according to the second visible place, and the saint' virtue is sweet, which dissolves the saint little by little, then it should be done every day.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But who wants to try his arms, and escape from his saint according to the second night, and his body is strong, then perform the bleeding after seven or nine hours from the first bleeding.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But who wants to throw the saint out of his body in the opposite way from the starting place, then do it on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But that body in which there is already a lot of saint' blood and it is hot and causes fever, then leave the saint' blood in one visible place and increase the vision before faints, more than if you had preserved all the conditions of bleeding; and to put your hand on your opponent's wrist as the saint' heart beats, so that he does not die of faints instead of a saint.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is not when you want to try your arm and escape the saint according to the second visible place, because it is already closed the vein opening and it is difficult to extract the blood from the saint, then squeeze under it with force and stretch it a little, because water is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	While you leave it to bleed a second time; or hold water to the sharpness of the bleeding that coagulates the blood from the saint' opening; or place over it tar and sage, and tighten with a little compression so that the saint' blood comes out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation goes away.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity forces you to evacuate the second time, and there is no excuse for it, then draw blood from that spot or in another vein on another arm.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called “bracelet of the arm” is flebotomized in place of the forearm or of the bicep, when not dilated or hidden, since it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the bloodletting on him is that the patient puts his hand in water until the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then tighten it lightly with a strap around the limb at half-way length; then draw blood according to the small transverse line, not the longitudinal one.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Then make an opening wide and draw blood from that vein at the base of the thumb, a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood stops, then put your hand in water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	May you be if you are in the days of summer, then you are forgiven for not putting your hand in water, and the time is set aside for the body to rest in water's tail during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the bloodletting from this vein is more effective than that of any other vein, since there are no pulsating veins or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the bloodletting from the right wrist is associated with the health of the person's liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the bloodletting on him is that you tighten the wrist lightly or your own hand, since you have put it in water's tail, until the vein appears clearly; then draw blood according to the transverse line; and if you cut that vein from one side to another, then do not do so, for it will not be seen.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And preserve your hand from bloodletting, since there are nerves that denude the flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then put your hand in water' tail again and let the blood run into that vein, since if you do not, the blood will clot at the vein' end, and the flow will stop.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when you draw blood according to the amount of need, then put your hand over the vein of oil and salt so that it is not hardened completely; and seemingly cover it all with a cloth.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May the improvement of bloodletting from the left wrist is that it is associated with the health of the person' own body.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Then do likewise for him in return.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the improvement of the vein is good for the health of those who are about to give birth, just as it is good for the mother' health; and for the retention of menstruation, and the health of the breasts and feet, and their similar appearance.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the bloodletting on him is that the patient puts his hand in water' tail and draws blood over that spot until it clearly appears; then place your hand over the joint of the wrist; and the location of the vein cut apparent from the palm, and from that branch it goes down to the foot' sole, being ramified into many branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore draw blood from a wide limb or the other leg first, since it is better and more effective to cut it early.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you draw blood from the sole of the foot, then guard yourself from the nerves that run under that spot on the sole of the foot; and stop your bloodletting at the transverse line, as if you were to cut it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And be careful with the bloodletting.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	May you not cause pain to the patient; then put your hand in water' tail and let the blood run into that spot until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bloodletting is done incorrectly in the first attempt, then repeat it a little bit, since the location is good; and do not fear for it to be harmful, but guard yourself from the nerves as we have said before.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Then do likewise for the other side.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the location we have described is good at the end of the back.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the improvement of bloodletting on him is that he has pain in his hips when it is done according to the right method.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the bloodletting on him is that the patient goes into a bath of oil, and quickly tightens his belt from the waist with four threads in a long and slender cloth, since it does not appear except by water.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Then when it appears, draw blood according to a circle and do so quickly, since it is better to cut it; or cut it from one side to another, as the location is good.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is used for men who are mild and well-behaved; and if you hear blood running, but it does not appear to the touch, then draw blood from a limb, and that which appears on the tip of the finger is good.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard yourself from the nerves, and let the blood run according to the amount you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then return the strapping and tighten it at the location of the bloodletting, since gently tightening it is good for healing.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Of wind: either from the ear, or from the nose, or from the mouth.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And of ventilation: either by scraping and extracting blood, or byventilating while scraping.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation is done in two ways: either with fire, or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the places of ventilation administered by scraping and extracting blood are twelve in number, of which one is located behind the head, and is the last to be cut; another at the back of the neck, just above the jaw; a second on either cheek; two for the ears; one behind the ear, located on the nape of the neck; and two on the shoulders.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract blood from small veins in the flesh, nor does it cause harm by scraping it, as is done for bloodletting; nor does it cause harm to a person' health when it is done according to the right method, but it is good for one' health if the ventilation is performed correctly.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	May you not cause harm to the patient by ventilation or in any case, and give it at the beginning of the meal and at the end; and do so at your convenience in time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	And the reason for this is that blood is multiplied in those men who have pain in their heads and faces due to ventilation and they suffer from headaches; and in those whose heads are heavy and gloomy, and whose faces are pale; and in those whose sleep multiplies, and those who sweat while sleeping, and those who have a strange taste in the mouth, and those whose speech is unclear; and in those men who suffer from pain in their throats.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Then when it is needed in any of those cases, and especially if it is at the third or half-day meal, then order ventilation to be done rather than to wait until the day passes.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the improvement of ventilation at the nape is that it gives gravity to the head and makes it fall into the throat, but not all blood comes out from the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this incision is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not necessary that he uses oil that is used for kneading, or in which there is a cold, because it causes great damage.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And by water do not cover those who use the old ones, and on the heads of those who are injured with frost.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More also that over that is continuing on it is done oblivion; and by water do you command the bellows to pause its hand a little at the wind from the feet, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	More also vinegar is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the bazal: and by water confer to cough, and to the contraction of air and to the cutting of the instrument of air, and to sneezing, and to swelling.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if the vinegar is cooled a little, because if it is paused from below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the vinegar of acetic acid confer to accidental pains in the head and to blindness, and to migration and to fever, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the bazal.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And if you command the bellows not to press its hand for bloodletting so that it does not pierce the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And if the wind is blown from below to the mouth, it confers to drunkenness in the mouth and to corruption of the gums, and to resemblance to the diseases that are in the mouth, and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of another that is in the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	More also the wind that is made on the two spatulas confers to catarrh, which is done by the repletion of quality.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the wind from the two inner parts of the mouth confers youth by phlebotomy of three veins, since it is of the bazal, fuscal and cephalic vein; because that one attracts all those veins that are clamped together that are in the flesh, and those veins are thinner than the other veins within so that attraction comes to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the bellows not to process in bloodletting, since the place is naked of flesh, and leave it without nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a wind that is blown on the legs and confers to hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to ulcers from below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And if you command the bellows that it is a great wind, and that it is of fine air, since the place does not give a strong section; and strong also its hand in bloodletting for bloodletting.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	More also of small legs with great care, since they attract the blood of all the body, and confer to old pains of the lungs and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they cause menstruation, and confer to bothor and ademil; and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of two sophons, and of a linchpin, and of two nails.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, it does not weaken all the body and causes syncope in men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the wind of a linchpin, youth is given to youth by the wind of two legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the winds is that you pause the wind at the beginning to see and pour out through the opening quickly, and do not prolong the position of the winds; let them be put away carefully, and that the humors come to the place by adventitious means.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease repeatedly this water and continue within so that you see the place already reddening and swelling and that the rigor of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you bloodletting and repeat the water little by little, and approach carefully to the disposition of the bodies.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Since that man who is of tender meat of pigs can be bloodletting once and no more, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the bellows to increase bloodletting a little bit, and bring the water easily.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then you bloodletting two times, since in the first bloodletting the way of subtleization to the blood and its liquidity is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	More also in the second to the acquired scrutinization of the gross extraction of the blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is much feeble, then do not make bloodletting the third time so that you obtain the last.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract little blood or a little bit, it is enough to us a bloodletting.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract one blood, let us do a heavy bloodletting; and if we know that the blood is thick, then you bloodletting heavily.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of bloodletting in which the depth of the gouge is only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if that man whose flesh is thick, rough, dark, and the pores are narrow, so that the places of the winds are soft, open, resolute; if it is in summer time, then also with oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of wild roses, or oil of chamomile, or of blood, and to those that seem similar. And if it is in wintertime, then let it be oil of hay, or of hyssop, or of sage, and of mustard.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick, green, then let the oil be amaranth oil, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anet, and to their resemblances.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	More also if the bellows is of large size, then it is forbidden to use oil, and that in these places of the wind of their advantage, the ventilation should be done with hot water or very cold water, or water of hay, or water of hyssop, and to those resemblances.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that man whose blood is of a moist nature, wash his winds with vine or water of mirtr and sumach, and to those resemblances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And that man whose superfluities are thick, wash his winds with wine of the old, or water of sansuc (which is marjoram), or infusion of anet, or of chamomile, and to their resemblances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And if the ventilation is kept before a bath; waiting that it is administered near the end of the bath for an hour or two, and that it sleeps near the ventilation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary so that it is directed before phlebotomy before ventilation.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And consider at the beginning: then if the wind of the bellows or that which will be phlebotomized is coleric and blows on the head and inflammation, then it takes cold drinks, such as milky drinks with ice, and lettuce and radishes, and secanabin, and julep, and to those resemblances.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And put off their meals such as bread, and meats of a small size, and prepared foods with sugar, and to those resemblances.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And that man whose constitution is strong, then he takes in drinking milky syrup or syrup of secanabin of flavors, and sumac, and water not too much; and that it is forbidden to him eating and drinking, and putting off his meals of bread and meat, and of prepared foods with sugar, and to those resemblances.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And if on the day of ventilation and phlebotomy water is more than a meal.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And when it is given to drink certain men a medicine of the lion's heart or of musk, it is muscado, or alcelita before ventilation or surgery or otherwise, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is thinned; and it is not necessary for them to take that scar.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the ventilation be that they are stopped on their skin, and over the wound and podagra, and over the navel, in the locations of the joints, and the piercing of the anus, because these members do not suffer from a piercing over themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desirable for those except that a wound of a member, so when the ventilation is stopped on the skin, and over the wound and podagra, and over the navel, in the locations of the joints; and it uses that one to be dissolved: ventilation frets the member and scars it and increases the pain because it resolves ventilation.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is stopped on the throat when it happens in its obscuring or pox, because by virtue of strong attraction it lightens obscuring and removes the pox from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it appears when stopped on the skin and the navel: ventilation is necessary in those who are imprisoned.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These ventilations are given with juice only; and some are given with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are given full of running water in the navel's malady.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And water is that ventilation is filled and full, it is running water alone or water in which herbs are boiled to water.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of ventilation administered with fire: its opening should be two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the medicine should be half a palm; and it should be in the back of it, in the place where it runs around, most of it, the tray being small according to the amount that enters it a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is made of a strong root or citron, with large leaves, lion, wolf and mouse, because it does not bring the member to its own position on itself.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And in its middle a transverse pole of oak or iron, where it is stopped with candle by fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this ventilation is much greater than that which we have described; and the less one of those according to the malady's states and the condition of the person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the ventilations of the old and exhausted are other than those of young people and large figures.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of stopping this ventilation with fire on the member is that it extends the hand to the fire of wood properly before a small candle of wax, and stops it in the middle' location of the ventilation pole, so that the fire is kindled around the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then is stopped on the patient' member, and the tray on which we have talked, until when we have ventilation and do not hold back that tray; and the steam is boiled on that tray, and the ventilation stops it.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And light the fire according to its way, and repeat that if you do not like it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May ventilation that is administered in the navel' malady of pleurisy, with water, which does not have a transverse pole or tray; and it is not administered except when it is filled with water, and it is stopped on the member alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is its form: And this ventilation is much greater, the better to receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter  .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguineous are not administered in the members but in the members where it is not possible to position ventilations, because of their age; and so with the nose and mouth when they seem.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that if you have found blood is in the pure waters of clean well water.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they are laid down on their back in two-part water until they become hungry, and do not ruin anything in the navel of those; and it is evacuated from the body at the beginning with bloodletting and ventilation; and they are rubbed on the patient' member before it gets red; and they are stopped over them.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible juice from the location of the ventilation, it is much better.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, then wash that place with vinegar and make a solution of water; and it is rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the patient' body is prolonged, then place the place of blood-suckers and it is water; a cloth soaked in water, and stop it over that until it is drained.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the pain is multiplied, then sprinkle over it vitriol triturated, or cook and seem to be of stinging causes, until the pain is gone; or they are stopped over the location of beans cooked, and they are laid down until the beans stick to the location, and the pain is gone.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And when it is necessary, a repetition of blood-suckers, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if blood-suckers are prohibited by suspension, then rub the location with fresh blood or stick a needle in the locations until it stings pain; and they are stopped, because those when they feel any pain soon enough.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to make them fall, sprinkle over those a little of aloe tritated, or salt, or ash, and sometimes soon enough.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the third part of the process: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of a fracture and an accidental dislocation of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Or son the medical students and the vulgar ones and those who never read the books of the ancients, nor read a word from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	Therefore, for this reason the way of the sciences in our land is privated; and I have not forgotten it at all, but out of a long study of the books of the ancients and over understanding them, until I drew science from those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I was occupied with experiments and studies for most of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	I have already described all this in this chapter that describes my science and upon which I base my experiments; for it is fit that what is added to the description of experiments be made known after the addition of declaration; so as it is shown at the end of declaration; and it is formed out of the instruments that are administered with it, when it is added to description.
Capitol primier.	Chapter first.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	First the great collection of broken bones, for out of these we will begin to remark the members that are fractured and various if one alone is not enough.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	And then I will state the conclusion of this chapter, which I have put at the beginning of my speech, and it is forced on me to speak about the truth of those; or they are yours who know or learn this noble art better than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when you happen to a broken bone or dislocation or twist or housing, then you must be aware at the beginning with bloodletting and cleaning that place; or any part of it, if you do not forbid anything, as if it were cured by virtue, or if it is that very thing which has happened; or if it is in old age, or if it is hot weather, or if it is a time of heat.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let him be content in his own food of herbs, and of flesh of geese and of crab-apples; and let us prohibit the eating of coarse meats and of all food that fills the veins with blood, unless you are certain that there is no danger of apoplexy, and if you do not fear the effusion of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the patient to his first position with care.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so, when the broken bone has begun to heal, let the patient be fed on nutritious food, rich in meat and fat and heavy with moisture, for as such are the foods made from wheat, cooked with water, and roots, and peas, and vegetables, and fish, and chicken, and milk, and beef, and pork, and lard, and oil, and these are the foods that produce a slow and gentle coagulation of the fracture, little by little and gradually.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that broken bones in young men and in old men, it is not possible for them to continue and be solidified according to their nature by the drying out of the members of them.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are solidified and continued according to their nature at all times by the drying out of those members, and they are continued and solidified that which is of them in the end of their leniency, as well as the bones of little children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and aligns itself to the broken bone from the very beginning; it is a substance that adheres and strengthens that which is within it, combining it with itself, until it comes to a stop at its end of strength and firmness, as well as fire in the beginning, so that for no reason does she prevent this from happening to her works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the patient's food, food in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A variety of fracture according to a variety of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the spinal bone is different from the fracture of the head bone; and the fracture of the foot bone is diverse from the fracture of the leg bone; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will remember all the species of fracture, separated out in its own chapter distinct from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A variety of fracture within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fracture of the bone within itself are diverse; for an arc-shaped fracture occurs in its stars, and some are broken according to the length of the bone: and such are the fractures of the skull and the cheeks and the addictions, either proceeding or not proceeding, as when it is prepared to write, and a fracture occurs with pain and disruption in the head, and a small crack-like fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And all species are engendered or tormented of themselves in their restoration, according to that which will come; remember them separately in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A symbol of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And through this is known the fracture of the bone: it is a twist of it, and from that eminence and appearance of it to the feeling, and not from it when you hold it to your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when it is not in the apparent twist and does not cause pain with movement of the patient, who does not feel great pain when you touch the bone with agitation, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	While it is possible that it is a twist or a small crack, otherwise you would not know that he holds it to your hand and compresses it with all of his strength; then pause over it of the medicines of which you remember a moment when they come to this place, and tightly bind it.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the place when it is arched and does not split in two or another action that occurs in its skull, as it is raised from all of its side, then you begin to correct it after an hour, so that to it an apoplexy cauterization occurs.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if to it an apoplexy cauterization occurs, then leave it for a few days until the apoplexy ceases; and tightly wrap that second one, no matter what way you can do so with levitation and invention.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of it and the reduction of it is less serious than that of the bone in which such a skull occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then strengthen that second one when you remember it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	However, if there are two skull fractures, then it is necessary to amputate this broken member of two parts, whether it is the arm or the leg; or to your hand if the member is small; or to two cords or to one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And be your position to which you pause the member from its ends according to its natural figure, while the breaks of the broken member are extended, then know that you must cut off those additions in order to make them join together again, no matter what way you can do so in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And take care so that no action of yours or injury occurs to the patient through your operation or healing; and, according to your might, apply a bone to another as you see fit.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Then, at that time, take advantage of your strength to touch it to your hand, and if there is any other reason, correct it and wrap it up in the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And it causes violent extension and compression, as well as foolish actions that cause an apoplexy cauterization through their operation, or an apoplexy in the member when they have seen water through the operation of their foolish actions.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Then bind it together, and bring about a connection and a good operation and tightening of that member, and rest and tranquility; command the patient on it to not touch it in the hour of his vigils or his sleep, and observe its revolution and agitation, and know its excretion, and be aware of all his movements with all your might; and wait until the position of the member is right for him to feel pain, which occurs when he feels the position of his injury; then, if you change that position to another one that does not cause him pain, then command it to be wrapped up in a way that causes no damage to the member when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the tightness of the member that I recommend is this; so that you know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and their size and the shape of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small, as the arm and the hand and resembling those, then know that the wrapping is of thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	However, of those that are large, as the back or the waist, then know that in those be a wrapping on both sides and a hard connection, for the binding tightly connects the large member with all its might by tightening it; not like this one, in which there is no damage.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then begin, and put your might into it, and pause well on the place of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to the member you want; and tighten your hand around the binding.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Then look well at that one from the beginning with greater might than you have strengthened the place of the fracture, and tighten your hand around the binding.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then increase it slowly with the wrapping of the place of the fracture, and soften the tightness little by little until you take it from that place completely.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another object and wrap that other one over the broken place with wrapping, and then look at the wrappings from the beginning until you leave the fracture completely; and be your operation in the tightness of the wrapping and in softening that which we have said in the first wrapping.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And if it is a twisted fracture, pause between the heels of the lion or drape where the curvature of the fracture is, if there is any curvature; and in no case do so.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And pause over the other object, and let it hang gently from those folds so long as there is no swelling or abscess at that place, and then pause over the water that forms the abscess and which contains the swelling; and leave it for a few days; and then bind it firmly.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if the bones of the leg are made of cane, and formed properly; or if they are made of bamboo; or of palm branches; and each bone is shaped according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, note that the bone that is paused over that fracture should be thicker and further away from each other than the other bones, and according to the length of the bone as regards size and thinness; and bind it with another object according to your first tightness; and let it hang gently according to what I have said about tightness, and this should be your tightness according to the place of the fracture, and how much further it is from the fracture, so much should be its tightness.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And note that the threads should be thinner and softer, and of linen; and if the threads are thick, then such as are used to tie a knot, and this is a great mistake, for if one ties the tightness equally, it will cause pain.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very fine threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve the necessary tightness with them, and there should not be more than a finger's width between each bone.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is tied by the extremities of the bones according to my instructions, then pause from those heels of the lion or woolen ribbon until he has no injury there.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some broken bones are am pain, and an accident occurs in the rope, and I come to mind of that in the Capitol according to its uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you know that a broken limb does not bind firmly to the bone the first day; which is why the limb, if it is large, should not be bound to the bone for three or seven days, according to your caution about the advent of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the way that the ancient surgeons used; they are placed on a fracture and dislocation and torsion.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	A method of binding such as a shower of restoration of fracture, suitable for complex cases and mainly for women and children, because it does not conduct heat nor friction: and this is because you take powder of flour, and that is the mediastinum of the flour which conveys the movement of the mill on the surfaces of the grindstone.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And use that accordingly, but rather take it as it is, but take the yolk of an egg, and pause its spreading thinly or finely; and then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way of applying the ointment that repairs fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, fennel, and mirra which is rained from the seed of a wild horse, all from one dragon; of myrrh and aloes from another dragon five; allchil from ten dragons; and all are to be finely ground and mixed with water or the white of an egg if the patient's complexion is scarred; and then use this ointment, for it has a good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and gives strength to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way of applying the ointment that repairs fractures and twists: Take myrrh and aloe from one dragon five; of mirra and aloes from another dragon six; of acacia from ten dragons; and all are to be ground with honey or with milk from a wild horse.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All should be sifted in a mortar to make a paste, and then it should be sieved, and mixed with water or egg yolk and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	A method of binding joints and separated bones from their places, causing pain and accidents in them and developing cracks and fractures: take wool and immerse it in vinegar and oil, then bind it over the place.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Not in this binding is useful for restoration, to relieve gout and expel pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way to bind and restore broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of poppy, and grind them into a paste.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A method of fresh binding that is administered to restore the fracture of bones and also to relieve gout: take rawhide, chamomile flowers, violet leaves, and flour of erba, all of it; make a paste with water, and then bind it. 1.i. All should be thinned and sifted by the wind, if the limb is not scorched.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scorched, then take that accordingly with water or with cool water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another way of binding that is stronger in this case, when accidence occurs and there is a durious gout, to restore the limb: Take rawhide, mustard, marjoram, viola, chamomile, all of it, sifted; all should be thinned with water according to the quality of the limb and the rest position of the wind.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But if it is not strong in the seven sacred books, which are placed on a broken limb to restore it, except for wax and oil, and nothing else; and let it be tightly bound, neither too thin nor too thick.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But if it is not strong in the seven sacred books, which are placed on a broken limb to restore it, except for water and oil, and not for any other cause; and let it be bound with a little of calamine, as in the case of mirra, ensets, and similar things that we have recommended against those causes that cause exsiccation.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of binding that causes injury and pain: take some sheepskin, and cut it with a sharp knife, or cut the hair off a man's beard, and grind it up with rawhide and salt; all should be sifted and sieved, and then made into a paste.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the quantity according to which binding is tight and loose should be considered: if there is no pain or injury, and the limb has not been broken, then do not bind it for more than two days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is a violent pain or injury or swelling at the place, then do not bind it, but in the hour, remove the binding, and bind that plaster.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a drap of linen and marine sponge, and immerse them in warm water, and rub that on the place until there is no pain or injury, and then let it rest for an hour; and then bind it over sheepswool immersed in vinegar and oil, or rosin, and bind it tightly; and if there is any swelling or pain at the place, then pause the binding for a while, and then continue to bind it.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there is any slight tightness, then bind that tightly with a small binding, and do not bind it too much according to your first tight fitting, and make it small with respect to that which should be healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if there is a great deal of pain and swelling and injury and swelling, then do not bind that with this binding, but continue to use the paste and tightness until it is healed completely, and you will be relieved from binding and tightness.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there is not an incident in that member of any of those things that we have said, then do not release it until three or four or five or seven days; And some are left for twenty days all of this is done according to what we have said, until the fracture adheres, and if it is placed on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then adjust it in a more tight position than the first one you made, and fit it with the thickening of the patient's skin, according to how it has been remembered.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if the place of the fracture is completely dried and worn out more than it covers, then know that nourishment cannot come to it; and therefore dip it in cold water every day throughout all those days that it takes to heal it; and a little less tighten it, and with this operation give nourishment to the member, and it will be healed little by little.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But if the common restaurators of the fracture of the member do not restore it to the beginning, according to what covers, and is restored according to its tortuosity, is an error according to the operation of them, and great fear, and if it were to be dried up there would grow bigger the old ones in their free places and would become hard with water.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen anyone of them make that, so it is reasonable to think that they do not make it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter on a fracture when it happens at the top of the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are chips, and the figures of them are different, and the causes are distinct, since some fractures are caused by impact with an arrow or spear, and the impact stops all the bone in its place, which is left alone, so that it does not hurt when it moves, and this type of fracture is called aschal; or the spear cuts a part of the bone, and cuts the flesh and does not go through the cut, then this type of fracture is called absolute lifting.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of a fracture that is crushed or twisted; and its cause is impact with fire or stone on the head, and their similarity.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating so that it moves the skin that covers it, or in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And there is also a fracture that is made in the bone, in the subtlety of the little hair, and therefore this type of fracture is called a hair fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is made by impact or by the impact of a stone, and similar to it, which makes one of its parts enter another, and breaks in the concave place, so that it enters through the grooves made by the edges of an arrow when it impacts them, and it is broken by entering into those grooves.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And most often it is made in the bones of animals that have hair, as cow's or bull's heads do.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And therefore all these species of fractures heal quickly, and they are like those who have separated stitches.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I come to the reminder of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	I have learned about all these species of fractures by detection, through investigation and examination of the corrupted flesh that is above them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary species is known by the red mark that appears on top of the bone, and it is dried up, and it is covered with skin, since the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the treatment of fractures consider at first the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the manifest signs that it means to death, such as vomiting from cholera, extistence, loss of reason, confusion, and the feeling of coldness of those parts and similar signs in the main organs, do not expect to heal them.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see that these are not cureable accidents, then begin the treatment of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	That is because if it comes to you that the patient is ill at the beginning and it is winter, then know that you should study the treatment of the bone in front of him on the thirteenth day according to all the dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then know that you should keep the bone warm in front of him on the seventh day, and have it covered with skin that covers it, and that these accidents happen to it:
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the skin that covers the neck, and it is broken into pieces and twisted, then know that you should cut the broken piece according to how I recommend.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	That is because you should cut the head of the patient who has a headache, and discover what bone it is according to its usual way and your ability, and that it is light on the patient's body.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you, then you should stop the bone, and wash it with water that is hot or cold, and let the wound open until it is calm, and be sure not to lose any blood from it; and then begin to treat the bone and remove it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And do this in either of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first way is that you cut the bone with a straight knife, and this is how it is done: You take another knife that is slightly smaller than the previous one; and this is how it is done.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then you take a larger knife.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And know that you should have several knives, some of which are slightly larger than others; and some of these are smaller than others, and all are sharp at the ends, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them easily in hitting the knife with a hammer so that you do not hurt yourself.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you should pierce it before administrating knives to it, and these are called non-deep knives.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called that way because those do not stop the end of the bone's head at which it is placed, since the wheel has a round edge or border on top of the bone that leaves the cap of it like a small circle, and this prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you take many of these wheels, as many as you need for the thickness of each bone, until it is present in all parts of the head; the end of which being sharp, the quantity in length and brevity should be according to the amount of bone's thickness.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of wheels: The quality of piercing in the circuit of a broken bone is that you place the wheel on top of the bone and rotate it with the pins that separate it; and then move the wheel to another location, and stop it at which point there remains the amount of its thickness or environment.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you cut it with a knife that is between each part of the bone, and make it smaller so that you can stop on top of it at the end of levitation, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or your hand, or any other cause because you have small tools ready for it, such as tweezers and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And know that you should keep the knife away from any cause of injury to the bone's ends.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so, with the aid of air, the bones are penetrated; and if it should continue, then separate it from the cyphac, and extract that which is in the bone, for it is roughened and ingrained there, yet more so than other chisels, for it is thicker and more subtle.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any of the small bones are broken and shattered, then use that which is easier with chisels; and then heal the fracture with lime and smear those which we have described.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another way of operation is slight, far from fear, which cuts Gwalia and the lauzec through great noise; and this is what it says: It is necessary that you begin to uncover the fracture of the bone in the place where it is most violent and most visible, until when you have uncovered that part and have paused for a moment the extremities of this chisel, which is slow and gentle, then this is its form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is because the rounded part is sharp and does not cut into anything, and the pointed part is on both sides before its length, sometimes thus: that the rounded part be fitted to the cyphac with the face of it cutting into the bone sharply in a pointed fashion.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike with a small mallet against the chisel of one part as long as it cuts all of the bone easily thus: and you will be sure that no accident happens in it which you fear in any way, and if the medicine is useful for all men and more ignorant of them; certainly, and if it were sleep-inducing.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if any cause is annexed to the bone of the pannicle in some places of the bone, then cut that with the chisel of the rounded part, and release it easily, for it is released by itself without causing any harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate within the pannicle, and that which is cut or left from the bone is its face, and it has roughness and subtile shards, then, when you have roughened that roughness and removed those subtile shards with sharp subtile chisels, which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer them in all places where they are most convenient and right for them, according to what you find yourself lost in your operation of that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And when you administer in your reason with the chisels which make the bone wider at first, then use that which is most subtle of them, and do not cease to go on according to continuity until you reach the place where you can administer the thickest and most subtile of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in any of the small fractures or hair-like and subtle fractures, then administer care according to what you find yourself lost in its correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is the reason why it has not been learned on all of those which have studied that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And he wrote to us here about great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the pannicle is rectangular when you cut the bone, then, when you take a piece of cloth according to the amount of the wound, and dip it in oil and rosin, and place it on the orifice of the wound; and then take another piece of cloth that is doubled or tripled and dip it in oil and rosin, and place it over the first one, and make it slightly tighter than before, so as not to strangle the cyphac; and then administer on it a thin piece of lead, and do not increase its thickness except by the quantity of the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that with this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the healing; and then remove it and administer medicines which are superfluous: such as flour of alum, and powder of herbs and spices, and of similar things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And this is because you should sprinkle that powder of medicines which is powdered on the wound, when it is dry; and generally, administer on that all medicines of their properties by which they are bitter and not chewed.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And keep in mind according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and is not in the encrustation of ointment or any other; nor do you add virulence to it; for when it is adjusted over the pannicle of the skull, it corrupts it and destroys it, and happens upon the patient evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And happens upon the cyphac of the skull, and when it is separated from the bone and its cure is described more clearly, and is darker on its surface; and then consider at that moment if you have described the accidents which we have said, that you know that they are dangerous for all.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not find the darkness except because of the medicine which is poured over it, and this darkness comes from that medicine by which it is made, then take a piece of honey and a piece of rose oil; and place those over it on the cyphac; and then cure that with the spices of healing which you have within; so that it may be healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	And you should know that the nose is not broken but it is two parts of bone which are separate, or one of those small bones which are surrounded; for so there are two bones in it, because the part of them is cartilage, and is not broken, and you do not find it to be broken; but you find it to be twisted and tortuous and unsightly.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, then do not put your small finger in its nose, and do not push that fracture inside by the small bone, and do not pull it out; but return the nose to its natural shape according to its figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And make that happen for you with ease, and keep in mind that you should not put it before your own eyes while performing this operation on the patient's nose.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper most part of the nose, and does not touch that which is below it, then make it equal to the end of the bone in which its small thickness is.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should make a bridge for that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And rest for it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and otherwise, then after seven days put a stop to the wound healing.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And put a piece of cloth over the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two small pieces if it is broken into two parts; and make that which is most thick according to how much fills the width of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And I don't know about these ancient restorative remedies that the horses should be wrapped in wool, and exchanged completely every day; it seems to me that the muscle is wrapped in album from a roasted egg, mixed with powdered flour; and let whoever enters stop until the bone has hardened and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some are placed inside the nose, instead of the horse, under wrap from leather of the lion; and it is that already the fracture of the nose has been very violent and that the patient cannot breathe.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, make it with water, and if you want, make horses.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another wound should be opened, bandage the nose with wax or felt soaked in vinegar and olive oil, or with a dagger.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if this wound does not open, then return to bandaging that area with flour of sesam and powdered egg white mixed with roasted egg albumen; and place it over the lion's paw, and do not bandage the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose have been broken or fractured, then return to them and remove them with instruments suitable for them; and then cut the wound, and cure that with water that heals and hardens, and bandage it as you should.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is an infection inside the nose, then return to bandaging that area with water and apply cauldron (plumber's lead) to stop the infection completely.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 2.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not caused by an infection, consider whether it is only separated slightly and not broken in two parts, and whether it has curved towards the inside, then its understanding is minimal.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you must introduce your little finger from the left hand into the mouth of the patient; and conversely, if the fracture is on the left side, then return your little finger to the right hand; and force the fracture towards the outside with ease from the separated part of the bone, with equal effort from the separated part of the bone; and place it correctly.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two parts, then return to extending those two parts according to their right position, as long as it is possible to restore them to their original alignment.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a concussion of the teeth with a disturbance, then strengthen those on which you hope that they will remain, with wire of gold, silver, or cedar; and place it over the broken jaw with wax, and over a double cloth, and place it carefully so as not to break it, or a single string along its length; and let it lie there according to how you have tied it, and apply that correctly, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, and provide them with a mild diet of chicken soup.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the shape has been changed in any way, then return to bandaging and leave it for three days; and correct what has already been distorted with flour of chickpea, albumen of roasted egg, or flour of sesame, because you will have removed the wax from it, and place it over the leather of the lion.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And afterwards, when it is stable and the shape has not changed, leave it there, that is not removed until it is healed and the fracture is strong; for these fractures take three weeks to heal completely.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another wound should be opened, then provide water for him that has the seed of the wind in it until it is healed, and leave that wound open.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is caused by an infection, then consider whether it is a bone separated or fractured, then you should provide water for him that heals and hardens with that infection, and bandage those separated parts.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the hole of the infection is narrow, then you should increase it with a needle according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have removed those separated parts, and they do not remain attached, then cut the hole of the infection if it is wide; and otherwise, place it over one of the bandages that you provide water for healing it, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the palate when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The palate is broken at its tip, which is connected to the jaw; and this fracture can occur in three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	It is broken, separated, or separated into two parts that do not cause a fracture of the jaw; but it is difficult to restore it; or if it occurs in the palate, which is difficult to restore it; or if it occurs in the jaw itself, which is difficult to restore it.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is caused by an infection, is that you should have two assistants; one to hold the patient and another to extend the palate at its separated part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then return that fracture with a little finger while it is bent in the right position; and do not place it at a high point or a hollow.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you are thirsty for water, then return to bandaging the patient with a cloth or wool, and make it large according to your need; and extend and raise the palate and curve it towards the outside as you place it, so that it is bent in the right position.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot put the end of the palate towards the outside with a pointed object because it reaches the front of the neck, then return to bandaging the patient on his neck, and place one point of the palette on it.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant presses the muscle of the patient towards the separated part so that the end of the palate is raised up to the front of the neck; and then you correct the fracture and return to bend it with a little finger.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel pain in the palate and it increases, then return to bandaging that area with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you should use a different tool from those that you have provided water for, because you have removed the palate with one of them; and this instrument is a windpipe or a piece of iron, and its form is as follows:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it resembles an axe or a piece of iron whose shape is as follows: and its size should be according to the water you need for him; and according to the size of the bone or the thinness of the palate.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what you can achieve during the operation; and there should be two ends, one wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the infection that you have cut out of the bone is wide, and you are certain that it will not open again, then return to bandaging those two lips with a stitch.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you are afraid of an opening, then you should use cloth and powder according to the quantity of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if this wound opens again, return to bandaging it with vinegar and olive oil, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And when the bone is broken and separated, return to bandaging with flour of millet mixed with albumen from a roasted egg; and place it over the lion' back, and wrap that area; and reduce that bandage as much as necessary so that it does not cover your neck; and let it lie there with a long string attached to it; and place a cloth over that, and wrap that cloth around the patient's shoulder; and reduce that cloth as much as necessary so that it is not noticeable; and provide water for him.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And do not make the star of the broken bones too loose; and so, that you see the patient every day, when the ligament is softened or the star has already been loosened, then you adjust it and tighten the ligature.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then place the patient's sleep on his neck, and let them rest there in the morning a small cushion; so that he may be raised, his assistant being attached to his collar, and thus the fracture of the furcula is raised with respect to the muscle; or, namely, his arms tied to his neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the ligament unless it happens in the place immediately or an apoplexy, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the plaster if you see the face of it in water, and adjust it in strictness and restore that one and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And he is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some seen in certain men is made in the time of that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the Restoration of a Shoulder Fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula pie is broken in the place of his lat and not broken from him but the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken in the place of his lat - and it is broken in the middle of his lat - and is not known except by touch, then according to that figure of the fracture is sforzato your preparation and reducing that one according to the natural figure in all ways possible so as not to be able.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place on the fracture powdered ash of flour and cover it with a double cloth; and place the star of a thin table according to the quantity of the spatula, or little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Or if you leave the star is a concave in some of the places of the spatula, then do you fill that concave with ash, and place the star according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then tighten it with a long string from the constriction of the tight and the firmness of the star until it is not loosened from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And examine the ligament every day; and all those seen that is softened, another seen and tighten it and equalize the star if it has been loosened from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And strike the patient on his back.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or .25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then do you dissolve the ligament, and that you know assuredly because it is of the bones of which the beginning was not wetted nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you press the place of the bone and leave the ligature, then do you cut it off, and stop it, and make according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadness from an apoplexy without haste.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the Restoration of a Foot Fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot, in some cases, is broken in the middle of his lat and blood in it; but the extremities of him move as ciccadas and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And from the accidents of him when it is broken in the middle of his lat is that he declines to the insides and happens to him great pain, and difficulty in walking, and hoarseness, and fortitude, and vomiting blood; and is declared in his cavity in the bone that has been broken and is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of him is that he be raised on his back, and placed between the hips of him a cushion; and placed the muscles of him, and adjusted the ribs of him to two sides, subtil in the operation of him and in the equality according to all ways as possible so that it convenes to water, within which he returns the figure of the bone according to what is seen.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place the plaster on him and cover it with ash and place the star of a thin table made from straw or caligula and its similar in levitation, because you wrap that one in cloth; and subtil in tying that one to the bone that has been broken is not loosened; and go to the ligature according to roundness on some seen, and tighten it with strictness; and consider the ligature every hour, and when it is softened, tighten that one.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity causes to the desolation of that one you have corrosion or pruziment, or pain, or apoplexy that it happens in the place, then do you cut and destroy that one and root out the plaster and adjust what has happened by water according to the way of curing him; and reduce the plaster, if times to water the face; and adjust the strictness until he is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of Restoration of the Ribs When They Are Broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that the fracture of the ribs is made only in large places, which join to two; and from the extremities of them from the division in front does not happen to those, except by water because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of him is not hidden from feeling, but inquiry about him with the dizz.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration be such that it is united the fracture with the dizz according to all possible way, within which it is swallowed according to what is seen, and place the star of a broken bone with ash and tighten it with the star according to strictness; and consider the ligament every hour, and when it has been loosened, strengthen that one.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the insides, then it happens to the patient a great pain and punctures, so that it happens to him that has wept, and by water because the bone is covered with a membrane; and it happens to him difficulty in washing himself, and hoarseness, and fortitude; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Antips are prepared for that one with a good defense.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of it is said: Hide that you stop the patient' food that causes inflammation and ventilation, so that the belly may be inflated and extended, and the fracture may be driven to the insides.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	Or let us water it so that it does not cause to generate apoplexy by being hot, if it happens; and if it has already happened, then help to water.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And say of them that it is stopped being ventose and placed so that it sucks strongly; and is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the ventose may throw the superfluities to the place because of weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And say of them that it is covered place with a wool that has already been submerged in oil, and placed pulvil between the ribs until it is filled, which is to be tied up when wrapped that one according to roundness; and consider that it is cured the patient by the cure of pleurisy from food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes a great constriction to the patient which he does not suffer, and the bone is covered with a membrane by puncturing, then they fear above the patient, then hide that one on the place, discover the broken rib, and place there an instrument that keeps the cipher, whose recollection precedes, and that I write the bone according to convenience, and remove that one.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	Then place the two lips of the plaque, if it is great, on fire, and cure that one with plaster within which it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if apoplexy happens inside, then you cut and place in rosin oil and place on the place, and consider that it is cured by water that hides from apoplexy.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And be raised on his back on which he sleeps, within which it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the spine of two and the collar.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some have a fracture in the bones of the neck, and also to their atlanto, and similar to the vertebrae of the spine.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if water has occurred to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider, for often their muscles are already weakened and stupified and dead and cannot be moved or stretched or tightened, and when you press them with needles or pierce them with a needle, they feel no pain in them; then you will know that it is not healed, and in its disposition it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel a constriction in them when you touch them and pierce them, then you will know that the spine of the bone is saved, and the patient is healed with cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck wet, and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If then you find that they are already weakened, and water has occurred to them, which happens in the most, and when you stand on their two legs, they have a desire for urination and cannot; then you will know that it is fatal, and do not work in the patient's cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if there is no cause of those, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the patient' cure is that you pierce into the apex of the swelling, either by a pointed instrument placed on the back or a little hole made with a needle; pause over that for some time; and if it does not heal, then make another small hole.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then pause one of the pads that is comforting and exists, and tighten it over that with a thread; and order the patient to rest and be quiet, and not sleep on the bed where they are uncomfortable, so that it may heal.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a separation of the neck of the bone or some other cause that has already been separated from it, then cut off the hair on the neck and tighten it with a knot, and adjust the two lips of the wound, either sewing them if they are large; and if there is some inflammation in the wound, heal it with an ointment.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the last bone of the jaw is broken and it is the end of the fracture, then cut off a little hair from the back of the head, and join the bones together as much as possible with wires; and if you have them, place them in a pad, and tighten it; and pause a pad over it, and wrap it up tightly, and if you do not have one, wrap it up tightly.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel that the jaw is broken in him, then cut off a little hair from his back and tighten it to join them together; and if there is an inflammation in the wound, heal it with a cure that precedes.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the width.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the width are to be joined together, and if they break, then consider that their fracture is only a communication in their extremities, which are divided in the middle; and the patient feels pain at the place where it breaks, and his back is stupified when it is broken.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the patient' cure is that you put your hand on him, over the fracture, which is the shape of his body.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of him, then you are dressed with a second garment, which is joined to his shape in the middle, and it covers up to the fracture.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is long or has already declined to the split legs, then you are to make the patient lie on his stomach, prepared for your restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have joined him, place a pad on it, and then place the cloth over that, and tighten it with a knot; and if you are afraid of any movement or removal of the stelha, do not tighten it so much.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And if you have joined the shape with water that fills it, place a pad on it, so that the patient's shape is not tight, and order the patient to sleep on his two legs or open his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if there is swelling in him, then you stop his extension and cure in the middle of it, and place a pad on it that is to be heated; and if you want to restore him, do so with thread, and tighten it well; and if you want to heal the swelling, apply an ointment.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there is a separation of the bone or they are broken, then you join them together.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the jaw.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adductor is that which joins the shoulder to the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, your cure of him is in two ways, the one of which you take a long cloth and wrap it around his body; and the other that you take a short cloth and wrap it around him.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And bind them in two ends of a thread, and hang them from a high place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient sit on a chair; and then lift his broken arm over a long cloth, so that it reaches to the top of his shoulder in the middle of which you join it to the body by a curve of the cloth; and if your hand is broken, heal it with an ointment.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And let it hang over some difficult cause, or the patient eat meat in the split legs; and then let them drink soup that is hot, so that the fracture heals according to its shape; and if the fracture turns back, consider that you have done a mistake.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient be raised up on a chair, and his hand be suspended by a thread, and if your hand is broken, heal it with water, which is to open the fracture with water; and let each of them hold the sides of his body.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten it with thread on the fracture and with another thread over that, and let each of the two ministers open one of his split legs.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then consider that it be stopped at the middle of the thread on the shoulder; and that the other side be stretched from him.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is near the collar, then consider that it be stopped on the surface of the shoulder; and that the collar itself be joined to the body.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	And eat easily and work well, and if you want to join him, consider that it is done according to how it should be; and if you do not apply it correctly, then tighten it well, so that it does not cause swelling.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if there is swelling in him, then let it be strict for seven days, and place a woolen cloth dipped in wine over the swelling, and oiled with rose oil inside that; and consider that you tighten it well.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to tighten that is that you place a pad on the fracture, and then wrap a cloth around it; and then adjust his arms over the adductor, and place his hand above his shoulder.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And let the cloth be tight on the adductor, and adjust his arm so that it may be in place of a stelha, if you do not forbid water from causing a fracture in the bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use of sthels.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And that you place over the fracture a sthela that is stronger and harder than the others; and place between each sthela the distance of the finger, and make the length of the sthela according to the fracture in addition to three fingers' width from each end.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And place pressure on the sternum with the bandage that was described at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	It is necessary that your bandage be tighter in the area where the fracture occurred.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture has healed a little, make the bandage looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And when you have positioned the sternum and tightened the bandage as described at the time of restoring the limb to its position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, leave the sternum and bandage alone for seven days as described above.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And for three days, consider the limb in all parts so that no pus or swelling occurs; or food is not provided to the limb due to a blockage by the bandage; and then adjust everything according to what has been said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Perhaps if you are certain that there will be no cause for pus, then do not loosen the bandage until three days or more have passed.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And place the patient's feet on their heels, and their hands over their stomachs.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a bowl of wool in front of the assistant, and consider for an hour at night or during the day whether the broken limb is getting softer or not; and if the joint is softening, adjust it according to your abilities.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And provide food for the patient according to the order given before, not making it too soft at first, but thicker later on; and then stop providing food when you see that the food is becoming more solid.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	And it is customary for the assistant and the patient's legs to be tight for 10 days, then looser and water administered with the aid of a poultice that will heal them.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is stiff, then do not loosen the bandage and sternum for a month or more.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of Restoring a Fracture of the Arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones that are called the forks; one is small and is the one that hurts more, and the other is larger and is the one that is placed on the left side from the small one, from the top most part.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	The large fork can be broken easily by itself, or both forks together are broken easily.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small fork is broken underneath, the repair of it is more difficult, and its healing more prolonged.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the large fork is broken on the side where the fracture occurred, the repair of it is difficult, and its healing very slow.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse is when both forks are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Then, if the broken bone is the small fork underneath, it is suitable to the doctor, in order to restore it, that he pause a little extraction with ease before doing so completely.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	Perhaps if the large fork is the one that is broken, then stop and make an extra attempt to extract it with force.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both forks are broken together, then do so with greater force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And then, after having adjusted the arm and made an effort to extract it, place the arm on a cushion, and the hand of the assistant on the arm, higher than their shoulder, and the ear of the patient towards the ceiling, and the foot of the patient on the floor, with its toes bent.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And make a cushion in front of it or below it, so that the patient does not get tired.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arm of the patient on its side or bandage, and another minister does so on top.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor bends the bone in order to extract it; he then adjusts it according to the best position he can find.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if the bone is not straight in the fracture, then pierce it with a thread of your choice according to your abilities.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if the bone is separated by a tendon and does not heal as hoped for the arm's repair, then do it again according to the method described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	Perhaps if the fracture is old, have read Chapter XI of this unique treatise, and then proceed to the treatment described there.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then apply a poultice made of rozmarin and white wax, and make it thick but not too much, and place pressure on it with a bandage that is neither too tight nor too loose; and then replace the poultice and apply a paste made from powdery molybdenum applied with clay mixed with honey, and place pressure on the sternum; and let the bandage be placed over the fracture gently and tightly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You know that there are two sternums for the arm; it is broken in one or both forks together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then place your bandage with pressure on the site of the fracture with great force and vigour, and when it is loosened or tightened further, do so with less force as described at the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloth that covers the fracture should be soft and not hard or rough, and the string used to tighten it should be fine and not too thick as described above.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb and the bandage for three days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If there is any cause that requires a correction of the limb, and if you feel any pain from it, then do so with cool water as described above to stop the pain.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Then let the limb rest without pressure as described above, and then tighten the bandage again.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the bandage is already loosened and the bone has healed and looks like that of another person, then adjust everything according to your abilities.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider whether you should prohibit the passage of food to the limb due to a blockage by the bandage, because if you loosen it slightly and then stop providing food for some days, that could be the cause. And then tighten it again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	Perhaps if there is no cause of those described above, then you should not loosen the bandage until about 10 days have passed.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then hang the assistant by their arms with a rope according to their abilities, and let them sleep on their heels.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You know that this fracture is restored in 30 or 32 days, or very firmly in 28 days, and all of it depends on the patient's constitution and your abilities.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of Restoring a Fracture of the Wrist and Fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that with the fingers of the hand and the wrist fractured together, and you do not see any fractures towards the back.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there is a fracture on the back or front of the hand, then do so with the assistant sitting in front of you, and place their hand on an extended cushion.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the minister extends the broken bones and bends them to their best position.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then do not apply poultice or ointment if there is no pus; and then place the sternum over it according to its quantity, and you have wrapped that in a cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	Perhaps if the injury is in the center of the hand, then make a bandage that forms a loop and tie it tightly around the injured part; and if there is a sore spot on the back of the hand, then make a stinger with a cloth and apply pressure to it with the assistant' hand. And let the bandage be long.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the leather strap be wrapped around the hand so that the cloth is applied to the palm; and tighten it according to what covers it.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is outside the palm, then cover what is outside with two leather straps so that the hand is held and straightened; and tighten it so that the skin does not move; and place a third strap around the bottom of the palm, between the thumb and fingers, and bind it tight.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in one of the fingers, then if it hurts when it is bent, cover what hurts with leather and tighten it according to what covers it; and place a small strap on the top to prevent the finger from bending, so that the fracture does not move and does not hurt.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, then it is covered and tied according to its length; or all are tied together, which is better; or a small strap is placed on top, as we have said for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your recovery, and bind tightly the disposition of poultice applied and opposite to it - to the hand's operation - that covers when there is any cause of those, according to what covers it when it happens that it hurts.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the Restoration of a Fractured Bone in the Thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone has two ends, and when it is fractured, it is felt according to what covers it; and the part above and below the fracture is felt differently.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is made so that the skin is tightened over the fracture; and another strap is placed on top of the fracture, and the patient lies on his stomach and face down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the minister extends all the leather strap around its part according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	And if it is close to the edge of the thigh, then the leather strap is extended from the top to the bottom at the place where it is broken; and the other strap covers the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the fracture is close to the edge, then the leather strap is placed from top to bottom, and the extension is done at the part where it is broken.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor joins the bone with both ends together so that it does not move according to its natural shape; and he makes a union with a good joint; then cover it with poultice and tighten it, if there is no injury to the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	And if there is an injury in it, then you lie down for several days until the poultice has healed, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The tightening of it is done so: cover what hurts with a hard cloth; and fold it two or three times, and make it tight; then wrap the leather around it so that it does not reach the shin bone and the edge of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long and thin strap between the thigh and the leather around it, at the bottom of the thigh; and bring the ends of the strap to the top at the place where the strap is above; then turn it over the leather and the thigh so that it does not reach the skin; and tighten it.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place a strap around the thigh in the place where the fracture is; then place a leather strap on top of the bone.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill what is empty between the leather and the thigh with soft cloth, so that it is compacted.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then begin with a strong and firm tightening of the middle one, with three or four folds; and when you move your hand, the tightening should be looser and softer and moister.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend the ends of the strap to the bottom of the foot; and tighten it so that the leather does not move from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then leave it alone so that there is no injury to the limb or poultice or swelling; and if any cause of those occurs, then make a careful examination of it, and correct what has happened; and cover what has happened carefully, according to what covers it when it happens.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is large enough to cover it, then cover it as you can; and if not, remove it and cure with a poultice so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by what is put on top of it; and if it has been adjusted with care, as we have said in the Adjuctor of the Arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of it in such a way is not made any injury to the patient's walking; and if it has been restored alone, then another is applied that joins both limbs together; so that it must walk on foot.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the thigh is strengthened in 10 to 12 days or more a little; and all depends on the diversity of the complexions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Thigh Bone at the Bottom.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that if there is a fracture in the thigh bone at the bottom, it is felt behind; and it is close to the edge of the bone.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	And if there is a fracture in it, then it is only a crack or a break in the parts; and this is a poultice or a blister, and all depends on what covers it; and about what covers it.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is made so that what is broken is joined together in a way that it is not moved, according to what can be done easily and quickly; and it is put back together.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place a poultice on top of the round strap, if you feel pain from it; and tighten it with firm pressure onto what covers it.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures; and if there is a poultice on it, then do not move it at all until it has healed completely.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Bone.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You should know that there are two bones of the hip which one is large and thick, and it is called by its name as the thigh bone; and the other is small and thin, and it is called by its name as the pelvis bone.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And there is any fracture in either of the bones of the arms; and it is made so that it is restored as the arm is joined to it, and its operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if the two bones are broken together, then the pelvis is broken into many parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the smaller bone is broken in the middle, then the pelvis is broken at the front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the larger bone is broken, it is broken from above; and this is of those causes that are not familiar to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer a good extension and rotation of the limbs according to how they are joined together.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the pelvis is small and there are no injuries in it; then the extension should be made slowly and carefully so that it does not hurt; and you will be pleased with your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And if there is any operation to the arms, and you join their ends together so that all your operations are completed; then you will be pleased with your success; and you will not do harm by bending them from their natural shape; and you will consider those who are bent in half, and those who are bent in one part only; and if they are bent too much, then do not bend them so much.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And wrap each sheet of cloth in two folds according to its length, and place one over the hip bone of one side and the other on the other side, and both should be under the most base part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And place the two stakes in three places of the two extremities and at the middle, for with this stretching the spine is prevented from tilting to the right or left, and it is in a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already administered is a brew of fennel according to the length of the spine; and placed in it is the spine so that it maintains that of movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And mostly tell you to pour water on the fracture, and when there is water it is called gout properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider the spine every day and study it well after examination, and you keep it from swelling or inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those causes occur, then stop doing so to the water that is poured inside until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus bone and of the bones of the foot and of their treatment.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	To the talus bone does not happen fracture altogether; but to the bones of the foot happens a few fractures; and to the feet of the horse few happen, and do not happen to them except in the middle parts of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and these bones are raised up above each other, then return the patient to the ground prepared in this way as they lie down.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And place one foot above the water raised by those bones, and crush them, and squeeze them together in order to return them to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And place plaster and bandage over it, and place the abdomen of the foot on a small table whose two ends are raised.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And tighten it by stretching the foot downward, since you have wrapped it in cloth and from other causes from which you suffer.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days pass by, then untie the bandage, for you will see the bones crushed or they are dislocated, and the operation in those is done as with cauterization.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if any of them are dislocated, then restore them, and crush them in this way with an eye and recommend to you in the restoration of the same from the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And place the said crunched stake according to its length, and place it slightly on one side; and place the foot on this table that was recommended to you, and tighten it by stretching downward.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if the water that is crushed of the bones is two or three or more, then you place over each stake of its amount wrapped in a sheet of leather, and tighten the table at the most base part of the foot, and let it stand on one of the ends of the table so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient to you that you do not forget that you consider all causes which have been said to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and stop doing so to any accident with water that is poured.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the cheekbone of the woman and of the bone of the finger and of the jaw of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the cheekbone of the woman is crushed, then make her chin fall forward, and incline that to the side of the two a little, and let it be held behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the mother should wrap her cheek with a cloth, and make it fall forward with care; and the woman should be struck on the head, and raise the two cheeks little by little, since all water is gone from in front of the cheekbone as it falls forward and the crushed bone returns to its place.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place powder on the two cheeks, and when he wants to urinate remove the cloth from him with ease and urine, and return it and return it according to the same way as it was at first; and place it again on the second powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Let it be so for seven days or more, since that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a bladder of oil and tighten it over the cheek of him a cannula of cattle; and insert all the bladder into the cheek, and blow into the cannula with strength so that the bladder is inflated inside the cheek, since the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be filled with cloth and kept for a few days according to what we have said, so that it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the finger bone of the man or woman is crushed, then administer in the restoration and cauterization of the water that we have recommended in the bones of the ankle.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And the water that is on the right does not hide these close fractures and those of few happen, mostly it happens to the left in this way as it is used and understood by my book; since that fracture means to you in the main dispositions via right-handedness in the restoration and stricture of him, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the jaw of the man when it is crushed, take a cloth, and wrap the jaw up, and wrap it, and leave it wrapped for three days or more, so that it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the Restoration of Fracture of Bones When It Is Gout.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to you that the fracture happens with gout, and mostly if the bone is large such as it is the rib or the hip bone, or similar to this, then you protect yourself from gout, and frequently wash those parts with water; and if the condition of gout requires it of you, and testifies so with water after washing.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the gout is severe, then you should wash yourself in cold water as often as you desire, and sprinkle on him powdered pepper; and if another cause does not occur to you.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And begin to restore the fracture in that measure day, and do not prolong water, unless there is swelling.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if there is swelling slowly, then you leave the restoration of him until the ninth day, so that the swelling passes, and do not approach it until the third day after three days, since you will cause other accidents to happen.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the crushed bone is prominent over the shoulder uncovered, then you should wrap it up tightly and wrap it up tightly with your own skin; and do this slowly at first.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not prepared for him with your own skin and is out of place, then you should wrap it up with your own skin carefully; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight days and its width according to the quantity of gout; and by water is necessary for the doctor that takes three or four according to the amount that you require for the cure of all kinds of fractures in general.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And be round, and be in a few pieces so that it is not doubled by compression on him during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And be of acute extremity in which margin there is in its extremes; and the water that is on him to great extent, and most of it inside the parts of the split.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the way of him:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called in Greek "labra volentiaratelare", so it is a few words.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the end of him is raised by being kept from the end of the bone that is prominent.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And wrap it in a cloth within which returns the bone, and wrap it up according to an equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And thus strain yourself to fit the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is thin, and do not take that instrument for a good grasp, cover that you insert the end of that bone where the instrument has power of it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	May you not be able to reduce the bone from all of that, then cover it with what we have described above, or cut that with one of the sharp instruments we have described, or grind it by some means possible.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And place on the bone those that remain in it roughness and small scrapes.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone has been reduced and the pain that is intense burning in it goes away, then you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and at this point bring water for the patient, because you have relieved him of great relief.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your work of restoring the bone is complete, and then cover it with black styptic poultice, especially if it is summer, and do not put it on any whetstone or other cause that would scratch it, so that it does not cause corruption and decay.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer the medicine at the hour of the complaint of the restoration of the bone, and let the poultice be uncovered so that you can cut it with a sharp knife and use wrappings according to the quantity of the poultice.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful not to strain the poultice with the fracture, for the bad weather can cause the bad medicine, and fire on its own injuries, causing death or corruption or decay, and it will heal.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the patient's stricture is soft, different from the strictness of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the poultice is large or it is a bad poultice, and you fear about that accident of death that we have described, and pain in the place, then do not cover it with styptic poultice, but wrap it up in cloth, and put it on it.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the poultice has started to be born after one or two days, that it gives birth to a child, then you stop it with the cloth you had placed on it, and then administer water, because our custom is that we treat the poultices with four-part medicine and seeds for them.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And remember that you take off the bandage and consider the poultice each day at nightfall until it is consolidated and firm, and cover it so that the member is prepared in such a way that the decay runs from it to the joints with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	if the poultice passes more than a few days and it is not consolidated or separated from the bone, then you know that here are only temporary remedies to cover it up again.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	Of those temporary remedies that remain and separate from it, those that are not separated and place the member on it, causing pain to pierce yourself in order to cut them off, as you can do so.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If the poultice stinks or smells bad, it is an indication of corruption and decay, then you stop using one of those remedies that we have described above in order to cure it.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from that one in which you should stay silent and present your complaint: when the wound is large, apply to the member so as to cover it with a cloth, and use the bone of the thigh and of the arm, and do not assume attraction for it, nor extrude it by force because if bad medicine happens, death comes; and let him rest where he can recover, because strong pain comes every 20 days or 30. And then treat the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 21
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of a fracture trail.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This complaint of the cure of a fracture trail, and especially if it is near the joints, and it distorts the member's natural operation; and it weakens the member's power.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the complaint is recent and administer those medicines that have styptic in them, and bind, and see, and press, and rub, and seeds on it; or take some of them all or part, and tie up those around it tightly with a cloth, and tighten those over it for good contraction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let that tightening rest for a few days; and then take it off and repeat it again, until the complaint is relieved; or put a thin plate of lead on it tightly because lead has the property to remove all the inflammation from the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Or if the complaint has already become severe and strict, it is necessary to cut it off with a sharp knife, and then cut it off from its most prominent part, and insert a small scar or hole into it so that it can be relieved, and cure that one within which is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the restoration of a fracture when it has been restored, and then cover it with a cloth lightly, according to its natural nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture has been restored, and then cover it with a cloth lightly, unless: because of many causes of the bandage and of the ligature of it being not done properly; or because of strictness of the bandages too much so that nutrition is prohibited from reaching the member; or because of many useless treatments; or because of excessive movement at the wrong time; or because of a lack of rest for the body and of overcoming it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure of it is to feed the patient and make his heart tender, so that the pain increases in him, and administer a bath; and insert a thermometer and relief on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place a cloth on the member, so that the cloth brings the nutrition to it, or continue the treatment of it with warm water, so that nutrition flows and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the cure of broken bones that are restored with twists and prohibits their operation from what is covered on them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member has been restored to its nature of twists and bumps on the broken bone and complaint, and it is due to the shape of the member, but also the member does not prohibit its natural operation, then do not receive the word from that one that this member is a new twist.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are many bad medicine and restorative methods that have caused it on our land; and this operation is very dangerous and brings great danger to the signet of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the claudication and complaint are recent, then they are encrusted with warm water in which there are tender herbs, as well as leaves of mint and raisin of it, and is made with a liquid emollient, as well as with diallium well-cooked; or that it be a mucilage of mint leaves and is applied with a gray of gin or with an oil of caraway, and is plastered on it; or that they are grass figures and are trussed with threads of cologne, and similar to those of the medicines that are called firm consolidations.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with frequent light friction that it is most humid, and is administered movement of the member from beginning to end at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Might such a twistedness already be added from behind and so done strongly, and it turns into danger and makes the need for surgery, unless that pus above is removed and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and where excesses of the nodulation of that member are cut out with small incisors, and easily administered to that which is sollicited and studied.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is entirely of some of the joints of the limb, by which it is prevented from moving, and the figure of the member is changed, and great pains come to the malady and injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, unless it is immediately reduced, that reduction being delayed, the joint becomes swollen and stiff, and to reduce the dislocation is difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And therefore it is not convenient that it be heated or stretched in the hour of the application, because it gives rise to spasm and pains ledent.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when it occurs, unless you are prepared for the flebotomy of the limb, and then let the pus be taken away from it; and then the member is dipped in hot water and oil, and then reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member is cured with the water in which the memory will come back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	You have already seen and ordered the chapters on dislocation according to which the bone is broken; from the upper part of the body to the lower.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter.xxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of treatment of dislocation of the jaw of the patient's lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated the two jaws if not treated; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are removed from their place by little movement, and so softened a little; or they are dislocated completely and completely, until they are softened at the joint of departure, so that saliva does not run from the patient' mouth, and his tongue is wrapped up in its own tongue.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation of it is a little one, then in most cases it returns to itself by itself because of little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is whole and complete, then it is convenient that reduction be administered to it gently, and not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister has the head of the patient, and enters into it the food of one of his sides in the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is of that side; or he enters with both sides of his food, if the dislocation is of both parts, and the other sides are outside those which he engages; and he orders the patient to cease his jaws and execute those movements from any part; and he enguals the jaw and fixes it until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, and more so if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, so that the reduction of both is gentle, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, for thus have we said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then, when they have returned and are closed, and the mouth of the patient is not softened, then pause on those dusts of cloth with wax, and be made of wax and oil rose; and then be bound with ease with soft threads.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his two sides, and his head be between two pillows, so that he does not lick it to the right or left; and do not pass for force him to eat anything; let his food be a kind of meat, so that when the pains are increased and the jaws are no longer able to move, then let him lick what he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this is to be administered with ease, and not work on the opening of the mouth of the patient towards eating and drinking and calling, so that the jaw is closed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then sudden fevers and sodas occur, and the abdomen of the patient is very sore, and very much vomits pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see it, then know that it is a loss; and sudden death occurs to the one on whom it comes within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter.xxv.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of reduction of the dislocation of the fork and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The fork is not dislocated from its place by its continuity to the feet; and some are dislocated at the edge of it, and this is declared by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient throws himself on his two sides and widens his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then cut the place with your own hand with a firm grip, for it will return to you.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then pause on that plaster and dust, and make it strong.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the end of that which seizes and continues to it is never dislocated in any day; then reduce it and bind it up according to what we have said and according to your own equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then pause on that plaster, and dust, and tighten it, and order the patient to adhere calmly and to rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this treatment the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter.xxvi.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except according to three ways; and the one is that it is dislocated at the edge of the jaw at the edge of the lower jaw.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the edge of its own muscle, and this one is difficult; and it is not dislocated at the back of the shoulder, nor at the front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most often it is dislocated and goes out at the edge of the jaw behind, and in those in which the muscles are few, it is gently dislocated; but in those in which the muscles are many, it goes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And suddenly a great pain occurs in some people by a hit or a blow, and the muscle of it is broken from its breach, and is recognized by water that has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then you should not hope for it to return until it has recovered from its pain, and then proceed with its treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is very difficult to dislocate it when it is at the edge of the jaw behind; but so you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the other, for you mistake between them; and you feel the concavity of the muscle at the edge of the jaw, and the touch of the ear of the patient, and cannot reduce his own head to its place, neither can he turn it towards every side.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, then feel the foot or the leg of the patient, and do not be afraid to touch him; and do not turn your head away from you.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation is done a little reduction when it is cold and the patient is child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the hand of the patient to its edge; and then stops the ties behind the jaw of the patient, and raises the joint with strength to its place, and the minister raises the hand of the patient, and widens it above; and then stops those ties because they return gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If however by the water which we have mentioned does not return, and from the beginning of the dislocation, days pass, how much the patient is bathed in cold water and is given broths that soften it and make it less painful, with the same reason as if he had been stung by bees, and fenugrec and melilot are added to the water, and it is administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the patient is raised on his back and the head is turned so that it looks up, and the doctor raises his hand over the spine, and then lowers the leg with the foot that hurts, and another servant holds the other leg, so that the patient does not move. And another servant should hold the head so as not to move it, for it returns to its place again quickly.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce it in this way: and that there be presented a man who is taller than the patient, standing on one side of him, and intrudes his hand under the patient's foot and raises it up to the hip at the same time the patient is suspended in the air, and another servant should pull the patient's foot away from the hip.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If however the patient is in pain, then he must be raised up and it should be seen that this pain does not come from another cause, because the dislocation quickly returns again.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced with another way: and that a long pole be fixed on the ground, round in shape, made of mortier, which is not thick nor thin, and is placed next to the patient; since it is put on the head of the pole there are placed lions' skins, and the patient is standing according to the length of the pole, and another hand is extended from his other side with force, because the joint returns quickly to its place.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce him in any way that we have mentioned, then use this treatment: and that you take a long pole, the length of which is two brasses, and its width four fingers, and its thickness is reduced at the tip according to the shape:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place on top of the round pole a lion's skin, so that the pole does not slip under the patient' head.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the head of the patient is placed on the lion' skin, and the hand or arm is extended over the pole at the other end, and the tip of the pole is held between the assistant's body and the arm.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then the arm is placed on a step according to its width, and the hand is extended from one side, and the other body part is suspended from the other side, because the joint returns quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is complete according to each way that is possible for you, and then, waiting for a moment, suspend a rope of wool over the patient' shoulder; and then pour a paste made of flour and egg white over the muscle, so that it is rolled up again, and then tighten the rope around the shoulder with a knot; and let the member roll over the paste, and the hand should be tied to the patient's neck, and it should not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And since the patient' food is suspended little by little, until the member is comfortable, because it is less painful to the healing process of it.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then the food should be given in greater quantity every day and exercise made with it; and if it is not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated by moisture that happens to it or by some other cause, then three kinds of cauterization should be administered according to what has been said in the chapter about cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If even then it does not heal and seven days have passed, you should know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, have already split or become stretched or softened; and you should also know that the joint will never again be in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that part which is done, the reduction is made with a sudden movement and with force until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then another stricture should be administered to that part, and care should be taken for it to heal.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it happens that the healing is slow in the member and the movement of it is delayed, then the patient should bathe in cold water so that the gravity in it is removed and it returns to its natural state quickly.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of Treatment of Dislocated Shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with great difficulty and seems to return with great difficulty; and it is dislocated at all parts, mainly at the front part towards the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you when you see it, because the joint is bent and cannot bend the arm or touch its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And since you treat the shoulder, reduce the dislocation as quickly as possible so that it comes with a cold sweat; because if it comes with a cold sweat, the reduction is difficult and it does not heal completely; and more so when it is at the back parts, because it is worse than all the other types of dislocation, and more painful, and certain death awaits it.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the patient' hand should be extended with two arms, and the patient' arms should be spread out, and the sides of the body should be placed on the shoulder and let go, and push the joint with the palms of the hands together or with a finger so that it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is at the front part, then return it in this way so that it doubles its hand with its own hand, before touching it with the palm of the hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey to reduction, then administer violent stretching and do it strongly.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And that two ministers extend their arms, and hold the patient' arms in such a way that they are not moved again by the stretching.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then the arms should be rolled up again from all parts, because it is wrapped in a long folded cloth over the patient' hand, or limb.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his own hand, he should grease it with some oil so that it helps in lubrication of the joint with ease; and then push the joint with a sudden movement until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then the reduction of it is done when it is placed on a paste in which salt is made and egg white, and it is tightened with a string around it, and the arm is hung from the neck, and left alone for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then let it heal; and when the joint has healed in its place, then cut the member off from that part.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see that the joint is not strong, then repeat the paste and member, and leave it alone for some days until it is healed; and then cut it off.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If it happens that the healing of the joint is slow in its reduction, and the movement of it is difficult, then administer a bath with cold water and gentle friction, and pressure, until it is relieved; or place it on a resting position, so that it does not move; and then bandage it, and leave it alone for some time.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	E approva osta aquellà, et metaquell en banh; et quan suza, lahora tu fregua la junctura am fricació temperada, et approva itera super aquell' aleliati, sò è ronchal de motu, una vegjada, et secunda, et terzà a.,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	The corruption has already come about in the water for bathing, so it is limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, pause over that cow's wound wet and scarred with the knife and stretch over it; and make it several cuts, for that is wet and reduce to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of cure for dislocated shoulders, if they are from the joint that is between the arm and the breast.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Malassen of the breast some veils are displaced, and the reduction of dislocation is slight, and the opposite is for other joints, however it is necessary to make a reduction quickly in the hour in which they have been displaced, before the loc is pustular or has occurred pustula on it caut.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of dislocation is that you pause the joint of the breast on a table and the minister extends the breast of him, and places the navel or the palm over the vicinity of the joint, and presses it in so that it returns to its location.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However it is necessary to consider if the palm has already been shown on the belly of the breast, then the patient pause the two of his hand on a table as well the extension and the reduction; and if the dislocation is precedent they are the two of the hand, then is the position of the breast' hand intricately on the table, so that the navel of the joint is covered.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And then if he returns soon enough, it is good; and if not, then stretch that with a cloth giving way to the pustula and leave him; and do not repeat it again, because otherwise, he does not suffer nor can it be cured after the reduction has been made.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However the joint is according to its tortuosity; and there is no cause for the patient, but his hand is softened and cannot be stretched by any means; then know that nerves are thin or twisted, and then it is not necessary to stretch them with a sharp instrument at their place and firmly gives them a push there.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then if the malassen has returned, then pause over it the cloth which we have re-used, and leave it and stretch it by hand for three days; and then untie it and exercise the breast.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if its motion is slow and occurs in it any gravity, then make him stretch that with a tail of water and some cuts, so that he is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of cure for dislocation from the shoulder.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some cuts are dislocated the shoulders at all.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of these shoulders is displaced from the two of the hand or the belly of him, then stretch that and press the displacement of it with a towel in your hand, so that it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the tip of the shoulder, and suspend that above the part to which it has been displaced, and leave that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then support that and stretch it in so that he is stretched out by day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when he is not sore the next day, then stretch that again according to its narration, and do not cease to untie that during the day and to exercise its motion, and stretch that at night; and make it for several days so that it is stiff.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same for him if it is displaced at the belly of the breast, and stretch that to the part and make the first operation on it, so that he is cured.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And in the same way do for him if it is displaced at any other joint.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of cure for dislocation of the shoulder's spines.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it occurs to any of the spines of the shoulder or neck joint, and then two more spines are removed from their places, then there is no cure for him, because death is sought by the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of it is that the patient's ejaculation is involuntary and cannot be retained, and some cuts are made on some members of him or his two legs or two arms, or one is removed from its place, because then it is cut into four parts; or one spine is removed from its place, for with cuts it is cut.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that has been cut is now made into pieces behind and is called gelbozitad.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	However the cure for him is that you consider if it occurs to him from his youthfulness, because then there is no cure or treatment for it at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	However in that which is caused by a crash or a blow or an analogy to those, the Ancients have spoken at length about the remedies for it, of which some return with great difficulty; also I have seen and improved on it from another which I will tell you, because of my nearness to the matter, my quickness in explaining it, through which I made him understand and he understood.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in the gelbozitad which occurs from the part ahead of the foot, there is no cure or treatment for it; and in the same way for that which has been made into two parts.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not cured except the one which occurs to him at his hand, of which I have re-used again.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that is that the patient be stretched out on his face over a table higher than his head, and an instrument which does not touch his feet be used in order that it should not be wet.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then place a strong stick upright on the ground at the edge of the foot next to the table, and another in the air above the head, and place another stick between his feet in the other hand.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	Then the minister holds one stick, and does not hold it firmly; and the other minister holds the other one according to its form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap about the head of the patient and leave the hair-leap free; and extend the edge of the hair to the stick which is intended for the head, and stretch that; then stretch the other hair with your hand to the other end of the foot, and adjust all the hair; and tie those again in the other stick which is intended for the feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then the minister drops and stretches the hair to the edge of the stick, and does not hold them firmly in that place; but they are tied again into their places with the stick which is intended for the feet, and the hair is not held thus.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	Then the navel or belly is placed on the spine according to its strength so that it returns, or is placed on a table, and then it is adjusted on the table so that it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this form, then take a table whose height or length is in the air of three brases, and cut into the wall where I have said that it is near to the patient a place where the edge of the table comes in.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then pause the tail of the table on the spine and the navel or belly is placed on the other end, and stretch it in so that the spine is cut and it returns to its location.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the tail which is rolled up with the hand; and it is that you stand on the ground and place the head of the patient in the back of two sticks, whose length is a palm, and make it in any stick go across the ground and come back, and place one so that he does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let one turner hold a round stick on which the thistle is turned, and let it be twisted in both ends of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a loop in which the thistle is formed, and its length is a palm more than that one is twisted; and there are similar loops in the other two sticks.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tighten the ties that you have stretched on the patient's feet in the loop in which it is necessary to place the cap of the foot, and the ties that you have stretched on the patient's thighs in the turn that it is necessary to place on their legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each loop should be turned by a minister with his hand, and the doctor crushes the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then when the spine has returned, and the place is closed, it is necessary to apply a poultice of dried blood on an album of milk, and then cover it with cotton; and then place it over the poultice of dried blood on a table whose length is six inches or more than that, and its width the quantity which covers the site of the pain, and over the split of the spine so.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	Then tie it with a tie that we have said, and use the patient' nutrition of subtle substances before it is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any imminence in the site at the end of the healing, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and cool by means of the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already is administered in that place lead-plaster.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases there is imminent danger to the latter of the two spines of the back, and it is due to that dislocation; and it is that bone which we have already said you should not touch, for it will make you commit a mistake in this medicine, because it would cause great pain.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not cause anything other than dislocation only, and it does not happen in those places that happen in the other joints due to small movement and curvature.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four ways, because it is dislocated in the insides, or in the outsides, or in the front, or behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And most often it is dislocated in the inside parts, and rarely in the front or behind parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of the dislocation of it in the inside parts is that when you adjust the back of the patient on its back, it is longer and the heel is closer than from the healing, and the patient cannot bend his head because of the loop; and this site is where the loop comes out with a bang.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that in which you have a dislocation is to those parts that are opposite to this accident; because the accidents of it are opposite to that.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that in which you have a dislocation is when it expands its own back according to complement, but on the other hand does not bend so much that it hurts him from behind, and if he walks he cannot stand on his feet; and his urine is repressed and his body is aching, and his walking is difficult over the floor.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that in which you have a dislocation is when it does not expand the back, and he cannot bend his head behind him because he bends his back; and the back is shorter than that one, and the body is aching, and this site is where the loop comes out.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of these spices of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already come out with its own medicine; and it does not happen in this cure of everything; and it is not necessary to make a mistake in this case.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in that case, where the dislocation is recent and is one of the four kinds of dislocations, then you should turn the joint and extend it in both directions, to the right and to the left, because it returns very easily and does not require any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a minister very strong and extend the back of the patient from its outside, or to his sides, or with a tie that is tied on the back of it; and another minister should stretch out the hand of the patient above his feet, so that his hands touch his toes; and another minister should tighten the tie on the root of the leg, and another should hold the foot.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is extended from him or from the inside to the joint of the rib, or from the back to the split of the hip bone; and the other minister should hold the foot.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And all these extensions are made in one way, so that the patient's body is raised on its back with his feet on the floor and his legs hanging down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This kind of extension is particularly good for all four kinds of dislocations.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns in that water that we have said, it is good; and otherwise, then all kinds of water are necessary for this cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of itself when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the inside parts, then the patient should be placed on its back; and then pause the ties on the root of the leg, and extend the tie in front of the split of the rib to the outside part of the hip bone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister should hold the arms of the patient, and open the large site of the patient' back and extend it in front by violent extension because that returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this kind is the most light treatment for which this member is reduced, compared with other spices.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is not done in this way, then the two feet of the patient should be tied together with a strong tie, gently, on both legs and on both heels.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each should be four fingers, and the back of the patient should be extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the patient' back should be suspended from the top of the pole, and it should be at its maximum; and the length of the patient should be two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then order a young man who is strong to hold the head of the patient, and he should be suspended from the other side by another young man, and the other young man should bend the neck of the patient with a firm chain because the joint returns quickly to its own place.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the self-reduction, when it is dislocated at the outside, then the patient should be placed on its side according to what we have said previously; and the tie should be tightened on the back of the patient specifically, and on its feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two poles should be put down, one under the feet of the patient and the other on top; and three fists should hold the pole to which the patient is tied, so that it does not get wet by water spilling over from the patient' body, because the extension to the outside parts should not be made by pulling the pole.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then any minister should extend in his side, and the doctor should put his hand on it and adjust the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you obey backwards, madame will be much larger; and otherwise, pause over that carefully and thus as we have said in the gourd by that constriction.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May serve that the patient lies on his side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in front, then serve that the bed be slightly extended, and according to this narrative place over the buttock; and the doctor places his right palm on the patient's lower back, and approaches the other palm, and extends it over the lower part of the leg at the hip joint.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the leg, then do not serve that the patient be extended to his legs, and raise him off the ground; keeping him on a hard surface, so that with a stretch he is separated from the two limbs, as we have said above in the stretching of the foot over two stretches; and it is on its face, and the joints are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And serve that be administered pressure to the joint with a table at the place where it is in pain.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, when the reduction is completed in the manner described above - and the sign of the reduction of his leg is not hidden from you, that you extend two legs from the patient, and when you see them separated as much as possible, then know that the second limb has returned - and then you adjust two cushions and place a mattress, and stretch the foot in such a way that the thigh does not hurt; and attach the leg to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then return the limb and the mattress, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those stretches in a vestment, then know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and let the patient go home.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and stretch it again according to your first stretch, and let that leg rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then return it, and cause it to walk slowly on two feet or four, until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of treatment of dislocation of the hip joint.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The hip joint is dislocated according to three ways, because it is dislocated at the front, and at the back, and at the sides more than at the front; and it is not dislocated in front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is that you command the patient to place his leg on the cushion; then know that the hip joint is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these ways is that you pass under the patient's leg, and then that he extend his leg if he can over it; attach the two thighs to his face, and place his foot between the two thighs on his back; and then serve to attach his hip joint to your palms, and stretch those between the two thighs on his back with strength, and another minister extends his foot until the hip returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of recovery is that his leg should touch the cushion with a light, non-laborious movement.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then return it and stretch it again against the cushion, and attach those to a piece of cloth for three days or four, then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient for walking for some days, until he is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	You may serve to administer strong stretching to the joints in advance of the reduction that we have said above in the treatment of the foot.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter III.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the thigh joint.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The thigh sometimes becomes painful with a little movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the second intention, and the dislocation of it happens either at the back or at the front.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is that he feels his thigh swelling in the direction of the dislocation.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment of movement is that it should be a gentle and easy extension and should be stretched until it hurts, then return it to its place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the treatment of him when it is dislocated according to the second intention, serve to make a patient lie on his side, and have one strong and capable minister at his hip joint, and another behind him in his place.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then come to you with the right hand on the top of the patient' foot, and with the left hand at the bottom of the foot in the place of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then throw the foot to you with the right hand, and stretch it with the left arm for two times, and then support it on the right arm as it extends.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Then serve that he make two stretches according to what we have said.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then support the foot on the third stretch, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Then if he returns in one or two stretches according to this method, and if the foot is stretched again, then do so, because that one returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	You may serve to reduce the patient on his back with water that we have recommended, then stretch one leg over two feet on the ground, and support a cushion under it, and wrap a cloth around the patient' foot, so that he does not slip.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then the minister of the patient places his cushions, and another minister extends his foot against extension from his hip joint or leg that rests on the neck of the foot; then extend that leg against the extension of its own limb, and the cushion under it, so that the knee does not hurt; and the other minister serves to support the patient' foot with a cushion, and the cushion is placed between the legs of the patient.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor swallows the dislocation with his hand, and another minister places the cushion between the patient' thighs, because the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Then, when the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction, then return to stretching and stretch it with force, and attach the leg to the limb with a strong bond.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Then you must be careful of the nerves that run behind the thigh joint, so that the limb does not hurt when it is stretched.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave that leg for two or three days; and if the limb is softened, then stretch it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then return that leg in the third day or in the fourth, and do not allow the patient to walk for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	You may serve to walk ahead of that space if it is safe that the dislocation is not over him dissolved and corrupted, and do not take treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you serve him in the preparation of his food as we have said above in the treatment and preparation, then do not serve to him until he is healed and strengthened.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter IV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of treatment of dislocation of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Then that which is dislocated should be stretched a little bit before reducing it; and if this is not difficult, do so gradually.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	You may serve to make a patient lie on his side or on a table at the place where the dislocation is, and let him walk as if he were going.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then place the patient on his feet, and pause his foot over that which causes pain, then support it with a foot under him as if he were walking; and let him walk gradually until he is healed, and see that he is not in difficulty in walking.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And place the feet of the patient on a table that takes up all the length of the leg, which has two heads, and tighten it strongly and firmly for three days; then remove it and make him rest from walking for four days, until he is well and his recovery is ensured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the dislocations that are caused by a splint or by a fracture or by some joint disease.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When this happens because of some cause and you engage in the treatment of that and in the restoration of it, then watch out for success or failure.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And do not imagine that because you are skilled in the art, you can be proud and impatient or arrogant; and that you use only mild medicines to ease the pain a little, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but hope for salvation from destruction, relief from suffering, and some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Then try very hard to restore it at the beginning of the cause, before the patient develops a gouty attack.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the member returns quickly as you wish, then administer the medicine that eases the pain a little and treats the plague by applying cold water to it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is a fracture and you find the bones separated, then you should set them in place, and do so on the patient who has had simple gout before, in places where those with gout are commonly found.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And be careful and avoid according to your ability that of the instrument in the pathways of danger as it is preceded by my prediction; for you are better off serving your Lord, and remaining permanently devoted to his glory, and more salutary for his true creatures at the right time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-Bucaisi, clearly explaining what God wants.
Amen.	Amen.
