O thou, my very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its expositions and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely 'surgery'.
And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is foreign and unknown throughout, the knowledge and skill have perished, and nothing remains but small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and knowledge is distant.And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely  'surgery'.
Now it seems to me that I want to bring this text to life together with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the tools for cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because no good hand masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And it is necessary for those who practice medicine to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins, and the number of bones, and their dislocation, and the movement and rest of the veins from which they issue.
And because Hypocrites says that what is known with the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, should be careful that he does not fall into error and harm people; just as I have seen many of those who interfere in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who opened an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and opened the arteries in the neck; so much blood poured out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the position of the disease and the size of the stone; if they cut it out, he would die.
And I saw another man who was treated by a doctor from our land, who had a broken leg and with the break had a wound; and the ignorant doctor held the break over the wound with a splint with great force, and left no padding on the wound, and left it thus with a bandage; and he commanded that it not be unbandaged. And he remained thus until the leg was completely swollen and the foot, and it came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come to unbandage the leg; and when I undid it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was entirely ruined.
And I saw another doctor who opened a deep abscess, and then it became inflamed due to the wickedness of his lord.
For when a canker is free of melancholy humor, one should not touch it with iron unless in such a place that one can completely remove all that is corrupted.
And so, dear son, you need to know that the work of the hands is divided into two parts: that is, in work where there is danger in various situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is danger.
So it is necessary for you to be careful so that the foolish crowd cannot talk badly about you.
Then take your weapons in the name of Christ, and undertake your maladies lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave the terrible diseases of grief behind, and put away the things that make you doubtful, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens says in some of his warnings: "Do not take on a dangerous illness unless you are called a foolish miracle."
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it is the chapter arranged from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and of the tools for cauterization, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and of cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter arranged with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twistings, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I say something about the nature of aid and the harm done by each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest discussion and most subtle science, and the secret responses; and the majority of the sages spoke about this, and agreed on it; and I am content with a little of their words, for I desire brevity.
I say that cautery aids universally in all complexes where there is matter, whether the complex is hot without matter or dry without matter.
In a hot and dry complexional matter, some people devised and said that cautery is of great help; and others said the opposite: that cautery is not worth it in a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat in a hot disease, nor by dryness; and those who said the opposite, said that cautery helps greatly in a hot and dry disease that comes to humans. For when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
And yet, I do not recommend this for those who have not experimented and who do not know the treatise on cautery well, or the diversity of people's complexions, the causes of their illnesses, their prognoses, and the seasons; for other complexions we are not afraid, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the doctors agreed on using cautery.
And know, my son, that cautery combines fire with secret remedies and is of greater benefit than burning cautery.
For fire is simple, and does not spread beyond the cooked member, nor harm another member if it be properly applied.
Burning medicines travel from one member to another by separation, and bring about the healing of the diseased member with great difficulty; and sometimes they kill the patient.
Fire, because of its heat and the goodness of its substance, does not harm if there is no excess.
And this I have found by experiment and by long service and study of the art, and having placed myself under the guidance of truth, that is why I excuse myself for the length of my speech, for I do not wish to take from you the secret which is hidden in fire, nor the quality of its work, how it heals the diseases of the body, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration; therefore receive it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauteries should be performed, and they chose a suitable day.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmfulness underneath is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as the foolish do; for the illness that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say so, but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not medicines that move the complexion, and dry up the humors that cause pain, and are better than medicine for their swiftness, and for the virtue of their action and their lordship.
And it is possible that the illness comes sometimes according to the complexion of the disease and its location and its strength; and are gathered in it the excesses by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cautery is administered where there is little excess and moisture, as with dental cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that rarely happens.
And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine; but it is true, yet they do not believe that cautery is worth more than medicine, and their intentions are false, for cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cure in any disease and they are ineffective, then we administer cautery and it works. Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancients said that cautery with a gold instrument is gentler than with iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that the heat of cautery does not cause swelling, but this is not true, for I have tested it and found that it is true in some people; and cautery with gold is more effective than with iron, as they said.
Nevertheless, when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly; and if it is heated too much, it is done in the fire; and thus there are many difficulties.
And because of this, we use fire cautery, which we have made suitable for our work.
Now I have arranged this chapter from head to foot so that the way is easier to find.
of the olive cautery
This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness in the brain, and there are two reasons for this: one is due to a disease called "soda", and the other is due to many humors that flow from the head to the eyes and ears, as well as for many diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient is purged by a cleansing, dissolving medicine for 3 or 4 nights, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can bear; then have the head of the patient shaved.
Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his knees; then place the root of your palm between the roots of his nose between his two eyes; and let him where it will hurt most, then burn the cautery, which is called 'olivare', for this is its form:
And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while turning it; then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot for a broken bone; if you don't see one, repeat the cautery until you do as I've told you; then take some silk and place wet cotton inside, and apply it to the spot; leave it for three days; then apply an ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon' until it heals.
And the ancients say that when a wound is left open for longer, it purges more; and for this reason, they advise using leeches.
And some say that one must let the cautery burn so much that part of the bone is burned, and then one should heal what is burned of the bone.
And others say that one must let the cautery burn so much that it makes a hole in the bone as wide as a woman's needle, so that the humors can issue out; and then one must leave the wound open for a long time; after which one should heal and soudge it.
And these two ways of cauterization do not seem good to me at all, except in those where there is a fear of death; and I believe that I should leave it, for the shoulder is weakened by continued dislocations, as we witness in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak from nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more saving and mild, then I use this together in healing.
of the old pain in the head
When throughout the head chronic pain comes and lasts a long time, one should use herbs and pills for the ill person, which are called "cochie", as well as poultices, oils, and plasters; and if they perform the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it does not help.
Take care that the head of the sick person is of a strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize under that fire cautery a little bit which we have mentioned above.
Afterwards, cauterize each horn of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and make 1 cautery in the place called "vasselz"; there is a place where one applies leeches; and lighten your hand so that you do not go all the way to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain with this cautery than with the others, and I will tell you about it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be more subtle than those used for cauterizing the middle of the head, and that is the shape:
of the cautery of the head When sudden pain occurs in the head, and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and all other remedies I have described in the division of diseases are tried without success: then cauterize according to two methods, that is, with a hot iron and with fire.
For the cautery with a hot iron, take an egg and remove the shell and cover it with a bandage in two places on both shoulders; then make the temple where the pain is located so that you can place the egg under the skin. When it is placed, tie it tightly and leave it for 12 hours. Then loosen it and draw it towards the egg, leaving the wound as it is for two or three days. Then apply a cotton bandage soaked in butter until healing occurs.
After the wound has healed, if you see fit, use some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
The fire cautery is performed as follows. Heat the cautery, whose shape is as follows:
And it is called "cauterization" because the head is made in the shape of a lid or cover, with a slight curve, and in the middle there is a small aperture; and place it over the painful area, and hold your hand and twist it slightly so that half the thickness of the skin is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, as it is out of control and flows profusely with blood.
Afterwards, place cotton in the wound, and keep it there for three days; then place wet cotton soaked in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called "culter", do so at the very tip, and be careful not to touch the artery in this hemorrhoid which is not old.
of hemorrhoids
When you treat hemorrhoids as we have previously discussed in the sections on diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine with fire or iron do not help, then you should heat the cautery called  "culter" until it is white; and sign the painful area with a line half a finger long, and lift your hand once, and press down so that you do not touch the artery and it reaches the bone; and be careful of the mandible that bites when one chews, and the nerves do not react so that there is no pain or spasm in the patient, and be careful of the flow of blood from the artery when it is cut, as the cutting causes great fear to those who are not familiar with it, especially if they are not experienced and untrained; and leave the wound open for a while; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding of the artery when it is cut, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the end of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have described in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of ear pain from coldness
When there is ear pain from cold, and one has applied dissolutive medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called a "point", of which this is the shape:
After puncturing all around the diseased ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move slightly upward from the root of the ear once you have marked the place to be treated; and there should be 10 punctures around each ear; then treat the area until it heals.
of mouth torture
There is no cautery for ulcers except those that cause phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not use cautery on appearances that come from dryness and inflammation of nerves.
When you treat this appearance of torture that comes from phlegm and discharges from the head, and gargling does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with .iij. cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little beyond the temple, and the third in the junction of the two lips; and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and cauterize the top of the ear just below the horn of the head, and another cautery in the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery on until half of the brain is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And the appearance of the knife is as we have said before, but it should be a little more subtle and the blade should be a little thicker; then treat the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do 4 cauteries: 2 on the 2 horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one in the place called "vassels" as we have said before; and do the last cautery over the mouth of the stomach. Treat it as we have said before.
of quicksilver
For this disease, give the patient large pills and cleansing herbs for the brain; then shave the head of the patient all over, and apply a liniment made from mustard seed as written in the treatise on liniments; and here is how to do the cautery: perform it as I have said.
If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, do 3 cauteries on the head going down to the neck, and there should be a distance of 2 fingers between each cautery; and treat him as the others, and if you see fit to adjust, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, do another 2 on the horns, and treat him as before until he is healed; and let the cautery be called "olive", as I have said before.
of the coldness from the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and other things as we have said before; then raise the head of the patient, and cauterize in the head and over each eye, and one behind and three upon the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, then do four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the deepest part of the heart is burnt, and lift your hand; after that cure it until it is healed, and use the cautery called "olive oil" which we have mentioned before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and first they must cleanse the brain of hair and other things that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, cleansing the brain often with good meats; then the king will cut off the head, and do to him .i cautery according to what we have said before, and .i cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the illness is forceful and suffering, do cauteries as I have said for paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said.
If the illness is in a child, do to him 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
When through the cause of melancholy there are excesses or corrupted moistors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with mild cauteries as we have said for paralysis.
And if through the cause of melancholy there is a decline towards melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give him something to drink that will cleanse the brain according to what is previously described in the division.
After taking the head of the patient, make a well-made pad in the shape of a circle, and place it on the head; then tie the pad firmly in place, and let the patient cross their arms; then present the linen, and apply melted wax of old bees; and heat gently so that the patient can bear it; then remove the pad from within the head, and let it cool; do this for the patient once a week with good governance until they are healed.
Or, if you see fit to cauterize it, make many small points on the cautery tool. This cautery method moistens the brain significantly; then place wet cotton in beeswax and tallow of young cows.
of their eyes When eye problems first appear with the signs that I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient drinks that cleanse the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Afterwards he orders him to raise his head, and he cauterizes in the middle of the head, and makes 2 cauteries on the 2 temples if the dislocation of the eye is in both; or a single cautery if it is in one. He then closes all the veins and arteries below the heart with the cautery, and the cautery should be as long as the width of the temple. And beware of bloodletting, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it as best you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision, the cautery that you should use to stop it; and sometimes a cauterization or incision is made underneath the 2 bones at the back.
of the body from tears
When the tears are old and habitual, and are on the veins or arteries that appear outside the head, and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I said earlier, descending to the eyes: 1 cautery in the middle of the head, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries or incisions underneath the 2 bones; and if there is a need for more, he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
where the body weeps from within the eyes
When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of leeches; after that, bleed the head, and cauterize it with olive oil at its middle; and apply two cauteries made from a cautery called "clavilis" on the two joints, one under each ear; and beware of the artery so you do not cut it. And this is how the cautery called "clavilis" is formed:
When the papery film of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called  "olivare." And this is how it is formed:
And if you see two warts on the body as long as the sorcerer's hair; and do not take your hand away until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that points the eye Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are converted to the opposite direction, and prick the eye, and they perform cauterizations according to two methods: that is to say, with fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a warm bath; afterwards draw on the paper a figure that is like the leaf of the myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs; then moisten cotton with egg white and mallows on the eye, then heat the cautery whose shape is there:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have drawn little by little many times so that the skin is burned there, and the sign of healing is that you see the paper retire, and the hairs rise to the tip of the eye; then lift your hand and leave it thus for 3 days, then moisten cotton in butter until the burn is healed; afterwards dress with ointment until it is healed.
And if afterwards the hairs come again, and the paper is softened then recommence the cautery in that same place, just as you did before; and if the hairs are bald, then cauterize it until the paper is raised to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, then make parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live charcoal, each one-third, and grind them together well; and make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape that you made like the myrtle leaf, and put it under the eye with cotton moistened in egg white; and if the ailment is only in one eye, do it in one, and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened in vinegar of eggs; and let the patient's hand be in a warm bath and place your finger on the medicine, and press a little and move it all the times that the patient feels biting from the medicine, because he feels biting as well as from fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger. And when the bite has passed, raise the area affected and examine if you see the skin raised as it was by the fire or incision; if so, all is well. If not, apply more medicine to the area where the medicine did not take effect, until your work is even and your eyes are focused; then place wet cotton in butter on the burn until the scorch is cool, then clean the area with an ointment called "diaphenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful that the medicine does not get into your eyes. And if the skin becomes soft afterward and the hair grows in the eye, then restart the medicine on the area that is softening properly, just as you did before; then clean it until it is healed; and this is the way of the myrrh fuel:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, your constraints should be. And do not deviate from the right path for one who is skilled in this art.
on the treatment of fistulas by cautery
When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should apply cautery according to the following method.
Instruct the patient to tilt their head towards their healthy side; and have an assistant hold their head steady in your hands so that it does not move or turn; then place cotton soaked in white wine or in juice of peony roots over the eye; next, heat the cautery instrument which should be shaped like a penknife blade, with a curved point, or like a tent peg; but however, the curved one is better for your task.
Then press the fistula if it is open and drain any pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, pierce it and draw out any fluid; next, place the hot cautery instrument firmly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the spot below the eye, so that your hand does not shake; place the cautery in the fat of the eye socket and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of cautery to the bone, it would be good. If not, then restart the cautery again once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days; after that, put on moistened cotton in lard, and cure it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then put on corrosive medicine as much as the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what he would come to in his kingdom.
And there is one kind of cautery for fistula that some of the ancients said. Go to the fistula, and cut the site; after that, put a thin camel's hair in the slit; this is where the form is: and they make the quantity of a bean; and hold your hand on the camel hair firmly, and do not move the patient so that the melting wax does not flow into their eye; and it is necessary to put moistened cotton in olive oil on the eye of the patient; the wax will then close the fistula and heal it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have described, it is good. If not, then one must administer a clyster to the nose, and bring the fistula back into the body of the nose according to what is appropriate in its own place.
cracks in the lips Many times, cracks occur in the lips that are called "hair," especially in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections, and the treatment is not effective, then heat a small knife-like cautery according to this shape:
And place it gently in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat, or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, causing swelling and a boil, and it becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have described in the section on incisions, and it does not help: then you should use a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the opening of the fistula, hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and from behind; and do this once or twice, after treating it as we have described in the section on treatments, until it is healed; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then you must expose the area and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it does not help, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heat the cautery, whose form will be described below, in such a way that you place one end on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside, holding it so that the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; after lifting your hand, repeat with the cautery according to your desire; after filling the mouth of the patient with warm salt water, let him gag for an hour and spit out the fluid.
And in such a way the tooth that was loose is now firmly fixed, and the gums made soft are restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried up.
of toothache
When toothache comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cauterization is needed in two ways: with a cautery of butter and with a fire cautery.
Cautery with butter: take the butter from a cow's milk, and attach it to the end of a spoon made of iron or bronze; then take some cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent pole, and moisten it in the butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools down; do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see that the butter has moistened the cotton, and apply it to the aching tooth, and place a hot piece of iron on top so that the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
The cautery together with fire is such that you take a bar of iron or brass, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, whose form will come later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this several times, for the pain will be removed that very day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in preparation for this cautery, and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery:
When scrofula is caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and is unresponsive to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery until the form comes later, and have two openings for the fumes to exit from the other side of the cautery; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, so that it reaches the bottom of the abscess. If the abscess is small, use a cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for 3 days; then treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient must be purged first with solubilizing medicines; after that, make cautery at the root of the throat, and beware of going as far as the throat, and not burning the heart but just a little. After that, make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and use the cautery called "clavicle", of which we have given the form earlier; and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
of the tongue When all lung diseases are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is chronic, then make two cauteries on the chest in the hollows; and another cautery between the breasts, and use the cautery called  "clavicle" according to the form given earlier.
And if you see it, make cautery in the point with all the cauteries that are called  "points", of which the form is given earlier for ear diseases; and let the points be to .xxx., or as far as around. After that, cure the area according to what is said before, and let there be three cauteries according to this form:
And for this reason cauteries are lighter when you do them three times.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, ease the patient's back and side; then lift the heart, which is within the thymus, with the fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, light the cautery which has two needles, here is its form:
and cautery the head until it pierces to the bone, and let the shape of the cautery come together with four cauteries; and this is why the cautery is made with the cautery that has three wires, so that the shapes of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three wires:
And sometimes it is adjusted above that one nerve so that there are eight cauteries.
Afterwards place on the cautery a little powder with salt; afterwards let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is fully healed.
And if it is dislocated above, whatever happens, then do cautery on the thick part of the clavi- cautery, or many cauteries piercing. For the jointure is closed up, and moisture is driven out, and the patient healed.
of the cautery for phlegmon
The ancients said that one should make cauteries for phlegmon from roots of aristologus, and in such a way: take a root of aristologus, long, the largest you can find, and dry, as thick and as long as your fingers; moisten it in oil, heat it up, and cauterize. One cautery between the Adam's apple and the throat, and two small cauteries going slightly lower into the part under the beard; two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, bending a little backward; one cautery in the groin, and one on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the sides of the groin opposite the cautery between the shoulders; and do not press your hand hard, but do it gently as when using a perfumed oil.
And some ancients say that a man should use a cautery of iron like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the phlegmon; and when there is pain, as we have said for liver phlegmon, then jump away from the cautery, so that either death or a fistula occurs in the patient. But in this procedure, there is danger of death to the patient, or a fistula which cannot be healed.
The man who feels the cautery all along his sides and through the groin and stomach, must get up in bed. And if the cauteries are so large that he cannot stay in bed, then he must get up on four or three pillows, and have the cauteries under him, while he is above them; and the cauteries should be in the space between the ribs, and the largest cautery between the two shoulders, then he should get up on five or six pillows.
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of the remedies, and it does not help at all, then there are three ways to cauterize that are good.
Of these, one way is to make three or four cauteries, marking according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver that we mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, but let the patient lie still on his back.
And another way to cauterize is to heat the cautery which has two points, as we showed in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart where the mouse comes from the left side towards the right, and let the elevation by which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After [the patient] has the two nerves inflamed until the skin is pierced on the other side, and then draw the cautery quickly, and thus it will be done four times. And if you see that, then cauterize all of the cautery in three nerves. After the cure when he has bled pus for a long time, and this is better than the other cures mentioned before.
of dropsy
Cautery does not work for dropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes." When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your cure does not help, then you must make .iiij cauteries around the navel, and 1 on the stomach, and 1 on the liver, and 1 on the kidney, and 2 behind the back on the spine, and 1 on the tailbone; and the cautery should be close to the edge of the heart.
After leaving the cautery open to draw pus for a long time, do not leave the cure of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the chisel that we have previously shown; and for the back it should be olive-shaped, according to what has been described earlier.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in a person who is dropsical, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep, thus you will draw out the yellow water, and the cautery should be in this shape:
After that, make 2 cauteries on each leg at the top of the tibia; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries to heal without bandaging, until the water comes out; then dress the others as we have said.
of the brain
When diarrhea comes from coldness and moisture, when the retentive and digestive faculties in the stomach and intestines are impaired, and cannot be cured by means of remedies; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with much strength, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before regarding the cautery of the stomach, with the circulating cautery; and four small cauteries around the belly, each cautery being subtle, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the elbow, and one cautery on each shoulder joint, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good support.Et si li fai  .i. cautere sus la tete, et  .i. cautere de costé, et  .ij. cauteres entor la cheville subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil; car li cure est profitans a ceus qui sont desaloiez de lor leu.
of the cure for hemorrhoidsAnd si li fai   .i . cautere sus la tete , et  .i . cautere de costé , et  .ij . cauteres entor la cheville subtilz a tout  .i . cautere clavile subtil ; car li cure est profitans a ceus qui sont desaloiez de lor leu .de la cure des emorroydes
When hemorrhoids are in the rectum, one or more, and are old and consist of thick, cold, moist humors, and are treated as we have described in divisions, but are not helped, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that is, all below the buttocks, little by little, triangulating them; and two cauteries under the tailbone.
And if you think the stomach is cold, and the food is not digesting, and one sees swelling in the face, then on the face place one large cautery over the stomach, as has been said before, and one over the liver, and one over the navel, with the whole cautery clave; and leave the cautery open for a long time. Afterward treat the area until it is healed.
of the fleshiness which is named "thelul."
When you scrape the "thelul", heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and then place it fully heated on the scraped "thelul"; and hold your hand so that the cauteries reach the source of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of "thelul," cauterize each one as we have said; afterward treat them with healing ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will be of greater aid.
of poorly healed wound
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
When there is a fistula and it is suppurating and discharging putrid corrupt matter, then you should probe it with a thin wire, and be careful to go as deep as the tent goes. Then heat the cautery like a razor and insert it into the fistula according to how far the tent went in, and repeat the cautery until the pus and corruption are burnt up, once or twice or thrice, according to how much is needed; and be careful not to burn any nerves or major blood vessels. If the fistula goes towards the bladder or intestines, then beware of those places, and do not go near them, but only on the flesh, and think that it is not feeling anything. After that, cleanse the wound until it is healed, and if the wound is suppurating and the matter has been discharged for a long time, then know that the wound is completely healed. But if the matter has not been discharged, know that the wound is through and the bone at the bottom is rotten; and in this way, do as one of those which we will discuss in their place.
of the disease of the kidneys When cold pain comes with rain and strong winds, and takes hold of a woman, then you must make a cautery on the rains on both sides using the key cautery that we mentioned earlier; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater relief.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine due to the condition, then make a cautery on the part above the bladder where the hairs of the pubic region start, with one cautery on the right and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as the width of two fingers; also, make one cautery below the back, or two if you need them; and use the key cautery as described earlier.
of the womb When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not permit conception, and the flowers are corrupt and their terms late; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore one must make three cauteries around the womb, as we have said in the cautery for the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; and let the cauteries be of a mild nature, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous humors descend to the box of the hip, and because of this they move out of place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together; and it is found that the place of the dislocation is hollow, then one must cauterize the patient on the box of the hip with 1 cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the location around the box as it turns, so that the box is within the circle; and let the cautery be like that which one uses to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make three cauteries of the olive oil large, and let the cautery be as deep as all the scabs; and heal it until it is better.
of the pain of the hip When pain occurs in the hip socket, it is caused by cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of thick humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good-smelling pills.
Afterwards, he should do cauterization; and the method of cauterization is according to two methods: one is with burning medicines, and the other is fire cauterization. Fire cauterization has many methods, one of which is to cauterize the hip socket in a triangular shape according to this form, and make a deep and large wound, and there should be a distance of a thumb's width between each cauterization. Sometimes a cauterization is done in the middle of the hip joint, so that there are four cauterizations according to this form:
And if you want to cauterize with the circular cauterization that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire hip, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
And this is the way one proceeds in sciatica when the pain is located in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it extends to the thigh and leg, then make .2 cauteries where the patient says that the pain lies, and .1 cautery above the ankle joint of the .4th toe on the left side a little; and let the cauteries be cutaneous, and burn away the thickness of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the ball or near there, then cauterize where they feel the pain with .3 or .4 cauteries called "points".
And if necessary, make more cauteries; and if he feels that the pain is below the knee toward the thigh, then use a cutaneous or circular cautery, and be careful with all your cauteries not to leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who made cauteries above the ankle joint of the foot, and left them on so long that the leg was completely swollen, as was the foot, and it became pierced and rotten all over the foot. Afterwards they died from a stomach ailment.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and the other, according to this manner. // And the wise men said about the cautery of the hip, of which here is the manner, make a piece of iron and let it be at the end as thick as a little finger, or a little less, and let it be between the teeth and let it go from one tooth to another with the space the quantity of a thread of the needle; and let the teeth be above two parts, and let them also be like nails, and let it have a handle of well-made iron; and this is the shape:
And let it be heated until it is all red and dripping hot, and then place it on the box of the painful hip, and let it be turned onto the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery and leave it for 3 days; and then make a poultice of butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its sight, and those who are experienced in it use little; and nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries which can be endured, and it lies where it occurs.
of back pain
When back pain comes from sitting or impact or from excessive evacuation, or from similar appearances of cold matter, none of these warrant cauterization except that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
It is appropriate, after the patient has voided foul pills or other similar substances, to make three marks on their back where the pain is located, and in each mark, administer .v. cauteries or more depending on the strength and amount that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed according to the cautery called 'point'; and if you see fit, perform .iij or .iiij cauteries with the medium-sized cautery instrument according to this form:
This disease often affects young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight, constricted appearance when they wake up, and fear; and you will find it in the last vertebrae of the back and in the appearance that comes over the other vertebrae.
When you see this and you cure it, then cauterize it with a cautery of salt according to this form.
So that the purple cautery will affect each part of the spine equally. And if you see [the spine], then cauterize around it with a pointed cautery .ij or .iij lines long, and let the points be close to each other. Afterward, cure the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware of administering cautery in gangliness that is in the webbing of a nerve.
of joint pain
When joint pain is caused by moisture that is spread throughout the body's limbs, and when pain comes in the feet, which the doctors properly call 'podagra', and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is cured by cauteries in such a way: make the mouth of the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
And if there is a need for you to touch the face of the foot, then you should cauterize it with the entire cautery that one calls "point". And if pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize each knee with three or four cauteries on each part, with all the olive-sized cauteries; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand against it for longer than the thickness of the heart is burned.
And if the pains go down to the knee and back, then administer the cautery that we discussed in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbow or shoulder, then cauterize each part, and provide good treatment for the patient and take medicines. For if you provide good treatment and purge the flux, then he will be healed with God's help.
from the root of the ulcer
When the ulcer comes in the anus, and the bowels descend to the testicles and it is new, then when you see him being cured, he should not defecate that day; and he should use things that loosen the belly so that the farts descend from his belly; after that, let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to press his anus until the bowels are repaired, and bring them back to your fingers, and sign with chalk underneath the ulcer on the bone of the buttock, and throughout a sign that is similar to half a circle on top of the body; then heat the cautery from which this form comes:
as long as it is white and bleeding. Then reset the bones to their proper place; and the assistant holds his hand steady so that they do not move back; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put under him one cushion and one servant on the thighs, and another on the feet who holds his hands; then apply the cautery on the sign all over your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again another time until you reach the bone; and be careful that the blood does not flow when you are doing the cautery; so that you do not burn him; and so that by this the patient does not die, or suffer some other harm.
And you should know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And the cautery of children should be subtle according to the size of their ears, and for large people it should be as large as their ears; after 3 days, cure the site of the cautery with butter until the scorch is removed; then cure it with other ointments until it heals, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well-closed; and his bandages should be left on for a long time so that the blood does not flow when he tries to move around.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, if a well-made brace is provided for him, and he wears it for another 40 days; and has good rest, not working too much and taking care to avoid excessive eating and drinking, and shouting too loudly; and if he follows these instructions, he will be completely healed. And I will now describe the treatment for cutting into his shoulder joint. of the bowel movement
When bowel movements come from other stomachs and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then do .j cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and let it be burned by the third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients said that one must cauterize with a cautery at 3 angles according to this form:
but first sign the site of entry and draw a line along the width above the bowel movement, and another one from the side, and hold your hand in place throughout the entire cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and deeper.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, from a fall or injury, and the pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment does not help, then cauterization is required using the cautery known as 'point', and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the limb, its size, weakness, virtue, location of twists and turns, and the intensity of the pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; if not, apply another cautery on top of the previous one, for such is the custom that it should affect the nearby limb, so you must continue applying cauteries until the patient is healed.
from mixing
Miasmas are sometimes healed by cautery with great difficulty, especially those illnesses that arise from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see such an illness being cauterized, pay attention to whether the disease is in its early stages, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not persist or remain, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the body, then perform five cauteries on the head: one at the crown of the head, and another towards the forehead at the front of the hairline; and two on the temples, and one behind on the nape of the neck; and hold your hand in such a way that the cautery reaches the bone, and as long as the skin blisters so that the vapors of the thick humors can come out; and cauterize the mouse according to what it is in front.
And if the disease is scattered throughout the body, and it is clearly lost, then you should cauterize her with these cauteries that we have mentioned on the head, and one cautery in the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the groin and another there, and two on the two shoulders; and two on the elbows, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the back of the calf. And sometimes do one cautery on the bone of the arm, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And you should know that the more cauteries you do, the more it will help, and it will be beneficial; and you should know that the sick person does not feel pain from cautery as a healthy person does, because the body is already entirely corrupted. And you should make the cauteries large and small according to the members and joints, according to how you find them in the methods of the irons. After this, treat the wound with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
of swelling
When swelling comes to a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then cauterize the limb according to its size; and let the cautery be slightly warm in the center of the fire; then cure it with ointments until it heals. And sometimes cauterization is done on the hand, foot, back, at the exit of a nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; but no one should attempt this who does not understand the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
of almond milk
When the disease called "albaras" appears, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a slightly deep cautery, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and the color changed; then cure it with a poultice of linseed and lentil flour, with rose oil, and plantain leaves, and colon blood and almond blood, each ingredient being used in equal parts. Mix everything together and apply it, wrapped in a cloth, to the affected area until it heals.
the cure of cancer by cautery
When chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And yet the wise say that one should also make cauteries in the middle of the chancre; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have indeed seen it happen sometimes; and a more certain thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circular", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the swelling that cannot subside
When someone has a disease called  "adubelati", and it is slow to heal, either because of the excess fluid it produces, or due to the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, very old) and have little blood, or because of the season; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries by pricking; after that, leave it as it is. For it will hasten to heal.
And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery with which it is formed:
And put your hand over the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has penetrated the skin, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning in such a way that the course of the pus is relieved. After the cauterization, when it is perfectly healed.
the fire cautery by iron
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", which is nothing but a corruption of a limb, for it corrodes the limbs just as fire burns dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cauterization with fire, then heat the cauteries with a small and large claw, according to what is appropriate for the location of the disease; then cauterize all over until you reach all the corruption, and none of it remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed. And then leave it for three days, and apply ointments to the cauterized areas to soothe the burns and remove all the corruption. After three days, if new healthy flesh has appeared, that is good; but if not, then re-cauterize over the area that remains corrupted. This kind of disease can sometimes be cured with medicine instead of fire cautery; however, fire cautery is generally more effective. I have already described the cure for medicine ague in the section on that topic: use it as needed.
of warts that appear on the feet
Many times it happens that on the feet, from different causes, a disease called 'close' according to our understanding arises, and it is a large, faultily formed thing which breaks the toe. And the cautery for this disease is in two ways: that is, fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is that you heat one cautery as hot as an owl's egg, made of good iron to the measure that it can support the nail all around, and that it has thin edges; then put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to produce pus; then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the place with ointment until it is healed.
And if they are converted from the body, and many times they appear in the hands and feet, then you must administer hot water cautery; and it is done this way: take a brass or iron rod, or an owl's egg, and put it on the nail and the althelul - that is, warts; and put the rod on so that it wraps all around, then pour a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail and can find the hot water deeply to the root. And let the patient endure the biting of the hot water for a while; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted from its roots all the way through. Do this one after another until you extract all those in the body, then cure them with ointments that produce flesh.
the cure for trembling
When someone shakes from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other, you should make them .iiij. cauteries or .iv. on the spine of the back, .i. cautery between each vertebrae; and .i. cautery on the feet, and .i. on the stomach with an olive-sized cautery; this will stop the shaking and hasten the healing from the cold disease.
of stinking pustules
Sometimes they appear on the body as bathes or stinking pustules, which come from thick corrupted matter. One should cauterize them at their appearance, with a small cautery of myrtle wood, whose tip is heated, or of long aristolochia root, or with the lenticular cautery. Sometimes one should cauterize them at the beginning as they appear, in this way, and then they cannot grow further, but the superfluity from which they come is disrupted, and they are healed; but this should be done after blood-letting.
when the artery is cut There are many times great bleeding from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or with the incision of an abscess, or with the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very sorrowful thing to stanch.
And yet when this happens to someone, quickly place your index finger over the wound of the vein and hold it very tightly until the blood is calmed beneath your finger and no drop comes out; then take several small and large olive-wood cauteries and heat them in the fire until they are all red; then take a little salt, either large or small depending on the wound and where the artery is rupture, and place the cautery over that vein where you hold your finger, and keep it there until the bleeding is stopped.
And if it bleeds when you lift your finger from the wound and the cauteries are extinguished, quickly take another one of the cauteries which are in the fire.
And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped; and beware of damaging the nerve which lies nearby, and that no further harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be stopped well by itself alone if the artery is large, unless by one of four methods we have mentioned: either by cautery or extraction when it is not treated, or by a strong ligature, or by medicines placed on which have power to stop bleeding; and let it be bound and pressed gently.
Whoever administers a tight binding of bandages or places burning things on top, or similar things, will not benefit if only a little.
And if this happens to someone and they do not have any medicine available, then they should put their index finger on the wound as we have said, and press firmly both on the wound and the vein; and they should not move it, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and swollen and pressed firm; and they should make inquiries in advance about what cauteries and medicines are needed.
We have told you in the first chapter about all illnesses that require cautery with fire or burning medicines, and their cause, instrument, form of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will go in this chapter by the same path so that one may more easily find what they want.
And so that I may begin this, my dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of this greater caution is needed.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to be foolish. For in many ways people come for cures. Some come from such a distance that they would die easily from the journey, because of the severity of their illness; and from those one must be afraid. And so that I may begin this, my dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of this greater caution is needed. And among these there are some who lose their senses and say, "Wait, I am healed"; and they die from the disease. You must not consent to those who come to you with such behavior, but put more care into your honor than your greed, and do not open foolishly but wisely that of which you are certain and that from which you can take profit and loss; and use prediction and indication in the cures of your illnesses for which salvation is turned towards you. And this will help you to that good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Very dear son, our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have ordered this chapter in a discourse on chapters, according to what it is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have discussed from the head to the feet, so that you can find more easily whatever you need.
from the head full of water
Do you know that this disease often comes to infants during childbirth, and when the birth canal is too narrow for the baby's head; and sometimes it comes from a relaxed birth canal, which no one knows about.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone but children, and in all those that I have seen, death soon followed; and for this reason it seems better to me to leave the treatment in a few simple remedies.
And I saw a child whose head was swollen with water, and the swelling increased every day until he could no longer bear it; and he died of the moisture, which had gathered under the skull between the brain and the bone; and if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscess is small, then make a large slit in the head, as long as two fingers, so that the moisture may flow out; and here is the form of the spatumile:
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the corners of the head opening in every part, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not close up again: then you must make three slits in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all moisture forcefully. After that, squeeze out the folds of cloth and powder, and apply wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then loosen it, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head be extracted equally, and give the patient dry meat without any moisture as long as the limb is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at where the abscess opens, and the gathering of pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
So cut where the abscess opens and the gathering of pus, and pierce according to what you can; and be careful not to cut the artery, and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from bleeding and the evacuation of moisture.
from gout
When someone suffers from a condition called "cataract" in the eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment is ineffective, then the best course of action is cauterization by cutting the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them cut, the patient should face away; then rub the area around the arteries with a rough cloth until they appear, then hold the patient's neck firmly with one hand; then look where the vein is, and the places are behind the ears, and they are very sensitive; then sign the places with your finger, then cut both with a sharp spatulum two parts deep so that the vein reaches the bone, and this should be done from the back of the head.
And if you see it, put the spatulum under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also as deep as two fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood will flow out continuously upward.
And if the artery does not open to feeling, then you must measure the quantity of the space of three digits, then cut in and cut just to the bone; and what it is convenient to put out of blood is 6 ounces, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery; then regard the wound: if there remains on the bone no dot of pus, so that the hot abscess does not come in, then strain the wound and ligate it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
of emetic
When ancient emigrant comes, and catarrh is acute, for the moistors of tears and the chills in temples and ancient soddeness and similar things, and it is medicined by manners of cures of medicine and all that does not benefit him at all, then let us draw out the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have related.
And the manner of the extraction of them is that the patient pulls back the hair of his temples, and feels the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little relaxed outwards when in some men who are too cold; and if it is relaxed, then the patient strains his neck with some cloth, then rubs the place with some rough cloth, and washes the place with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulum made from which there is the form:
then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upward with tweezers and loosen it well from the tissues beneath in each part; and if the artery is delicate, return it to the hook of the fingernail, then bandage that part according to the amount of the two fingers. For if it is not bandaged, the blood will not stop flowing at all.
And draw out the blood from 1/4 to 3/8 of an inch; and if the artery is large, you should tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound heals, and bleeding comes slowly; then bandage the excess between the two ties in the same hour, and if you wish, cauterize it with a hot-iron cautery up to the bone so that the shoulder is cut; and this is the best treatment if the patient doesn’t have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
Because cauterization helps to end moisture; that is why it is more helpful for moisture. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and places it on well-made tents; and when they are taken off, cure them with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with tents, until they are healed; and if there is an artery without a vein as far as you work, hasten to cover by cauterization, or employ vitriol and stretch out your hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you don’t have that at hand, put your finger on the place so that the blood congeals, and moisten the place with cold water until the bleeding stops, and bind it as it should be; and what is better and lighter in the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of 2 parts, but let the cutter be well thickened so that its heat lasts longer. For when an instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less well. And between the two knives there should be a space of a finger's width, and then when you have cut through both sides and placed the hot iron on as far as the bone, and split the vein in two places; and the two parts should be pulled apart so that they are not fused by this cautery all the way through. This is how the cautery tool should be formed:
tears
When tears are flowing from the eyes which are above the testicles on the head, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the patient turning red, and there is a beating in his forehead as if from trembling; and if the eyelids are thin and moist so that the hairs have fallen out, and the eyelids are scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
And the ancients called it "cure contused," and you should do to the patient who has this disease, let him have hair on his forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions as two fingers all over the forehead going down to the nose, and the other two at the two temples above the eyebrows, and beware of cutting into the arteries that are on either side above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and each wound should be the length of three fingers across joints;
from the incision that is to the temple up to the second incision; and scrape all the skin that is between the two incisions up to the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this spatulum.
then insert into the first incision the instrument that is called  "cultellarius," and it is very sharp on one side, and not at all sharp on the other, and this is its shape: And cut the incision towards the chest and the armpit to the heart, and the other incision towards the bone, and bind it tightly until it reaches the middle opening. And tie all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to what opens near the heart, and then another incision in the middle opening to the other defiant; then draw out the blood equally, and express the site for the extracted blood; then put a tent made of old cotton in each incision, and place moistened cloths in wine and oil and garlic on top, and guard against hot abscesses coming there; and on the third day loosen the bandage, and administer plenty of cold water, then treat it with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other remedies for wounds, until it is healed.
from the eyes
When someone has a constant catarrh, and you see the eyes are sunken and small, and the vision weakened, and the eyelids burnt, and the hair falling out, and in the head there is pain, and the patient sneezes; then know by these signs that these matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the remedy for it is to cure what is inside.
And you should command the patient to lean back, then make a large slit in the middle of the forehead, and another one from ear to ear. Begin the incision from the left temple to the right, going down to the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that control swallowing. When the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, then separate the two lips of the slit and insert old cotton, and tent with linen; then bind dampened cloths soaked in wine and oil on top, and beware of hot abscesses. When it is healed, you should rub the bone until new flesh begins to grow, then treat it with astringent substances that promote healing.
In this way: take two parts of wheat-flower and four parts of colophony, make an ointment from it, and administer it to promote healing throughout the wound.
on earaches
All that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grains or a beast, or stone from a mine, or similar object like iron; or seed, such as peas, beans, and lentils; or flowing liquid, like water and garlic and similar things.
When it falls into the ear, a pebble or some other object that does not adhere to the ear or grow in it, then expose the ear to the sun. If you see the pebble, then distil some violet oil or oil of camphor, and then administer extraction; and make the patient sneeze with a spice, and plug their nostrils when they sneeze, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and keep the ear elevated. Often it comes out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then administer extraction with fine tweezers, which are made like this:
If it comes out with the tweezers, that is good; if not, then administer extraction with a fine needle of small wire; and if it does not come out in this way, then make an iron hook and insert the tip of the hook into the ear canal firmly, and plug the area around the hook with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out gently, for often it comes out as we have said. And if it does not come out in such a way, then take some glut and use it to grab birds, and place some instrument that is suitable for this purpose, and put some cotton around it; then press the glut onto the pebble or whatever it is, and pull it out. And if it does not come out with all the things we have said, then be quick to split the ear so that pus and blood comes out, and a spasm; and the manner of the splitting is that you first make the patient fast for three days, and bleed him according to his condition, then make him sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small slit in the root of the ear at the fat where it depends; and the slit should be like a crescent moon, so that you can reach the pebble, then remove it according to your ability, and suck on it strongly with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed. And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer removal; and if it cannot come out, then administer .i. spatumile with a thin needle according to this form:
and administer an incision on that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to moisture in the ear; instead, make many pieces of it and then extract them with thin pincers and a succor, as we have said, so that the extraction is easy.
In the case of an earache due to fluid in the ear, the patient should use a mild emetic and pack the affected ear with soft cotton. And they should lie down with the affected ear facing upwards, or if the fluid drains out on its own, all the better. If not, they should take several thin stones according to the size of their finger, heat them slightly in fire, and then insert one end into the ear, and press the other end with another stone; and they should continue doing this with different stones until the fluid drains out completely, as we have said for the stones.
In the extraction of an object from the ear, if it is a small object such as a flea or similar, treat it as we have said in the previous chapter. But if the object is large enough to be felt, administer extraction with pincers; and this is the easiest method to remove something from the ear.
When extracting worms from the ears, if you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations and the treatment does not help, then you should examine the ear in the sun. If any worms appear, then catch them with fine tweezers; if they do not appear, then take the skin of a chicken where the comb is,
and tie the narrow end tightly beneath and leave the wide end loose above. Then insert the thinnest end of the chicken skin into the ear according to the amount of suffering from the illness; suck on the chicken skin until all the worms come out. If they do not come out, then stuff cotton around it as I said before for the stone; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillation remedies that ancient healers have proven effective against worms, and you will find these in the section on distillation remedies; also, distill your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument so that the worms come out as you see:
And it should be made of silver or bronze with small holes beneath and open above for distillation; and to press the distillation into this instrument use a well-made bronze tool, and if you wish take a razor and wrap cotton around its tip; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicines you desire, into the chicken skin, and let the skin be in the ear; then put the razor with all the cotton inside, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled into the ear; and the patient will feel it inside, and the distillation should be slightly warm as it is poured into the ear; and take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not work as well.
on the stopping of the ears
No child is born without an opening in their ears; and the same thing happens to men due to the clogging of a wound, or due to pus forming inside the ear, and sometimes this clogging extends deep into the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes there is only a slight blockage, which can be seen easily.
When it occurs deeply and cannot be seen, it is a matter of great concern in various situations, and in such a case, one should hold the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane becoming apparent, then treat it according to its appearance.
And it should be sharp and pointed in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the membrane is due to pus or some other substance inside the ear, then grasp it with a pair of fine forceps and squeeze gently until all the substance is removed.
And if the membrane is deep within the ear, take a small, fine rasor and heat it slightly in the fire, then place it inside the ear. If the patient feels pain when hearing, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then insert a tent into the ear according to the size of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this each day until the wound is healed, or take a piece of cloth and moisten it in rose water, and powder with vitriol; and if you see swelling in the ear, then you should remove the cloth and replace it with another moistened in cerotum made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then heal the wound.
And if there is bleeding, plunge a sponge and cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding that are used for treating distilleries.
of the pulp of papers
This althelul comes from papers when they are wet and dry, you should extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the tip of a spatulum from its roots; then put powdered vitriol on the spot.
And if without skin, then cauterize with a subtle lens-shaped cautery, and the cautery after the incision is valuable; and many times they return, as long as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of hailstones
Many times they come in papers as things that look like hail in shape and hardness, and this is why this disease is called "hailstone"; it is an assembly of moisture thick on the paper above and below; the work is such: take care if the hailstones move from one side to another, and it's a simple thing to know; then they open the paper slightly, then peel it off gently with tweezers, and cover it. If you can't cover it without piercing the paper, it won't harm the patient; and if the split is large, then they put together with a stitch, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, they do not force it, for the ointment will restore it at once and heal the wound.
And if the hailstone is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then reverse the paper, and the hailstones are held with tweezers, and covered and pressed from one side to another; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it does no harm; and when the hailstone is covered, wipe away the pus with a clean cloth, and cure the area where the wound is until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is woven into the papers above, and this happens more to children than to no one, and it is very painful for their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hasten to their eyes. And because of this, they lie on their faces and sleep on top of them, and their eyelids become moist, and the swelling and appearance are covered by exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers, it comes out between them.
And the way to do it is that the sick person puts his head on top of the healthy one; and then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, and then put it over him; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exinach is gathered inside the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of the moist skin with a sharp spatulum, and do not make it larger than the wound made for the vein opening; and in various dispositions, exinach comes out of the slit according to the shape of a piece of white grease.
Then take out the entire piece of cloth with your fingers between your thumb and forefinger, and turn your hand to the right and left so that it is spread out; and be careful not to put anything in the slit, so that you do not come to the spatula all the way to the eye, so that you do not hurt it.
And if the wound does not open at the beginning of the slit, then widen the slit slightly until it opens; then extract as we have said, then moisten cloth in vinegar and water, and apply to the area, and extract with bandages.
And if there are such men who grind salt and apply it to draw out the moisture that remains. Then treat the wound until it is healed. And if a hot abscess comes to the site, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.
of the hairs of paper
When papers grow hairs of a different nature than usual, and they are enveillit, they harm the eyes and cause various diseases, such as tears, and softening of the paper and albugine, all of which lead to the destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways to treat them: by cauterization with fire, or by medicine applied to the eye, or by incision and stitching, or by caustic substances, depending on what is described in this chapter on cauterization.
It is necessary for you to place the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper on his eye to your left hand; if it is turned, that is good; but if not, then put an needle with thread through it from above; and have this close to the margin of the paper where the hairs are growing next to these hairs, and draw the thread across the paper to the top, and turn it over to the razor; then, on the part under the paper, under the hairs, all around, as much as the spatulum covers, from the large eyebrow up to the small one; then pull out the thread, and place a little tent of cotton and linen underneath the paper, and sign a figure of an inch, like the shape of a myrtle twig, and still it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you see rising above the paper which is split in two.
And if you are dealing with someone who needs a large amount of paper, according to how much the paper has softened, then proceed around the spatulum on the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large eyebrow up to the small one; and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a hair root, then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the eyelid, and cut it all away; then bring together the two edges with a single stitch of fine woolen thread using an needle, and draw out the blood, and dry up the excess thread above the two eyebrows with any sticky substance if you wish to do so; but if not, then leave the stitch and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without a stitch using dry, constricting substances, for the paper lifts away from the wound as it heals, but the stitch is harmful (as the ancients say), and this is work without fear;
and there is another way: it is to mark the paper with a figure that is like the shape of a myrtle twig, as we have described, with three branches evenly spaced according to its form:
then cut away what is on top of the smaller forces evenly according to the form which is here:
And if you do not have the strength to hold the tweezers, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle or thread, and sew it up according to the shape; and sew another thread next to the large artery, and the second thread next to the small one, and bring the threads together between your fingers evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above which you have signed, as we have described, then bring the two lips of the wound together by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerot and similar soothing ointment;
and sometimes the hair of the paper is turned inside out: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but the sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure for warts is according to this form: and it is that you turn the paper inside out and cut it inside according to what I have said, and then make two warts by art, and two subtle threads as long as the paper and the broad scale of the wart; and cut at two heads where you hold the threads; then bring one and the other together subtly over what is on top of the paper of the eye, and strain the two warts from the two parts formed; and leave it thus for several days, and the skin which is strained will die and blacken and fall off, until it falls off by itself.
If it is delayed, the cautery will force out pus until it heals; and when the wound is sewn up, and the paper removed, the hairs will no longer grow; and this is the form of the two canes which you shall make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and breadth:
the work is such that you thread a fine needle with a fine silk thread; then bring the shoulders together and tie them up gently, and let the length of the threads be about the size of a palm; then prepare another fine silk thread in the needle, and tie off the ends of the thread; then have the patient place his head on your lap; and be in the sun so that the work is exposed, for it is a subtle and small work, then insert the needle through the paper to the root of the hair, and draw out the hair until it comes out of the paper with the natural hair; then extract your hand until the hairs come out of the paper with the natural hair.
And if the thread is pulled and the hair does not come out with it, then pull the thread from underneath until the thread comes out of the hole above and you see it with your eye; then pull on the thread and the hair, and close your eye for two or three days, so that the hair regrows in its place and the flesh grows over it again; and if the hair is short, accompany a long hair from the eyebrows, and let it grow with the one you are treating until it is elongated and then release it.
of the puffiness of the eye
When this disease called "aleacrati" or puffiness occurs in the eye, there are two ways it can happen: one is natural, and the other is unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cauterization, and from similar things.
And the method of treatment for this is that you split the swelling and loosen the eyelids, and put in tents of linen, and change them until it is healed; and you must not use anything in its treatment that dries and constricts. For if you do, the disease will return worse than before; but rather use emollient things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altered and seeded, and daiquilon melted in one of the oils, and wrap a tent around it, and treat it thus.
And the essence of your treatment is that you take care that it does not swell again according to the form it was before; and these works that we have said are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
of the flesh that comes in the eye
This disease which is underneath and is truly called "axacrati", has natural and accidental causes. The accidental cause comes from wounds and splits and cauteries and similar things; and the way to treat it is that you grab a needle with a double thread, insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct so that the threads come out on both sides of the flesh; then the flesh will be above all of the needle, and the lump will be as wide as a spathamile.
And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, then take a razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper over, and make 2 splits along the edge inside the paper; and let the shoulders of the 2 splits be at the 2 angles of the incision you have made, so that when they are assembled, the shape is like that of a letter with the number "1", and then remove that flesh according to how much it has grown underneath, following the paper, then join together the 2 cut parts, and sew them up with a thread of wool; then treat it with the medicines for softening that we have mentioned, and with poultices, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a split or wound or cautery, then you should make a single split underneath the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said above; then separate between the 2 lips of a poultice, as I have said; and one must do the treatment according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the wise masters prepare things with all their power so that they make the shape return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what he needs of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
from sudden papery
When this sudation occurs in human hands in such a way that the paper above is sodden with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must push the tip of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it upward; and hold it with tweezers, until you grasp what is hurt in the subtile spatula, which is not too pointed nor too trenchant, so that the patient cannot bear that the too-pointed spatula might pierce the eye; and your incision to peel this union should be light, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and all this union is healed, and they sometimes make in the eye a salty wash, and lift it with sweet water, and use a collarette; then place between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and place over the eye wool moistened with egg; and after the third day use the collarette and the soothing things until it is healed.
of the nail of the eye
You know that the nail is in two ways: it is nervy and resembles a .ij. hard syphac, and another which is not nervy, but resembles white congealed moisture; and when touched with iron and pinched with tweezers, it cannot feel anything; and both appearances begin towards the great tear duct, and grow little by little until it covers the entire sight, light, and movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your lap, then you work the eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then curl the nail with tweezers of small doublets, and place them on top; then take a needle, and put in it one horsehair, or cow's hair, or ox's hair, and a strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and insert it among the nails, and pierce all the way through the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and place it on top, and scorch all along the hair the edge of the nail which follows the eyelid and the silk to the hair up to the head, then cut off the remaining part at the root of the tear duct all the way to the subtile spatumile and with small forces, and leave the natural flesh or eyelid, so that through the incision does not come the body of the tears accustomed; and sometimes only the nail is placed on the oncine, and with the thread, as we have said; then scorch it all the way along the spatumile:
And beware that the spatumile does not touch the flesh and break it, and that the prunele is not pierced; and after the incision, pour into the eye a little powdered celandine, and from the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot pierce it with the needle, and the oncines cannot enter, many times this kind of nail is cured by medicines; and they grow again as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the patient, and take the spatumile lightly according to this form:
And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it does not diminish and the pus is pressing out, then distil from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper and crushed seal, and stop up the eye until the next day; then recommence the other work according to this same procedure, until it is all removed.
If there is no obstruction in the eye, such as an abscess, then use milk, and first treat the abscess with a hot poultice until it is healed, then recommence the procedure as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid is damaging the eye greatly, then cut it away at the edge, and only a little at a time so that no body fluid enters the eye; then distil into the eye a red collar made of litharge.
of the flesh which grows on the eyeball
In some men, a red pustule sometimes appears on the eye, covering the pupil and pressing on the eyelids, resembling a rose on a column. The patient should then put his head in a healthy person's lap, after which he works on the eyes, and pulls out all the pus with tweezers suitable for this purpose, holding it firmly; he then opens the first pustule, and scrapes off everything down to the root, being careful not to injure the eye during the procedure. The incision should be made as we described in the section on nail incisions, using gentle pressure to remove the pus, as demonstrated by the illustration in this chapter.
And when the incision is complete and all the pus has been removed, apply oil of sesame or you may distill red vitriol and similar corrosive medicines, and place cotton with egg white on the eye to secure the hot abscess; if anything remains, and the cold poultice does not help, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with remedies for hot abscesses; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus proceed with other pustules in the eye that are similar.
However, you should always use the natural remedy for weak eyes and the accidental remedy for iron work; and do not insert your finger in any of these procedures until you see that this member is suffering from that procedure.
of the eyes
They are red veins that are covered over the eye, and impede sight and weaken the eye every day. Therefore, first examine the eye to make sure there is no other disease apart from the stye; then, have the patient tip his head back so that you can examine the eyelid thoroughly with your wisdom, making a small incision in the eyelid according to your skill, and making the incision twice as wide as it needs to be.
And make two incisions in the eyelid, one above the other, according to this form:
Then press those veins gently, and draw out the blood an hour after another, until you have removed the veins from the eye; and be careful not to cut the eye with the points of your knives, and perform this operation at noon in front of the sun, and be very skilled in your work so that you do not slip and cut the eye; and when you have finished, distill into the eye a green and red колир to purify what remains of the stye.
And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, then make a poultice over the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is assuaged and there is no more hot abscess, then begin again according to the method given above until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
of the eye fistula
The "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then pierce into the abscess where it must be, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then return to the instrument from which this form is made; it is called the  "aspre chief", and is made by grinding down a piece of horn until it is sharp like a file as shown in the present figure.
And place it over the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand slightly until you feel that the corruption has been removed; do this several times, then restore the area with drying medications.
if the fistula is not healing and the flesh remains dead for 40 days without becoming infected or any ill effect occurring, you may be sure it has healed; if not, there is nothing else to do but open the fistula at its opening with an iron needle according to this form: you must then uncover the bone a second time with iron and with sharp medications, and when it is uncovered take a needle according to this form, and the iron should have three angles, and the shaft should be tapered to a point as you see here.
then place it on the bone underneath the fistula, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then return to the needle until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the pressure of his blood; then restore the area with dry medications as I have instructed you, and when the flesh hardens and closes over the opening, examine the matter at the fistula; this is a gentler treatment for the patient.
from the output of the eye
When the eyes are completely open and there is no disturbance to the nose or diminution, you should ligature the patient; then bleed him, then apply cupping glasses or leeches without piercing, to suck out, then place over the eye a poultice made of acacia gum, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla, and then compress the eye with bandages and drapes; the manner of the drapes is that you take quite soft drapes, and double each one in four, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eye requires; then compress from above with a firm bandage, and repeat the cupping without piercing; then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye compressed day and night, and if the ligature softens, you should compress it strongly; then remove the poultice after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, repeat the poultice, and the drapes, and the poultice, and the cupping until he is healed.
from the ruptura of a woven cloth
When disruptions occur in the woven cloth, then it opens up and appears like a grain of resin, and is frightening to look at; therefore, if you see it covering, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part underneath up to the part above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the part of the eyelid; and pierce the latter, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the area of the double thread and tie one part of the cloth around it, and compress it well; then remove the needle and place raw linen soaked in egg white over the eye; and leave it until the threads tear with the cloth, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is constrained by the cloth on each side in a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
If the eyes appear swollen, pierce them with a sharp needle that penetrates through the white of the eye, and draw out the fluid, then push the eyes back in and they will heal.
of the eye socket
This disease, which is called "alcunnati", is nothing but an accumulation of fluid in the eye socket, resembling water but not actually being water. The appearance and treatment of this condition are as follows: have the patient sit upright and still, then hold their head steady with your hands from both sides and move it until you see the fluid rise to your eyes. Then stop and let it settle, ensuring that the light shines through so that the patient can see as usual. If the fluid does not drain and the eye socket remains swollen as described, know that it is an accumulation of water. If the swelling is as we have described, have the patient sit still while you take a sharp needle and pierce the white of the eye where the conjunctiva meets the cornea, allowing the fluid to drain. Then treat the eye with warm honeyed water or water infused with fenugreek and honey until it is healed.
of the eye's waters
We have the appearance of the ailments in the division, and what is needed to pierce it; then act according to health. You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light so as not to be seen by the sun, and hold the healthy eye closed and pressed tightly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if they are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by the thickness of a hair in that white part of the eye to the area where the tear duct is located, then pour the instrument called 'almagda' skillfully, and turn your hand so that it pierces the white part of the eye, and feel that the almagda reaches the empty space; and the measure of the path of the almagda should be at the bottom of the space from the pupil to the end of the darkness; and this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the horny tissue, and then place the instrument where the pain is, and express it from one path to another. If the pain subsides now, the patient sees in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After a short rest, if the pain rises again through the second path, insert the instrument and when it is firmly stuck and does not rise, gently remove the almagda by turning your hand a little; then put a little gem-colored sea water in the eye, and remove it from that eye. Then place on top of the injured eye a compress of wool moistened with rose oil and an abundance of egg white, and bind it with the healthy eye. We, and those of our time, put on comfrey with an abundance of egg white.
And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you must use the instrument called 'alberit', which has this shape:
Perforate the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make a small incision, then insert alum, as we have said; and when the work is finished, prepare the patient a dark room, in which he sleeps on his back in a dim light; and keep him quiet, and give him light food, and do not let him move his head or turn to the right or left, and tie him according to his disposition for three days; then untie him in that same dark room, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then put the bandage back on for seven days; and you must not do this during the hour of the treatment or after the incision now, but you should ease this, so that the water rises slowly.
if hot abscesses come, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and use that which soothes abscesses; and when it is soothed, untie the sight and put over his face a bandage to cover some eyes, and then be in that dark room again. And then leave the house little by little, and return to his normal state; and know that no弟子should intervene in this case.
And one came to us who was from Spain, who told us that in his country they used alum pierced, with which one sucked out the water, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagest, because those who do not know them can see them; and they are properly made of brass:
And let the heads of these be of the same subtlety, and the points in four angles acute.
of the heart by the nose
At times they arise from the nose as varied swellings, some resembling scorpions with many feet; and there are others in which there is a coloured swelling, and a pale sore. For that type of sore which is pale and not swollen, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, and pour on the oil from an onycha, and draw it out with the tip of the stethoscalp, as far as you are able to endure it.
And if anything remains that cannot be covered, then open it with one of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without you are overwhelmed, or an abscess forms, then lances it as it should be; and if it is a malignant abscess, then hasten to cauterize it until the pus is drained and all the pus is removed, then pour in wine or water.
And if the ears are affected and moisture extends to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is pus in the bone above, so do not use instruments to cut: therefore you must place a thick linen thread in his nostril with your fingers, and have a space of a finger or less between each knot; and let the patient hold the end of the thread in their mouth to the limit of their strength, and pull it through until it comes out through the nose; and many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it. Then hold the end that comes out through the nostril in one hand, and the other end that comes out through the mouth in the other hand, and move them gently back and forth as you would with a bowstring until you feel that the thread has corrupted the pus; then pull the thread, wipe away the blood, moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the nostril as before. Do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the pus; then put a plug of wool in the nostril for several days until it is healed, and if medicine is needed to dry the wound, then use it. This is the form of the instrument used to cleanse the ears, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And it can be made of silver or brass, similar to an open lamp, with a handle, and it should also have a lid; and if you want, make a closed cane, and let the instrument be hollow for cleansing the ears; and it should have a handle at the end for holding it when heating oil or any liquid.
of the heart upon the veins
Many times a disease called "tuberculosis" arises in the head of the veins, and it grows and becomes large, so that it is visible to look at; and therefore you should cut it at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then place the hot cautery or medicine upon it; and if one delays cutting it until it has become large, then be wary if it is hard, discolored, and lacking in sensation: do not touch it with iron, for it is an abscess, because when one cuts it at any time, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due only to pressure, not discoloration, and you see that one can cut it all away, then evacuate the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the area of dry and constricting things.
when the vein is cut and sewn
Know that when a vein is cut and sewn, it profits little in some people. Therefore, whenever this happens to someone, one should look to see if the wound has all its blood; and then join the two lips with a single stitch, and cure it until it is healed. And if the lips are torn on both sides, then one should scrape all the parts of their skin until they heal, then join the two lips with a single stitch, and tighten them, and powder them with dragon's blood powder and ground incense; and place an ointment on the powder, either a strong one or another ointment that promotes healing. Leave it to heal by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The method of sewing is that you use thread: either with needles as we said for sewing the belly, or with thread as I have already told you.
of abscesses on the lips
At times there are hard abscesses inside the lips, resembling grains of peas, both smaller and larger; therefore, you should open the lips, and cut on each nodule, and pinch it with tweezers, and scrape away any dry matter until the wound is cleaned out; then apply vitriol powder to the incision, and then use an astringent, and treat the area with poultices until it is healed.
of gum disease
Many times a growth arises on the gums, which the ancients call 'albulus'; you should hold it with tweezers, cut at its root, and let the blood or pus flow; then place powdered vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders, on the site; if the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cauterization, and this is the form for treating abscesses.
Here is a translation of the provided text:
Here is a translation of the provided text:
It is necessary when treating a toothache that you delay as little as possible in pulling the tooth, for there should be no excuse not to do so; for it is a very serious matter to delay. Therefore, when the patient is forced to draw breath, you must be certain which tooth is causing the pain. Often, the pain deceives the patient, leading them to believe it is a sound tooth, and they have a healthy tooth pulled; and yet the pain persists as long as the diseased tooth remains, for we have already seen this happen to these patients. And when you are certain which tooth is causing the pain, you must scrape around the tooth all the way to the gum; then open the mouth wide to push back the gum on all sides; then probe the tooth with your fingers or fine tweezers, gently at first until it is well loosened, then grip tightly with the tweezers. Have the patient's head between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
Afterwards, pull out the tooth carefully without breaking it, and if it will not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it gently into each side of the tooth, then move it as you did before. And if the tooth is decayed and eaten away, you must fill the holes with lint, and then grip it tightly with tweezers so that it does not break while being pulled; and you must work gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful not to break it, and leave a part of it behind, which often brings greater pain to the patient due to the root remaining in place. And beware of doing as ignorant surgeons do, who, through their haste and arrogance, sometimes break the jaw, and do not heed what we have instructed; they sometimes bring great illness due to the roots left behind, or by breaking the jaw, as we have often seen. Once the tooth is pulled, wash the socket with wine or garlic and salt; and if there is bleeding, which often happens, apply powdered vitriole to the socket; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
The forms of forceps, with which one pulls out teeth first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And they should be made of thick metal so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made iron, and serrated to hold the gums.
from the root of teeth When the root remains in place, you should apply wet cotton over the area for a day or two, until the gums are softened. Then, use forceps called "algefri", which resemble a doctor's mouth, and inside them are serrated like a file. This is their shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, you must uncover the skin all around the root, and insert the instrument called "althali", that is, a splint, which has this shape:
And it should be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through this, that is good; if not, then you must use all the instruments, of which the forms come later:
And one should also use this instrument which has .ij. prongs, of which the shape is:
and other tools that are in front of teeth, and this instrument which looks like a large pair of tweezers, whose shape is:
And have this instrument outside so that it cannot be broken, and know that many instruments for teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise subtle master finds by himself his instrument, according to what his works and the disease show him, because there are many diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to their diversity. And if it doesn't break the cart or other bones, or it protrudes, then he searches for the instruments he needs, which I have told you about, and helps with gestures, of which this is the form: And let them be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone so that it doesn't slip, but he can hold and remove it; and then restore the place with appropriate medicine. And if there is protrusion in the bone, and it is small, then use this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and its shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you should know whether the tooth is new after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and it cannot be filed or ground down. So pull it out; and if there is abscess with the tooth, take this instrument of which the form is like a small beak, and let it be made of iron with a sharp point at its end:
And push it in and out little by little due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent, and can be filed down, then file it with a special file as shown in the form:
and is also like the file with which we make needles; and in filing, press gently, day after day, little by little, until it does not move, and then smooth it at the end with a file, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, one should file down the sharpness until it is even so that it doesn't cut the tongue or distort speech.
when the teeth are crooked
When the front teeth are crooked, either from a blow or from falling, and the patient cannot chew without spitting it out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, but to no avail, then they must be restrained with a gold wire because silver wires turn green and rot, but gold never moves. The wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, depending on the amount of space between the teeth. Then, if you want to straighten the teeth, take the wire and hook it between the two healthy teeth, then place the crooked teeth in between, as many as there are, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then go back to the starting point and pull your hand gently but firmly so that it does not move. The wire should reach all the way to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then, using tweezers, clasp the wire at one end and bring the two ends together, placing them between the healthy tooth and the crooked tooth so that they do not cut the tongue; then leave it as tight as possible for as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone or the wire breaks, then restrain it with another wire. It will remain like this and serve its purpose forever. This is how you straighten crooked teeth, both the front and back, as you can see in the diagram:
And when a tooth is missing, we replace it with a new one, as we have said; but only a wise and experienced person should do this, and sometimes we make a tooth out of cow bone and put it in the place of the defect, restraining it as we have described, and it remains and serves for a long time.
to cover the thread of the tongue
There are two types of this thread which comes from under the tongue, either as a congenital condition or due to an injury. The treatment is to open the mouth of the patient and lift his head, then loosen the tongue and cover the nerve thread with a wide bandage until the tongue is dislodged from its socket. If there is any swelling or bruising due to an injury, soak the area in hot water, and if bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol; if not, cauterize it with a lentigo cautery, which is suitable for this purpose. Then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
And if you see it is red or black or hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, do not touch it, as it is a sore; and if it is inclined to blanching and there is moisture, pierce it with a needle, and drain it from both sides; and if bleeding occurs due to your treatment, apply powdered vitriol until it stops, then return to your treatment until you have removed everything. Then raise the area with garlic and salt, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
Of abscesses in the throat:
At times, masses form in the throat called "godath", which are properly called the two almonds. When you treat them as we described in the section on treatment, and they do not heal, be careful: if there are hard abscesses of a small size and light color, do not touch them with iron. And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron either, so that blood does not flow; but leave them until they burst on their own, or you will burst them; and if they are white in color and the root is thin, have an instrument to pierce them ready, but first check that the abscesses are calm and soothed. Then make the patient sit facing the sun, with his arms raised, and let the servant hold his hands between his own, pressing the tongue under all the instrument, from which this shape comes; it can be made of silver or thin brass like a knife:
Then you press the tongue against all this instrument, and you will see the abscess; take a needle and insert it into the almond, and draw it out above as much as you can; then draw some threads from the cloth with it, then cover the instrument with which this shape is made, so that it looks like a hook; and even though the heads are curved, and one towards the other, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cover it with tongs, of which this is the shape:
And let it be cut in one part and left uncut in the other; and when you have lanced one of the tonsils, lance the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and garlic, and if bleeding occurs, gargle with water, or scalded pomegranate peels, or bay leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses develop in the throat besides the two tonsils, so lance them in the same way as the two tonsils.
I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely, one abscess of small size; and she had almost completely blocked the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was closed off, nor eat or drink, and would have died within a day or two. And the abscess was already so large that it had forced its way out through both openings of the nose. I promptly inserted an incision into one of the openings, then pulled out a large amount of pus; next, I made another incision in the other opening of the nose, and cleared her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterward, I inserted the incision into the abscess, and lanced some of it, and only a little blood came out; thus the passageway of the throat was opened for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to lance the abscess for a long time; and the abscess would grow again, filling up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; so I packed it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it ceased to grow. And I left those parts, and may God help her after me.
of the grape
When the eye descends to the pupil and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; if it is fat and round, it is called an "eye". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the skin of the aperture is soothed, and it is fine, you should cover it; if it is round and not long, and is blood-colored or fuschia or black, then you should avoid cutting into it, for there is great danger in doing so. Therefore, when you see it, according to its whiteness and length, have the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, pull it downward, and cover it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for the incision on the two almonds. You should not cover more than the superfluity that extends beyond the natural limit, for if you do, it will harm the voice and speech. After the incision, use what we said about the incision on the two almonds, and cure it until it is healed. If the patient fears having it covered, then you should use a cauterization of the tongue without fear. And the way to cauterize is as follows: have the patient place his head on your shoulder, then press his tongue against the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and hold it with a hot iron so that it is not too thick or too thin; then use the shaft of this instrument, which has this shape:
And it has a handle at its head where the medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and the instrument is applied to the whole medicine on the eye; and the patient should lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus from the medicine flow out of his mouth and do not descend into his throat and windpipe. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it on the eye for half an hour, until you see it swell and the burning of the medicine is soothed; then take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton around the eye, so that the cotton adheres to the eye; do this often until the cautery is complete, then leave it to dry for four or five days. If you need to renew the cautery with medicine, do so, and after the cautery, wash the area around the eye with cold water, and treat it with gargles until it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is healed by fumigation in this manner, take calamin, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, avens, and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in a pot, and add garlic, and let it boil. The pot should be well glazed with strong clay, and the handle of the instrument should be bent according to this shape: And it can be of silver or bronze, and one of the tools should be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is mortified; after which he should be treated again frequently, until the eye dries out; and take care not to do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, for various things can happen then; nor should it be done except during the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put a raw egg yolk inside it, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the egg yolk will not let the vapor harm the mouth, and it is a salutary treatment together.
Often a fish bone or spine, or some other thing, gets stuck in the throat; so you should treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all your instruments, so that you move the object; and if it does not become apparent to you and is lodged in the throat, then you must make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the thing will come out through vomiting. Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a morsel of dry bread; and attach a string to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it reaches the spot, it will get stuck, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out through what we have said, then take an instrument of soft lead according to this form:
And the instrument should be bent at the tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have its tip lifted up high; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, or he will vomit everything, nor push the bone inside; and move so that the patient swallows the instrument, so that he can move where the object is stuck; then he swallows it down, or pulls it out with all his strength, equally, until it comes out.
of the blood from the throat
If the blood is not stopped by medicine, as I said in the division, then examine the throat of the patient facing the sun and press his tongue with the instrument I mentioned. If you see the blood, then draw it out with a small hook or delicate tweezers made for this purpose. If this does not work, take a long needle and insert it into the throat of the patient, then heat the end of the needle and repeat this often. If the patient is suffering from an excess of water, fill a glass with cold water, open his mouth, pour it in without swallowing, and move his hand frequently; as soon as the water touches the blood, it will withdraw.
And if it does not withdraw as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida using the instrument I described for smoking the throat; do this many times, for it will certainly work. The method of the fumigation is to place burning charcoal in a pot and cover it with a perforated lid, and insert the end of the instrument into the hole. Then pour in your fumigation, and have the patient place the tip of the needle in his mouth and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches the blood; the blood will certainly withdraw now. If it does not, then repeat the fumigation many times. Let the patient suffer thirst, eat salted and sour things, and drink nothing; and then he will certainly urinate.
And if he does not urinate, then strengthen the body with hot baths and by anointing the body; it is good for him to stay in the sun and eat things that are warm. And if his body is very cold, then bathe his head first so that he does not move, then bathe his limbs; and if he still does not urinate, then bathe him all over, and let him eat and drink warm things. And if it goes as we have said, know that the blood has withdrawn.
the chapter on abscesses
There are many kinds of abscesses, as the recollections which come to us here and there in this book show, and they differ in their perforation and size. They occur in two ways, according to their appearance and what they contain. The second way is due to their location in the body. For example, an abscess in the head is different from one in the fundament, and an abscess in fleshy tissue is different from one that forms in joints, and each requires a different treatment.
And one should not pierce an abscess unless the bowels are quiet according to their nature; and some abscesses must be pierced when they are ripe, and will not go away on their own accord, such as those that form near joints. For when an abscess forms near a joint, if you leave it until it is pus-filled, the ligaments and nerves of the joint may become corrupted, causing contraction in that limb. If the abscess is near a principal organ, delaying the piercing until it is ripe will harm the principal organ. If it is near the fundament, one should pierce it so that it matures; otherwise, it will form an absess deep inside, which will take a long time to heal. One should not pierce an abscess before its digestion is complete, except for those near the fundament, which may become pus-filled and cause pain.
And one should know the time for piercing an abscess that is ripe according to its nature, and this occurs when the pain subsides, and the fever lessens, and the swelling and redness decrease, and there is less discharge and pressure from the head of the abscess, along with other signs. One should pierce where the abscess is largest and where there is the most discharge; and the piercing should be done in a vertical direction from the body, especially if the abscess is on the arms or legs, or near joints, affecting nerves and arteries, and in all similar cases where there is no fold.
Here are the translations for the provided text:
Those without a head, like a superficial abscess, should be pierced directly; and when the abscess is large and has formed a great boil, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour but some of it; then dry the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again from it; do this several times until the pus comes out completely. Do this especially if the patient is weak, or a woman carrying a child, or a small child, or an elderly person. For the pus sometimes jumps out with force when you pierce the boil that they might die from it without your knowing. Therefore, be very careful with this chapter; and when you have pierced your abscess, dry the wound, and if the wound of the abscess is small, apply a tent made of linen or old cotton; but if it is a large abscess with many openings, you should place a tent in each one so that they face each other. And if you have cut into the skin of the abscess and opened it all around, fill it with old cotton or the shavings of unmoistened linen cloth, and leave it for three days; then remove it and treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if bleeding occurs during your treatment, apply cold water and ash-water, and soak a cloth in it and place it over the bleeding area repeatedly. And if the bleeding persists, use the remedies and treatments I have described earlier in this book; and if it is winter, and the area is very nervous, you should place moistened tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil over the abscess; but if it is summer, and the area is fleshy, you should moisten the cloths with water and oil, or cold wine and oil, for three days as mentioned earlier; then loosen the abscess, dry and treat it as necessary until it heals.
And now you must know generally about the treatment of abscesses; I have already told you how one should go about treating abscesses, and now see this chapter.
of sores
And now you must know generally about the treatment of abscesses; I have already told you how one should go about treating abscesses, and now see this chapter. And now you must understand the nature of sores that come from the head, which are similar to those found on birds, like the warts on a chicken's leg, and there are many variations. Some are full of pus and blood; others are hard and pebbly in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause a contrary effect. The treatment for this type of sore is to use an instrument called an 'entromissoire', which will be described later, depending on what it contains. If it contains moisture, then open it from above. And when the moisture has been expelled, peel off the skin that contained it without leaving anything behind; otherwise, it will return as soon as you leave it alone, and you must repeat this process daily until it is completely healed. Then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if available; if not, in water and salt, and apply this to the wound, leaving it overnight; and continue this treatment daily until it is completely healed. If the abscess contains a hard lump of grease, treat it according to the method described below, opening it from above; then pierce your fingernails into it, and peel off the entire surface, and apply all your remedies to draw out the pus from under the skin. If the artery causes a contrary effect, then do as I have instructed you after. And so also treat any abscess that is pebbly in texture, cutting and curing it as I have described.
And the treatment for a moist and pebbly abscess is easier, as it usually contains less blood. And sometimes there are abscesses on the head that do not contain moisture, and I once encountered such an abscess on the head of an old woman; it was like a hard, rough, white stone, and could not be broken open; had anyone tried to cut into it, they would have caused a wound as if with a stone. With abscesses coming from the head, especially those found on children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the lowest point to allow the pus to drain out; then treat them as necessary.
of scrofula
Many times this abscess occurs in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere in the body; they are numerous and intertwined with each other. Each scrofula is properly within its own capsule, as is the case with the tumor and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many varieties of scrofula. There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malignant and resistant to treatment. Therefore, when you see one that is in a healthy condition upon examination, and resembles the color of the rest of the body, and is even all around, and not adherent to the nerves of the neck or the artery or the duct, and is not deep; then you should cut it open from above, and scrape away at each side, and the two lips of the wound will be drawn back, as we have said regarding abscesses in the head; and pull gently, little by little, being careful not to cut into any nerve or vein, and let there be no spasm or twitching so that the hand does not slip, and do not cut too aggressively, but only what is necessary.
And if you cut into the vein or artery and it will not allow you to work, then put some vitriol powder into the wound, or any other powder that stops bleeding, and tie the wound closed; and leave it until the abscess is healed, and the wound softens and begins to discharge. And when the blood has clotted, return to your task, until you have finished; then inquire about whether there are any small scrofula remaining, and cut them out and clean them. And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, then you should not cut that scrofula at its root, but ligature it with a strong double thread, and let it fall away from it without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat the wound.
And if you cut away the whole scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound and stitch them now, so that there is no superfluity remaining due to the size of the scrofula. Then you must attend to covering the root of it, pulling it out and sewing it as we have said. Those scrofulae which hold superfluity, pierce where it appears dead; and pierce it thus, as the one previously mentioned, hanging down, then administer tenting with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is remaining of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, then cure it with ointment interwound with charcoal, until it is healed.
of squint
The ancient wrote and spoke of the incision of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is their written word.
For those who have squint, the flap of the throat called the 'epiglottis' should be cut; and this is done by those who have hot abscesses in their mouths, throats, or both armpits. When the disease is in the channel of the lung, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it under three circles or four, a small split across, between two circles, or according to the quantity of the split in the larynx, not in the cartilage.
and those places where it is suitable to split the epiglottis so that there is no meat, and the vessels are long from there.
And if the masters are fearful, they should stretch the skin of the throat to the entire larynx, then split the larynx until it reaches the glottis; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cover the larynx, as we have said.
and is demonstrated by the section of the vein of the finger which leaps out through the place that is broken, and by the failure of the voice;
and leaves the wound open for a space.
And when the hour has passed for which you doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the heart, and sew it up entirely without the cartilage; then administer remedies that promote scabs, until they are healed.
Albucasis says to do this only as long as the throat is completely choked, and the patient is judged dead, and the lack of breath continues. So then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
and for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the maliciousness of the disease had passed, and it passes in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, once it was cured;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a young maiden take a knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut through some of the veins in her neck;
and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
I uncovered the wound and found that the blood which had issued from it had not oozed or flowed further than the throat, and the vein had stopped bleeding.
I hurriedly sewed up the wound and healed her so that she recovered.
and she had no power over the lady until she was bled, and then she returned to her senses.
That is why I say that one should not be afraid of cutting the epiglottis.
of the large throat
This abscess is called a "gorge hernia", and it is a large abscess coloured yellow, and it occurs often in women.
and it occurs in two ways: natural and accidental; where the natural has no cause.
And the accidental occurs in two ways, one of which is like a growth that comes from us, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from an artery; And there is fear in it, and one should not work to make force except in the small one, and test and search at all the openings: If you find it as smooth as a nut, and it cannot be cut, then cut it, as one cuts a nut, and treat it throughout its coat, if there is none; and search thoroughly, and treat it as necessary until it is completely healed.
of us
There are many ways of us, which I will tell all the similitudes;
and now it is necessary that I say all the difference between us and issue.
I say that discharge is continued fever, as long as the ebullition has not passed and the porridge is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
With the nostril there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains a pustule, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a pimple, and becomes large;
and they are according to their appearances, either greasy or moist, and very colorful as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the nose, that you test and inquire first with all the instruments which are called "forceps", according to what its shape will come to in the chapter which follows.
And the method of inquiring into abscesses of the brain is to squeeze at the most moist spot that you find in the abscess, and gradually press your fingers in, as far as you know that the instrument has pierced the membrane, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then pull out the instrument, and take care not to let anything escape.
If the pus flows freely, whatever its colour, they should proceed as I have said for other abscesses.
And if no pus comes out after the instrument is inserted, know that it is solid, so they should make a cross-shaped incision and take it out with pincers, and lightly scrape away at each side of the wound to draw out the skin where it lies, so that you draw it out healthy with the nail;
and if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will return to us many times;
and if a little remains and the pain afflicts you, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, and press on the wound, and apply hot poultices for abscesses, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed;
and if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat what is inside with ointment.
and if the vein beats against you or another, quickly apply ground vitriol and leave it for two or three days until the wound suppurates and the bleeding stops; then return to the cupping as before.
Here are the forms of the trocar, which come in three types: large, medium, and small; and there are three squares, called "albaret", and one called "breb", and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, for piercing abscesses of fistula.
They are like needles used for piercing sorcerers, made of brass, iron, or silver, and the black-tipped ones are best for piercing the tunnels of fistula.
They come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the opening of the fistula.
The shapes of warts are of many kinds, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are warts which have two curves in three ways also.
and there are warts with three curves, and they are also of three kinds; and there are warts with two curves, and warts with only one curve, and they are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
The tips of these which are cut are sharp, and there are some which do not cut except from one side, so that we do not cut the vein or nerve;
and these intrusions are the needles used in many ways, so that the patient does not hurt themselves while opening abscesses;
and are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you can see;
and we should not use them except in fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar places;
and sometimes we make another small instrument, like slices of fisticuffs, according to this form, with which one stops the flow of blood;
and they put it sometimes in the place that heals by cutting the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes they mend according to this large form;
Sometimes men's nipples swell when they become corrupt, so that they resemble women's nipples.
and remain ugly and swollen; and if anyone wants to cure them, they should follow this procedure from line b to g.: then scorch the fat, and apply medicine to the wound in layers, then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and let it heal.
and if the nipple sinks in and becomes soft due to its size, as it does in women, then cut it in two at the base, through two similar slits; wherein one is attached to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g. then scrape the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment; and let it be until it absorbs the residue and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the armpits
These abscesses that come from under the armpits are like hard scrofula, and some contain moisture.
So those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b. up to line g.: And when all the pus inside the abscess is drained, plug the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscesses are like scrofula, then treat them as we have said for fissures of scrofula, and if the wound is closed, then apply cautery as we have said before.
from the rupture of an artery
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sewn up, many times abscesses will occur, as well as swelling in the vein and abscess.
And if one knows it is from an artery, then the abscess will be long and deep. and when you sense it with your fingers, you will feel .i. dislocation; and when it is in the vein, there is a visible displacement.
and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpit and in the groin and neck and many other places, and it is large. Therefore, one should avoid the cure with iron, and in those who are bald, one should also avoid it, as well as in those with inflammation of the artery that makes a hole in the skin of the head.
Therefore, one should avoid the cure with iron, and in those who are bald, one should also avoid it, as well as in those with inflammation of the artery that makes a hole in the skin of the head. Then perform an incision with a scalpel, and carefully cut the artery away from the membranes, until it is fully exposed.
then put a needle underneath it and pierce it all the way to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
then probe the place between the two ties with an introducer until the pus comes out and the abscess is drained;
then administer the cure that makes the wound clean, until the thread comes out; then cure it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed;
and if the abscess is at the base of the vein, you must grasp with your hand as much of the abscess as you can all over the skin, then insert the needle under the area you are holding in your hand and pierce it, and pass through .i. double thread so that you draw it from the other side; then ligature the abscess, as I told you, with either of the two parts of the thread;
and if you doubt that the thread will slip out, insert another needle through all of the thread under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four places;
then scrape off the abscess until the surplus comes out, then scrape off the surplus from the heart and leave what is attached.
then put on a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer poultices and ointments until it is healed.
abscesses of the nerves
Also, as abscesses come in the artery and vein, they also come to the nerves when they are hurt, or through excessive exertion, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows and everywhere where there are joints, and it is a painful abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it has various dispositions without pain.
And when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in a deep part of the body but under the skin.
And it is useless to bandage it tightly from all sides, and it neither goes forward nor backward, nor downward nor upward, and one who has a dislocation should not cover it with iron; otherwise, there might be contraction.
And those who have it on the head or forehead, use the spathonile. If the abscess is small, hold it with tongs and cut it at its root;
And if it is large, suspend it with a hook and lacerate it, then cut out the bone and sew up the wound, treating it until it is healed.
large boils hanging Sometimes they occur in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "ringworm" because of its resemblance to oats, and its root is subtle, and the scabs are large; and there are both small and very large ones.
and I saw .I. man who had .ii. or belly that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference in them, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were split open, and moisture ran out of them.
I cut them and found one weighing .xviij. ounces and the other .vj. ounces, and their texture was such that if you look at the joint, the disease is moist, and the articular cartilage is white and moist with a fine root;
if the cut is wide, and there are large blood vessels in it, and if the blood flows out, then you must hasten with the cautery;
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision from the iron, then take  .i. well-made thread, tie off the joint as we have said, and leave it for  .ij. days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to constrict the hair tightly until it slips the joint, and pull gently on it without effort; and if the roots are thick, then there is fear of slipping out the same way through the belly, but you can certainly grip half of it,
then cauterize it so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and beware of gripping the part which is of a red colour and poor sensation and milk-white appearance.
For this is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the cure for cancers below.
when the boil has burst
If the appearance of a hernia comes from cauterization of a wound or from a fissure in a syphilitic ulcer, and it is on the abdomen, and some of the intestines protrude out, as happens with other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is mentioned earlier, or from wind.
And if it is from a rupture of the syphilitic ulcer and an opening in the intestines, then the color of the abscess will be similar to the color of the body, and there will be little pain and various openings. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestines, then it will be very diverse; and when pressed with the fingers, it retracts, and then returns, and sometimes it is constricted, and it increases in size at the entrance to the bath due to intense exertion.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is a minor issue and opens easily when pressed with the hand, without any constriction; but if it is due to blood, then there are signs of large and hard abscesses, and they are fixed according to a certain amount.
And if it is due to flatulence, then it is swollen in the touch, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or flatulence. You should let it be cured. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or bowels, then you should instruct the patient to tighten his belt and hold himself upright, then sign around the belly; then command him to sit between your hands, then go around the area you have marked all around the ulcer then cut the top of the abscess halfway down to the large hook;
then cut the top of the abscess halfway down to the string, and push your index finger into it, and pull out the intestine; if you find it caught in the bowel, then free it and push the intestine back into the abdomen.
and if they find an obstruction, they grab it at the elbow, cut out the surplus;
and if the artery makes a counter-clockwise turn, or the vein, then go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread them with two strong threads, and then pierce through what you have done in a cross shape;
then pull the abscess out by four inches on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave it as long as possible, and the dead flesh will come out on its own; where you cup it when it is subtle and tender, then treat it as needed, and lance the abscess as we have said;
where you cup it when it is subtle and tender, then treat it as needed, and lance the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as needed, and close the wound.
from which ulcer
We have described in the division of similarities of ulceration, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid the cure of iron; and we speak of ulcer in the genitals, and great caution is required in its cure, and the ancients said that when ulcers are in places where they can be cut, such as ulcers in breasts, and in similar places, then all of it must be removed when it is in the beginning. And when it is large and old, one should not approach it at all, for I have never been able to heal any of them, nor has anyone ever healed them before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile sometimes; then make him bleed if he has manifest fullness; then open the wound .i. good place to do the work; then cut your oncines or cancer, and the head from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow out completely, and squeeze well the place with your hand or something, and if the bleeding makes you opposite to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood vessels are burned; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
of hydropsy We have already spoken of the appearances of hydropsy, and in what manner the gathering of fluid occurs, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure which is made by medicine, and that which is cured by iron; so we will now speak only briefly. And you should not use iron in these two appearances: that is, tympanites and hyposarche, for these are deadly; therefore, when you treat this appearance of hydropsy called 'eclites' with medicine, and the cure does not help, if you see that the patient is weak or has another illness besides hydropsy, such as diarrhoea and similar conditions, then do not use iron, for there is doubt in these cases. But if you see the patient is strong and has only hydropsy, and is neither too young nor too old, then you should proceed thus: Take the patient by the right hand, and the assistant presses his belly by pushing water to the lowest part of the foot. Then take the spathula with spines according to this shape: it should be pointed at both ends, yet not so sharp that it can pierce all the way to the intestine when inserted, nor can it cause bleeding.
Then examine if the dropsy is in the intestines: you should split under the navel on the right side for three fingers; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then the split should be on the left side for three fingers; and if it's due to spleen disease, then it should be on the right, and the patient must not lie on the split so that the fluids do not flow to that weak spot.
Then pierce the skin with the instrument and draw it out, and lift your hand as you insert the entire spathula between the skin and the syphon, just like when skinning an animal to the thickness of a fingernail or more; then pierce the syphon until the spathula reaches the desired location, which is where the water is, then pull it out and insert this instrument, from which comes the shape: It resembles a silver needle, made of copper or lightweight brass, and has a small hole on the lower part; and on one side there are three holes, two on one side, and one on the other, and the head is shaped like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make to shape a pen:
the head of the penis is the foreskin, so that when the instrument comes to water, it goes up onto the instrument; therefore empty half or a third, because if you empty more than you should in that hour, by chance the patient dies from the shock to his spirit from the weapon, or he falls limp, or he approaches death;
but empty according to the amount of its virtue and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient indicate, and his pulse; then remove the instrument and retain the water, which is now held by the membrane that blocks the opening that I have described, that you pierce in this manner; then use the instrument again the next day if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw off a small quantity of water;
Do this each day, and be careful not to leave any water in him but a little; and if you doubt about the patient, and you leave a lot of water in him, then use the treatment of burial or hot sand, and sweating or bathing, and drinking tea, and the treatment of medicines that dry up his body until he is healed, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after drawing off the water, as I said before.
of the foreskin of the penis: Sometimes children are born without an opening in their penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place. They should immediately have a very fine spatule inserted according to this form: then put into the opening a very thin plug of lead, and tie and hold it there for three or four days, and when they want to urinate, remove the plug and let them urinate, and then replace it; and perhaps they do not need it at all, because the urine that comes out will not allow the plug to stay in. Those with a small opening will be helped by the lead plug, as we have said, and it will widen. Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are afflicted, for some are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot copulate because the matter cannot reach the testicles, and this is a serious illness.
And the way to treat it is for the patient to lie on his back, then the tip and shaft of the penis are made as hard as a feather, with the opening in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding that often occurs, and if it does, stanch it with what stanches blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of pimples on the penis Many times this albata occurs in the penis, and it is an ugly-looking swelling; there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; you should grab them with a pair of tweezers, pull them out carefully, then clean and dry them thoroughly, apply moistened cotton wool in Egyptian ointment, then treat the area with diaphenicon ointment until it heals. And if the albata is malignant, putrid-looking and foul-smelling, you should apply cautery to it. When you have pulled it out, and if the albata is on the surface of the penis, with part of it inside the skin and part outside, you should first remove the albata that is inside; and when it is healed, treat the external portion. For if you treat them both together, you cannot be sure that the glans of the penis will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption will come upon the penis and testicles; so you must cut away all that is black and rotten, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from pomegranate rinds and rose petals, then treat it with further treatments until it heals.
And if there is bleeding, you should apply the lunar cautery in the following way: Cauteries have two purposes: for bleeding and for corruption; and when the glans of the penis are withered and shrivelled, you should insert a tube into the penis and let the patient urinate through it. And when the skin at the tip of the penis becomes raw, either due to a wound or an abscess, you must circumcise it with a sharp instrument so that the foreskin is completely removed and the glans of the penis is freed from all sides.
and if it is painful to urinate, you must incision with a spatulum at the tip of the penis and scrotum; then withdraw quickly between two incisions, and place a thin piece of wet linen in cold water so that it does not dry out again.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not like other wounds in terms of healing; however, when we perform this procedure intentionally, especially on infants, it is necessary to do it properly and gently for their well-being.
I say that the ancient authors did not describe the circumcision of their children because they did not practice it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experimentation.
Because I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision all around the glans, and in some cases even cut off the foreskin entirely; this caused the skin to dry out and form a scar, as there were two membranes, and sometimes the upper one was removed while the lower one remained.
Then they cover it again, and the pain is doubled, and with the washing of the glans, which is not healed at the tip of the member; and in washing the nail, sometimes the instrument slips, and they injure the work, and many times they grow back so that they don't need to be washed, and I have seen this.
Of the washing that is done around the glans, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut accurately both above and below.
Because when you press your hand, it cuts evenly all around; but the thread must be well stretched against the skin; and the method of the first operation is that you should make the child think, if he is conscious, that you are only tying the thread around his penis, and then you should make him urinate in all the ways you can. then let him hold it upright between his hands, and press the forces between his hands or under his feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the penis and breathe or sniff, and pull it upwards until the head of the penis is inside; then cleanse it well from the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it under with another ligature; and hold it with two fingers by the second ligature at the foreskin and index finger, and press between the two ligatures, then lift the glans quickly and pull the head of the penis;
then let him hold it upright between his hands, and press the forces between his hands or under his feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the penis and breathe or sniff, and pull it upwards until the head of the penis is inside; then cleanse it well from the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it under with another ligature; and hold it with two fingers by the second ligature at the foreskin and index finger, and press between the two ligatures, then lift the glans quickly and pull the head of the penis; then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the wound; and put powder on top, and on top of the powder a glue-soaked cloth made from a cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, cooked with good and fresh rosemary oil, and leave it until the next day, and treat it again until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps for cleansing should be as follows: the two heads should be thin and sharp, and the handles should be as wide as the palm of the hand equally.
The mistake in cleansing is when the glans slips inside during incising; therefore, you must stretch it with your nail so that the glans makes an abscess; then, press equally and if you cannot hold it with your nail, hold it with tweezers, then press.
And if it persists for 3 days, and that which is under the foreskin is swollen, let it be until the hot abscess is soothed and the skin is lightly scratched; then copulate as much as you can, being careful not to touch the foreskin, this will do him no harm.
Treat therefore the area of sudden wounds with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if he copulates beyond measure, and it goes above, it will do no harm; treat it therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.
from the retention of urine
The retention of urine is from the stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or birth defect, or similar things, which we have discussed in the division;
and if the urine is not released, and you see it being held back by the stone which is lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should bend forward over his knees; and his feet should be placed on his back, and he should expand his belly from above his back, and restrain himself as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone upwards, causing the urine to flow.
and if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called a 'syringe'. This is its form: it should be made of thin silver, like the shaft of an arrow; the tube should be about a palm and a half long, and thin at the tip.
And the method of removing the urine is as follows: take a double thread and tie a small ball of wool or cotton at the tip; then push the tip of the thread into the syringe, and twist the excess wool so that it fits snugly against the tip of the syringe. Next, grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair, and lubricate the bladder and penis with warm oil or olive oil and egg yolk;
then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, and then bend the penis upwards towards the belly; then push the syringe forward into the bladder, and the patient will feel it enter the bladder, and this is not done correctly if it hurts; then pull the thread and the wool ball out, and the urine will follow the wool, then remove the syringe, and have the patient urinate;
and restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
of diseases of the bladder
When scabs or blood come in the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see water and medicine dripping from it, then do this with all the apparatus that is called a "clepsydra", and this is how:
It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the leather tube through which the medicine flows should be such that it blocks the shaft without addition, so that one can draw out moisture and push when needed;
and when you see your medicine flowing into the bladder, put the tip of the syringe into the moisture, and suck in the liquid that is there; then release it strongly into the syringe, and the moisture will enter the syringe, and go to the bladder immediately, so that the patient feels it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder: here it is:
And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher up; and below are .i. string or the strings hang; then take a sheep's bladder and put in it the moisture with which you want to enema the bladder; then tie the moisture between the .ij. strings formed by a thin double thread, and heat .i. pocket that moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then pull your hand on the bladder so that all the moisture comes gently in, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make  .i a round circle, and pierce it all around; then insert a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle like you would assemble a dal, and put inside what you want to oil and moisture and water, and attach it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, by pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of stone
We have already discussed in the division the ways of stone, and its extraction along with medicines; and I have described the difference between a stone lodged in the bladder, and all the signs, and in which type of stone one should operate: in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs most often in children, and it is a sign that the water flows from the bladder, resembling water in its subtlety; and it causes pain to the patient, and he grasps his penis, and can urinate many times, and then it blocks; and many of these cause the foundation [of the body]; and healing is easier for children until they are 4 years old, and it is much more serious in the elderly, and it is midway between youth and old age; and the cure is generally easier for those who have larger stones than for those with smaller ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema to draw out any feces that may be blocking the intestines. For sometimes this can obstruct the extraction of the stone.
Take the patient by the feet, and raise him up and move him about so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it rises from its place higher up; then make him sit between your hands, and have his hands under his thighs so that the bladder is completely tilted downward; then examine and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in its place, then you should cut into the stone right away. And if it does not slip out with the touch all at once, then wet your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is a young man, or your middle finger if the patient is older; and insert it into its opening, and examine the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, pull it toward the neck of the bladder; then press on it with your finger, and push it out to where you want to cut.
And instruct the minister to press on the bladder with his hand, and tell him to lift up the testicles with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum firmly, following its natural curve.Et s’il sent la piere a son doi indice ou moien, si quier la piere avec li spatumile et li boutons dedens, et quant il la sens, si l’amoine vers le col de la vessie;
And they cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel; and it should be straight on the stone, and both fingers should be on the anus, and the incision should be diagonal so that it is wide at the top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
By chance, the pressure from the fingers on the anus will cause it to slip out without effort; and you should know that there is such a stone in which there are angles and edges: it is easy to extract; and there is another type that is underneath, similar to a grape, and round, from which extraction is difficult.
For one with angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not slip out, you should use tweezers that are like a file at the end to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you put under it a very thin instrument curved at the end; and if you cannot grab it in this way, then widen the opening a little and pour vinegar underneath;
and if there is more than one stone, then first remove the largest one at the neck of the bladder, then cut it off, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards. And if it is very large, then it must be broken up, and a larger incision made. For two things can happen to the patient: they may die, or the urine will come out through the gap where the foreskin cannot heal; but nevertheless, try to pull it, or break it up with tweezers, until you extract it in pieces;
and when you have finished your work, then dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it up, and place over it a damp cloth anointed with oil and wine, or with oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then reapply the bandage around his neck, and do not loosen the ligature until the third day.
And when you loosen it, then wash the site well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses and scorchings and blood congealings come in the wound and the bladder is blocked by this, which is known in such a way that it passes without urine: therefore insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and burst;
then lift the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and assist him in every way you know how, until it is healed; and it is necessary that every hour when you treat him, to tie his two thighs together and bring the remedies over the site.
And if the stone is small and lodged in the passage of the penis, and fixed there, and the urine cannot pass; then the treatment of what I have said should be done repeatedly, that you should cut it many times, this is an excuse for cutting according to this treatment. I have already proven this.
Take an iron rod according to this form and let it be filed into three angles:
Then take a wire and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then insert the rod gently into the penis until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod in your hand within the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then the urine will come out at once, then press your hand on what is left of the stone which is inside the penis. Then it is immediately broken, and comes out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
and if you cannot do this because of any obstruction, then tie a wire underneath the stone and another one above it, then make an incision in the penis at the site of the stone between the two wires, then pull it out, and untie the wires, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it heals.
of the stones of women
Sometimes stones form in women, and if they do, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who reveals herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
And the third reason is that one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of medicine; and the fourth reason is that the stone in a woman is often deeper than in a man, so a deeper incision is required, and there is great fear involved.
And if you see this is necessary, then you should press a midwife who is well-skilled, and with great difficulty she may find it, and if she doesn't, then you must not hesitate to call upon a cunning woman who is wise in the ways of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the inquiry into the stone.
and look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then she should press her thumb into her vagina and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it under her thumb and recommend that she presses her thumb into her vagina with the pain, and press her left hand firmly over her bladder.
If she finds it, then she should move the stone gradually from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the urethra, where it is most sensitive, and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move her thumb over or under the stone, and let the incision be small at first;
then insert the probe into the incision, if you feel the stone is sharp enough to cut through the tissue so that the stone can come out, and know that there are many types of stones: some are small and smooth, others are large and rough, long, and rounded, and have various shapes. Know their likenesses in order to identify them.
And if the blood is slow to come out, put in a little powdered vitriol and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your task and remove the stone, and have the instruments that I told you about before to help you with the extraction of the stone from men.
And if the blood flows and it is from an artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the site, and constrict with bandages and a tourniquet, and no more compression, and leave the stone alone and do not try to remove it, for fear the patient might die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the site has healed, return to your work until the stone is removed.
of fleshy hernia
Aquous fluid is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white pus, which is beneath the heart of the testicles, containing the egg; and is called "pus", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and that is the skin of the testicle between the white pus that we have mentioned. And this does not happen rarely.
And the generation of this disease is due to weakness that comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread out.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors; sometimes it is a yellowish hue, sometimes red, sometimes black, sometimes watery white, and it happens in other ways as well.
and these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white scrotum that we have described, then there are red spots, like a rose, and it does not open the testicles, for there is moisture all around it.
And if there is moisture in the scrotum itself, then there are red spots with part of an egg, and because of this, one thinks it is another kind of egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white testicle, he feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all over the entrance, from which the shape is as mentioned before. According to this then, what comes after the entrance, judge what is inside.
According to this then, what comes after the entrance, judge what is inside. And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he should lie on his back, on something slightly raised, and have a lot of coverings under him;
then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two sides of the heart of the scrotum;
Take the spatulum of lead, and cut the skin of the scrotum from its tip to the base, making an incision straight down to the white membrane, and then carefully scrape off the skin according to your ability.
Then pierce the testicle with a large needle and draw out all the water, then insert your fingers and bring up the testicle; do not touch the skin of the scrotum but only the testicle itself. Carefully cut around its edge in sections, being careful to avoid bleeding too much, otherwise the water will return.
And if the testicle slips out during your work, return it to its place when you have finished working on the testicle; then sew together the two lips of the skin of the scrotum with a single stitch and treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed.
And if you find that the testicle is corrupted by another disease, then you must ligate the vessels which are suspended, fearing a rupture of blood; then cut the scrotum all around the suspension, extract the testicle and treat it as we have said.
And if water is collected in two parts together, know that they are two branches; then cup the other part just as you did the first, likewise, wipe away the blood and put soft linen moistened with rose oil into the wound.
And put another piece of soft linen moistened with wine and oil on top, and place the two branches on it, and put doubled sheets on top, and tie it all along according to this form:
Then take two sheets and fill them with wadded linen according to this shape and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, and one end press against the buttock up to the back, and the other to the groins, and the other two ends on the two armpits, and tie all the fastening in the loop of the breeches.
And sometimes this branch of cautery is used instead of an iron knife, and it is that you press a thin cautery knife against the skin of the branches, and it is heated as we have said, so that the white puss containing the water is uncovered;
take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the ulcer at the base of the fingernail, and scorch it with this delicate hot cautery.
And the scrotum in every way you can, until you pull it all out; and be careful that the fire does not touch the nail; and know that this operation is safer; and watch for blood loss, and damage from cutting operations.
And if nothing makes you contrary, or hot abscesses or blood loss or anything else, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, then administer a perforation, as I have told you, and when you are certain through the signs we have discussed that the pus is laid out,
let the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess at its base to the full depth of the spathum, and make an opening in the long bone; and let the holes be large so that all the pus may flow out;
then put cotton on the spot and bandage it, and let it be so that the remaining pus may flow out, then treat the wound until it is healed;
and if the white thread does not let the pus flow out through the mouth of the wound, then you must put in it a feather or instrument used to treat the sick, as described earlier; and enlarge the wound a little, and know that the pus will return and be accumulated after six months or so, and when it is accumulated as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
of the testicle abscess
Know that in the dissection of this nerve there are many places where fear occurs, for which reason I think it best to leave it.
And I will tell you about the treatment and appearance of the abscess.
I therefore say that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the testicles; and this happens in many cases.
This is to know about excess bitterness and agility, which is spread in the testicles, or from impact;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; it does not hurt, and the abscess is serious.
and by chance there are some grayish, hairy abscesses with pus-like color, and sometimes they come from a burst artery or vein inflammation.
When it is from a burst artery, it is recognized by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
Those who are affected by swelling of the vein are known by their appearance and the touch of the fingers.
and one can well make the incision on this appearance, and on the other marks; and you should cut the skin of the testicles, then the eggs will be on top, and the thread will be removed from all parts of the egg.
If the eggs are already cooked with these new marks, then you should cut the egg and the thread;
and if it is in the skin, or in that which is within the vessels, then you must free all that membrane, and smooth out the lump.
And if the growth is in the back, then you must cut it all out and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is finished, then dress the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
of the abscess of the testicles:
Here is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling a cherry, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans painfully when he urinates;
and the treatment of this disease is also as dangerous as the one mentioned earlier,
and nonetheless, we will tell you about it according to what the ancients did.
The patient should sit on an elevated chair, then you tie the suspenders of the scrotum tightly with your hands. You should also tie all the vessels that are close to the penis, and tie them tightly, and extend them firmly.
Then, with a sharp knife, cut through the vessels, as far as they are exposed,
and then skin from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
then I insert a needle where it is, with a double thread, and tie it at the first place where the thread came out, and tie it again at the other end. then cut them in the middle correctly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture;
then treat the wound as in the others, so that no blood vessels burst that might cause bleeding in one of the eyes;
for this does not cause harm, and if all the vessels are bleeding, then one must draw out the eyes at every vessel; so that the blood does not lose its heat through the incision of the vessels, drying up and unable to help themselves.
of the rot of the eye socket The cause of this disease is from the incision that comes to the eye socket, or the extension above the abdomen in the part of the intestines, causing the intestines to descend from that rot to one of the testicles;
and this rot is in the eye socket or from its extension, and these two ways come from causes: from concussion, or jumping, or crying, or lifting heavy objects, and similar things;
and the signs of dysentery are that it happens a little bit at a time over a long period and does not come on suddenly. and the abscesses are even throughout to the depth, because dysentery presses on the intestines.
And the sign is when it is from dysentery, that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses are various appearances below the skin, and it is due to the exit of the intestine and the body's defense against dysentery.
And sometimes the peritonitis is retained inside, and it causes great suffering to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron there is fear, which is why one should avoid it.
And the manner of the operation is that you command the patient to draw in his intestines with his hand into the wound, if he can reach it. Then lean over his shoulder between your hands and lift his hips.
Then press the chest upwards, and cut all the skin of the scrotum from the top; then push inside the lips of the wound hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the pus can come out;
then scrape off the scurf which is under the skin of the testicles, as far as the white, hard scurf is exposed all around;
then put your index finger into what is under the testicle, between the white scurf which is under the skin of the egg and between the second scurf;
and move the egg with your left hand to the right side of the scrotum, and the white scurf will be on top facing your left hand, and lift the egg with all the scurf towards the scrotum; and instruct the minister to extend the arm upward, and loosen what is constricted behind the elbow;
and feel with your fingers if there is any hardened intestinal swelling or white phlegm, and if you find anything, push it back into the abdomen below;
Then take a needle with .1. large thread made of .10. threads, and insert it into the rear part of the syphacus, which is beneath the scrotum skin; below the testicles, then pull on the head, which will appear through the threads, until there are .4. threads; Then tie them together one above the other in a cross shape, and bind the syphacus, of which we have spoken that is beneath the scrotum skin, with a strong ligature of 2 parts; then wrap the head with threads, and tie it tightly in two parts, so that no vessels which nourish it can enter, lest an abscess form there; and place the ligature according to the first long ligature in two turns of that, and after these two ligatures leave the syrup which is under the core of the testicles the size of a bean;
and then cut in the part which is under the skin of the testicles, as far as the blood flows, and the scrotum, as we have said before;et quere que le sang corre tant qu’il soit arresté, et la piere ne vienne en la fente; et s’ele est venue, que l’on li traie adés par la fente, si com nos avons dit ci devant.
Then bring moist wool in oil and place it on the wounds, and then bring the ligature which we have said. And sometimes the white syphilitic sore which we have described is cauterized after an incision out of fear of bleeding.
For this happens many times, and it leaves the wound open until it drains through it; and if it is slow to drain, then it should be opened with hot water and the application of what we have described should be repeated until it drains.
Then treat the wound with another treatment until it is completely healed.Quant li membres sont disloquez ou esloigez de lor leu, covient il que tu les remettes a lor leu; et s’il ne demourent, qu’il soit desaloiez par cause de moistor, et covient il que tu le remettes aler, si com il est dit au chapistre de l’ajutoire.
of carnous hernia
In this remedy I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is done like the remedy which is together with the vein, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the cut above, lightly from below;
then press gently on it, and cure the abscess of that which opens, until the vessels shrink; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the veins, as we have said, and it opens; and none of the intestines come out into the rectum, and if any do come out, it is a little, and they heal every hour;
and yet if he remains too long in this state, the wound or fistula believes that the intestines are descending;
and this happens through the extension of the fistula which is in the intestines, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and swollen open;
and the cure is through cauterization, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this way:
and the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then press the area of the rupture, swollen with pus, according to its size, about the amount of 3 ounces;
and then extract the boil which is under the skin, then take the thread and place it over the visible part of the boil;
and press it to the bottom of the abdomen, then tie the two ends of the thread visible over the boil on the head of the thread, and tie one and the other;
then extract the head of the thread, and do not cover the boil or stretch the vejiga or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines;
then treat it with wound treatment. And when you tie the threads, if the patient is clean and the wound is healed, as much as it needs to be.
The ulcer is constrained, and has no appearance in the wound, and cautery is effective in this case, and closer to safety.
of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Many times the skin of the scrotum softens in some men due to the testicles within becoming softened, and it is milky in appearance; and when one wishes to treat it, they should make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin on the skin of the scrotum; then bring together the two edges with a single stitch, or at most two or three stitches, firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the sutures.
of chastisement
You know that castration is despised in our law, and because of this, I would rather not discuss it in this book; and it is only necessary for two reasons: the first is so that the person who cares for the animal knows how to respond when asked, and knows how to care for it; and the other reason is because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, goats, and other beasts. I say then that castration is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting. In the method we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and hanging; then squeeze them in your hand until they are relaxed and you can no longer feel them. As for castration by cutting: you must hold the animal down, and press the skin of the testicles against your left hand, then tie off the scrotum, and cup your hands over each testicle ten times when you have scrotched them well; and I leave some pus and the fine pus that is on the vessels; and this method of castration is better than the one done by attraction, because in attraction, something from the testicles may remain, causing the animal to desire lust; then cure the wound until it heals.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites are of two types in men: the first is where between the two testicles appears also as the figure of a woman's nature, having hair, and sometimes urinating from it. And the other type is in women who have on the scrotum a penis and testicles. The treatment for both men and women is to cup the swollen areas, and treat them like any other wound; but in the second type of man, where urine escapes through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
of the tentigenes
of the tentigenes Tentigene is a growth attached to the natural part, so large that it is ugly to behold; some women have them as big as a hand, and this is called the "cure". You should cut away the excess of the tentigene on your hand or fingers, and scrape it gently; do not go too deep, lest bleeding occur, then cure the cure until it is healed. There is also another growth that arises at the mouth of the wound, which you should use, for it may heal, and it resembles a cyst, hence the ancient name "maladie kowee". You should scrape it as we have said for the tentigene, and cure it until it is healed.
of erratics
of erratics Erratic is when the orifice of the woman's womb is not perceived, or it is very small; it can be by nature from birth, or as an accident due to illness that comes upon her; or it may be due to a growth, or a thin or thick membrane, and is located deep in the wound, or on the sides, or underneath, wherever it may be; it affects conception and childbirth, and can even cause flowers to wither; and knowledge of this is through observing the dance. If the opening is apparent, then use your fingers or a rod. If it's a thin membrane, form it into a tube, and hold it in place until the membrane is broken and the opening is covered; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and apply it to the area, and let the woman lie on her back every day so that it does not adhere. And if it is hard and thick, you should scrape it with a spatulum similar to myrtle leaves. If it's an abscess, treat it as follows: use medicines that stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, and egg white; then insert a broad piece of linen so the wound does not close; this should be maintained for a long time, and apply a tent made of dry linen; then cure it with other cures until it is healed. And when there is a growth in the wound, treat it as follows, if it's not an abscess with an incision. For you must not touch an abscess to incise it.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings in the veins that cause pain, and when they are old, they become throbby. We have already discussed their similarities to ulcers, as well as the signs, and I will now mention those that can be cured. I state that hemorrhoids and throbby masses, when they are very painful in the anus, and there is no relief without using a sharp tool, can be treated with cauterization. If they are located near the mouth of the anus, then they can be felt and treated effectively. Therefore, it is important to place the patient in a cool room, cut off the hemorrhoids with tweezers at their roots, and apply a powder made from blood-restraining medicines like acacia, dragon's blood, and incense. Then, tie her feet to the wall for an hour, after which she should be placed in cold water. If there is bleeding, use a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, galls, and similar ingredients to soothe the area. Make a poultice with barley flour, honey, and garlic, and apply it to her back. If the pain subsides, that's a good sign. Otherwise, use leeches on her back and breasts without piercing them with a needle. Soak a cloth in plantain juice or dogwood juice mixed with old wine and place it over the affected area. Once the abscess has drained, treat the wound with ointment until it heals completely. The one called "albathir" is red and resembles a rough head; it should be cauterized as mentioned earlier and then treated until it heals.
of absesses in the anus:
There are many types of abscesses that can occur in the anus, such as sores, piercings, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, as well as other conditions that have been mentioned earlier. Now, I will describe the treatment for a hot abscess in the anus, which is not the same as a bowel abscess. If you notice that the abscess is firm at the beginning of its appearance, and there is heat and fever, and it turns red, then do not rush to pierce it immediately; instead, let the pain subside first. Then, make the patient sit on a chair, with two small pillows to lean against, one on the back and one under the feet, with the legs apart and the arms bent at the knees. Tie the arms under the knees with a good linen cloth, then insert the tip of the instrument used to open the anus and check the depth of the abscess so that the instrument does not go too deep and harm the patient. If the instrument is larger, cover the entrance of the anus with cloth so that it does not cause discomfort to the patient. Then, apply the instrument while holding it upright, and let the patient defecate. After that, clean the area with a moistened sponge or a cloth soaked in rose oil or dry vert oil, and insert the tent into the wound, pushing it deep into the anus and against the wall of the rectum. Then, place a cloth soaked in warm water or a decoction of mallows over the wound, followed by a poultice of linseed and honey on top, covering the entire area. After two days, remove the poultice and treat it with ointment until it heals. Sometimes, raising the anus and cleaning the wound with a clistere made of water, honey, and a decoction of lilies and aristolochia helps. Then, return to treating it with ointment. If the wound has drained and healed, avoid using heat, but treat it as mentioned earlier in the division.
of childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural shape of childbirth and its signs: when you see a woman straining downward and desiring to smell aromatics, then hasten the child's emergence; then you will know that this childbirth is according to nature, and the placenta comes out with the child; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so that the child comes out quickly. For when the child comes down on its head, the placenta follows, and the mother is cleansed of her excesses by good cleansing. But those who come in other ways do not come naturally. For sometimes a child comes out on its feet, or outside the body from the chest, hands, abdomen, or back; sometimes it is turned upside down on the neck, or it may take on other bad shapes. It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these matters, guarding against error and deception, and I will show you all the forms and how they should be helped.
If the child comes out head first in a natural way, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a stool or be held by women; and let her drink the juice of roasted oil or fenugreek, and then let the midwife insert the little spatulum, of which I will now describe the form: and split the placenta, and scrape away the mucous membrane with her fingernail until the moist fluid that is within flows out; and pinch the woman's belly so that the child comes down, and if it does not come down, then the woman must be enemaized with a fenugreek poultice mixed with oil of sweet alyssum; then let her drink and sneeze with condisi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the child will come out. And if both hands come out, then you must gently pull them in little by little; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up; then stand the chair on the ground, and let someone hold her so that she does not lean forward; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then grasp the hands at the knuckles that are mentioned above, and pull out the child, and reset it in the same way.
of the baby's birth on its feet When a child is born standing, it should be turned upside down. And then turn it slowly and gently until it is straight;
then grip one of its feet and extend it slowly.
When it jumps up to the armpit, instruct him to catch it, and make him sneeze by sprinkling pepper. If it jumps away, God willing.
And if it doesn't jump as we have said, then move it little by little until it returns to its natural position. For then it will be easy.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then take a mixture of honey and lard, and oil of sweet almonds, and melted gum, and grind them all together in .i. mortar; and put this ointment on the woman's nature inside and out, then have her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
and when she is moistened underneath, make a collar of myrrh for her and put it on her underneath, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then have her sneeze and pinch her nose and mouth, and gently press her belly, for the child will come out at once. of the child's delivery upon his knees When the child comes in this way, he puts his hands on his feet little by little;
of the baby's birth, which comes out wide enough for one hand to pass through It is necessary to engineer how to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then have the woman lift herself and walk;
if she cannot walk, then have her lie on a bed and stretch out her legs;
then bring the castor oil that I have mentioned;
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, then study to bring the hand back; and turn the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command that she hold on until the child comes out.
of the emergence of the child above his neck, and has his hands spread out, and his face turned towards his mother's back I must have him grip her hand, then turn it slowly, little by little, and gently;
and when it is even, he puts on the mustard mixture with honey and oil, as we have said, then he instructs that it moves little by little;
and when you have done this, make her sit on a seat, and instruct her to sneeze; and make her yawn. in the same way for all of the afterbirth
in the same way for all of the afterbirth When it comes out in this way to all of the afterbirth, catch the afterbirth with your fingers, as long as the fluids are drained;
and if the child lies on its face and on its neck, if the mother ignores it, it will not be retained and the child will die.
then place the baby inside, as long as you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman to grip herself several times:
from the exit of the twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely. Twins are a strange thing, and they do not live long if it is rare.
I know that they are multiplied and separated by the placenta which divides them, which is attached to the womb;
and sometimes they issue just as naturally as one alone, as we have said.
And if they are bleeding profusely, then the treatment as we have said, and be subtle in giving it, and do quickly and lightly what she does. and do thus as it is good for his health. of many children
of many children Sometimes they are formed in the womb: one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the glorious sage,
and it is necessary for the surgeon to know all of this, because a similar thing might happen to him; then act according to what is appropriate.
of the dead child
When you are treating a woman of a dead child or in the womb, as I have said in the division, and there is no pulse, and you are forced to work with your hands; if you should know whether the woman is of sound health and has no accident or fear of death.
the woman should be laid on her back, with her hips tilted downward and her legs lifted up.
and the midwife should apply the tea to her vagina, or if she is tied to the bed so that she does not move around too much and harm the baby.
Then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oil mixed with almace and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and musks. then gently push them into the marrow, then heat .i. needle until it is red hot
and be careful that the needle does not enter the brain if he pierces them in his eyes or nose or mouth or palate or under the beard or near the armpit,
and if the swelling is on the feet, pierce or press it at the middle of the shins;
and you should have him hold the needle in his right hand and place the thread between the fingers of his left hand and wind it around all his fingers lightly, and insert the needle into any of the places we mentioned so that he comes to the empty spot;
then pierce with another needle, or a third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;
and then they should be moved equally from one side to the other in order for them to come out, and the needles should be biting in order to hold, like so is the shape:
And if some part remains, then anoint the ball of one of his fingers with oil, and push it into that part, and draw out the other part;
and if nothing remains, then put this joint or a higher one, and do this until it all comes out firmly.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot pull back due to the dislocation, then you must wrap it with a cloth, until it all comes out;
then the cup over the joint of the foot or ankle, and so you must do with the other hand, and to the two feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is tight in the birth canal, or he has acute pain gathered at the top, you must push the spiny spathom between your fingers, and open the head and draw out the water; or you can use the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus, the infant's head is naturally large; and then pull out the bones with tongs,
and if the shoulder pops out and is forced, it should be broken as much as the moisture that is in the wound comes out;
and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as small as you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
And if the swelling is above his feet, then the pull is light, and the direction to the mouth of the wound is easy.
And if it is drawn in the belly or foot, then you must draw it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and open the belly or foot, so that the moisture that is in it runs out;
and if other limbs are affected, and the head remains if he also puts his hand into the wound and draws it out to the mouth of the wound; then he puts in a claw or two, and pulls it out;
and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by a hot abscess that has formed there, then one must not work on it, then you must administer moist and fatty things; and the patient should be given poultices, and warm water to drink.
And if the child is on its side, and you can get it to lie still, then administer what we have said for a living child:
and if one cannot, then let the body be cut into pieces, and nothing of the afterbirth left behind.
And when you have done this, if he is given what we have said about abscesses that come in the bones;
and bloodletting comes, let it be applied with a constrictive poultice, and other remedies are applied.
And I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had died, then another was sewn onto her, and the other one died too. After a long time, she got an abscess in her armpit, which swelled so much that it opened, and began to discharge a lot.
I was called to the cure, and I thought long and hard, but could not heal the wound.
I applied a strong attractive plaster, and out came a bone, and after a few days some more. I was very amazed, for I thought that bellies did not have bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I examined the wound and found a bone inside, until the woman felt better. and the woman lived like this for a long time, and then she suddenly died a little bit from the pain;
and I have not recorded this chapter until now because when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to treat it.
how to reset the dislocation to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the press, to which one adds the books; and at .2. turns of .2. knees of .2. lines. Nevertheless, let the horns be more subtle on the restriction, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the post be one digit wide, and the edges of the trees one digit, and one palm and a half long; and in between the .2. limbs are two adjustments of this same post, which are fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two settings are placed in the mouth of the wound to open when you turn the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lightweight, is made of boxwood or ebony, according to the appearance of pincers; and has on both sides two settings, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide;
and when you see the wound opened with all the instrument, then let the woman lie on her back, legs hanging and spread; then put the two parts of the instrument together in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument under between his thighs; then work your hand all along the instrument, just as you did with the tongs according to the amount you want to open the mouth of the wound, until the patient does what he wants.
These instruments are all decorated, and they have many similarities; and when the practitioner has prepared them, the action is more rapid and higher in status among people due to their quantity.
Do not despair over the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is inexcusable.
When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze with snuff, and hold her hands over her mouth and nose. and if she vomits, that's fine.
If not, take a jar or a covered container and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mother, such as chamomile, anise, fennel, and marsh mallow.
All of these herbs, or any of them, are cooked in water over fire; then put one end of the jar or pot into the mother's mouth, and hold the other end with your hand,
and let it fester until the vapors enter the wound; then make her sneeze, as we have said. Then remove the pus gently. And if it remains after this treatment and is not gone, then command the patient to soak her left hand in oil of sesamum or in a poultice of alder, and then put it back into the wound.
and probe the wound; and when she finds it, she should squeeze it gently and stretch it little by little straight, so that the wound does not hurt during extraction; But it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled; it will come loose and separate.
And if the mouth of the wound is narrow, we have described the treatment of sneezing, and smoking with herbs;
and if it doesn't work with everything we have said, then make sure that you don't try to pull it out;
but it is necessary that whoever is at the mouth of the wound, you tie them to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse her with a four-drug ointment;
if she can and will, and if not, still, when she farts there comes a bad smell from the stomach and head, and it makes the patient sick.
So you should use suitable fumigations: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dry figs.
The instrument used to fumigate the woman for retained afterbirth is as follows:
And it is made of glass like a cane, and one puts the slender end in the woman's womb, and the wide end above the fire;
and there is fumigation over the charcoal, and the dye until it is wasted, and start another one.
to pierce the fundament
Many children are born without their fundament being pierced; instead, there is a thin membrane. Therefore, the midwife should pierce that membrane with her finger, without using a spit-tipped needle, and she should be careful not to tear it;
then apply a poultice of wet linen soaked in wine and oil, then dress the wound with ointment until it heals.
And if you doubt that it will heal, insert a wooden peg into the hole and leave it for several days, then remove it when the child wants to move around.
And sometimes this stemming comes from a wound or abscess suddenly; so it must be stopped suddenly: then it should be treated as we have said with the wooden peg.
from the fistula of the fundament Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodular and grow larger as they emerge from the anus, or in the space between the two parts.
if there is one or multiple fistulas; and when that nodule is old, it opens up, and usually discharges a white fluid or pus.
and sometimes these fistulas are perforating; and they are caused by what comes out of the anus or is vented when the patient makes a bowel movement, and sometimes they burst out on their own.
And if there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they can reach the joint of the thigh, and all the way to the scrotum.
And thus one knows a fistula that seeps from the anus but does not seep: and you stick your index finger into the anus and insert a fine needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twistiness.
And if it has twistiness, then insert a slender tent or horsehair, as far as you can feel the tent or hair with your finger;
and if you cannot feel it, and there is no discharge or windiness or pus, as we have said: knowing that it does not pierce, then you can hurry to treat it.
And when the fistula penetrates up to the bladder or the urethra, urine leaks out and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it is pierced all the way to the hip joint, then the tent will be visible all the way to the location. if there is twisting and the pain extends around, then it has moved downward, and medicine will not help nor will poultices;
and for these persian ulcers there is no cure except through labor and the vanity of foolish physicians who interfere.
For that which is not persian and not old, there is hope of healing through fire, as I have experienced.
and let the patient lie on his back, and lift his legs up to his hips, and have his hips tilted towards his stomach; then insert a tent of bronze, or of wood if there is any twisting, as far as you know the tent goes.
If the pain is felt around the anus, you should insert your finger.
If you feel that the membrane has been pierced, and it is exposed where your finger enters the flesh, then you know that it has burst.and you find that it is soft; if one does not work on it, it cannot be cured.
One can still cure some, but this happens rarely;
and the aid for this, one burns the cautery slenderly according to the size of the fistula, as it is said before. and you insert it hot into the fistula all the way to the anus; and do this two or three times, until you know that the burnt flesh is like the quill of a feather.
Then treat it with poultices of moist bandages and butter, until the burnt flesh comes off; then treat it with ointment that softens and heals.
If he is thus healed, that is good. If not, he cannot be healed otherwise.
and if the tent goes in and does not pierce all the way to the bottom which is in the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula following the covering of the heart; if it cuts into the beginning of the fistula, and then fills up again before the tent, and then the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the top of the tent;
and the tent will be delivered, and fall down; then cut away those false flesh-growths which look like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
And if the pus flows out, and cuts between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
For fire cautery brings together two things: scorching of the flesh and stopping of blood and drying of moisture;
then the treatment of tents made wet with butter or crushed substances, until the place oozes and the flesh burns in that place;
then treat the wound with swelling onions in a hot charred state, and the remedies are dry.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes to a point from the fundament, and is removed from the body, put your finger in it and probe it.
If you feel the tent, and between them there is the skin or the membrane, or it is ready to pierce, then do not use force but rather follow a path of faith and hope through the administration of one of the three methods:
either cauterize it as we have said, or cut it to the bottom, or if you can, put in a tent and cure it as before.
And do not go too deep, lest you cut the tent that holds the fundament, and cause the evacuations to come out through there. then treat, as we have said;
then treat, as we have said; by chance you will be healed, or you remove that covering and wash it once it has been cut away from the foundation, either by probing or with another pointed instrument; then probe the wound, as much as you can;
then examine how to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the part above the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes there are fistulas according to this manner: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation under the skin above. Take a tent pierced at the tip according to this shape: And thread a twisted thread through it, and put the tent all the way through the thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
If it pierces through the margin inside, then pull out the thread from that hole, just as you would put your finger into the hole;
and draw the head with thread, and bring the two shoulders together, and hold them tightly for one or two days;
and restrain it sometimes, until the threads cut through the skin between the two;
then cure the wound until it is sewn up and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce through, then make it pierce in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
For it is not appropriate to cover the wound with a bandage until it is completely healed, as we have said, until it is healthy.
The form of the spiny spatomile, from which a fistula is made, is very sharp and pointed on one side; and on the other part it is not, so that one should not cover it, as you can see here:
Hemorrhoids are of two types: they can be inside the anus, like grains of resin, with small and large ones, and they bleed. And there can be one or more of them, both inside and at the top of the anus; but those that are outside have less moisture.
And they bleed a little, or have some yellow water or blood, and their color is like the body's.
And the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you should tell the patient to strain until they go into a chamber, so that the anus opens and they come out; if you hurry it with tweezers or hold it with your nail then pinch it at the roots.
and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of moisture, take it with a piece of cloth or cotton or a piece of camel's hair; then pull them out with your fingers, then pinch them, and sprinkle some hot powdered herbs on them that act as a cauterizing agent; or you may cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other remedies until they are healed;
and if the foundations cannot emerge, then cleanse the patient with a sharp and asperous enema to wash away what is in the foundations, so that it may emerge clearly;
and if the patient strains, and the thread comes out of the anus, then the cure is easy; and you should grasp them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and so that the incision does not need to be made with iron.
If you must perform the suturing in this way: take a twisted thread, and thread it through a needle, then pull the thread so that the needle goes through from one side, and turn both ends of the thread underneath the needle, and if it is too wide; and tight the thread firmly, then tie a knot in the thread, and remove the needle, and do likewise with all the others, but leave one to drain the excess blood;
then place over the wound a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and apply it to the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then let him defecate, and when he has finished, cleanse the wound with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
from dryness of the bowels or anus Many times there is a drying up of fluids in the intestines, and due to a constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine avails not.
Then you should cut it with a spatule or your nail to the quick, which will not let moisture in. Then clean it until it is sore as it ought to be.
And if it cannot heal, then restart the scraping more aggressively than before, until it heals and is scraped raw. then treat it until it is healed.
where trembling Warts are a small appearance of blisters on the body, and they go very deep.
And sometimes the wart shakes, and one feels it as dead because of the trembling, and it comes all over the body, and more on the hands than anywhere else.
And the cure is that you take a cane of an goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and put this cane on the vein, so that the purple circle the vein all around; then turn your hand along the whole cane so that you press all around the vein, and put it deeply, and squeeze the vein from its roots.
And if you see fit to make a cane of bronze or iron according to this form, and let it be slender underneath and drawn out on top:
do not pierce it, in order to hold it with the finger, and squeeze it. And if you see fit, cauterize the vein as it is before in the chapter of cauterization.
on the form of the enema Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or of molten bronze or steel; and sometimes one is made from these small and large instruments, according to the person to whom they are administered.
Those who are administered for the treatment of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the small and large enema is above wide, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
and it has a slit in the belly, as you can see, and the anus is inside; and it has two slits on one side, and one on the other.
and the belly where one puts the medicines is made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes,
and there is a distance of one digit between each hole, then tie into these holes a strong thread of twisted thread in a spiral, and assemble the belly so that it looks like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, and then give a enema; and this is the shape of the circle:
Let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the anus with oil or egg yolk, or similar thing, then insert it gently.
Then the minister squeezes his two hands together, so that it is all empty, then remove the syringe and leave the patient's legs exposed,
and if the medicine wants to come out, let it go as much as he can; and if he sleeps all night, it is even better.
And if you cleanse him of stomach sickness, and the medicine rushes out, then cleanse him again until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus or an abscess, then use enemas as gentle as for a baby.
and this is how to make the gentle enema that will not stretch the skin:
of wounds
We have already discussed in the division the cure of wounds; now we will discuss the cures with the hands and with medicine, according to the situation.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and according to what makes them.
The objects that make wounds are by stone impact, and sword and knife cuts, or by spear, staff, arrow, or similar things.
Or wounds are made according to the places in the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or leg, or belly, or liver, and similar members;
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because their memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, one should take care whether it is due to a blow from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still intact but the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess: then make the wound bleed quickly from the cephalic vein itself if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction to the damaged part;
and lessen the patient's consumption of wine and rich foods.
And if he does not want to bleed, then his food should be reduced, and he should not drink wine or eat meat;
and put a poultice on the wound, if a hot abscess forms, simply wet cotton in rose oil or in wine with styptic.
and if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound if it is fresh and bleeding, and has not been moved by the wind: powder which I will describe shortly.
And if the burn has been moved by the air, put on some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like that of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by sutures, then bring them together by stitches, as I will describe for wounds in the belly, at the ribcage.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it can be closed, but only with a small piece of skin left attached, then close the wound with medicine, and restore tough skin in place of the missing skin. and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods such as testes, cooked wheat, and similar items.
And if you find pus in the skin, but not reaching to the bone, then scrape away the pus, and then cure it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which does not clot, and it cannot be stopped with medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it dislodged, then tie it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is light: you must apply this powder that cauterizes so that the burn has healed.
And the manner of the powder is as follows: take incense one part, dragon's blood two parts, quicklime three parts, and ground it finely together, and apply it to the wound, and bind it tightly so that it heals well and joins to the flesh.
and then tie it well, and leave it untied if it is not swollen; for the medicine is not removed until it has healed.
And sometimes cautery is done with chalk alone when incense and dragon's blood are not available, but the wound is cauterized nonetheless.
And if the cautery has moved the wound, one should stay in the same place and not move at all, and not put any of this powder on it.
but one should apply some digestive poultices, or barley flour made with water and honey, until the wound heals over. then treat other treatments until he is healed.
And if the fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then I will extract it with fine tweezers:
and I will tell you about fractures of the head next.
of a wound on the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or artery is cut.
If it's a nerve, there's nothing else to do but leave it alone and not apply anything restrictive, because it hurts the nerves and makes them retreat.Car as ners de l’ome sont si tendus sus li corps que s’il fu entamiez, il ne peut demourer as ses leus naturals; and put nothing cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;Car s’on mit froit sus la plaie, il die oft;
but for the medicine, as with chalk washed in sweet water, and mixed with rosemary oil, and cooked washed also in sweet water, and other soft stones are mined according to this method, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then cut it and bind it with bands, then heal it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and she has a fever and is full of pus, then pierce her or cut lower down;
and if the artery is cut, and bleeding occurs, then stop it, and ligature it, and cauterize it if necessary;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the conduit is guarded, through which food goes, if it cuts the windpipe on the cane of the throat, and does not touch the throat but puts it back according to its natural shape; and then strain it gently, and let it rest for some days, then heal it with ointments that cause shedding until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then he should; and if there are bone fragments, then you should draw them all out if you can, and those that you cannot reach, then leave until the wound heals. and let the dislocation be released and aligned;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder I have described. And if there is bone in the wound, and a fistula forms, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of a spear or knife wound
If it is a deep spear or knife wound, and the patient is not bleeding at all: then know that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh with all its blood, then do not put powder on it in the first hour, or ligature it for fear of fainting, and returns to health, and overcomes the disease; but I apply an attractive ointment, and bind it .2. times a day;
and if you don't have an ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture,
and let the patient sleep on the wound for .3. days, or .4., or more; if there is no twitching or trembling of the heart, nor a shaking of the limbs. and when you see these good signs, then you know that the wound is healed. Then treat it with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, and there is pus, then you know that there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from an incision of a sword or knife, and it is single, in the front or back, then the treatment of that which is in front;
if it is large, then stitch it; and if it is small, then powder it, and if it has cut into the bone, and there are fragments in it, then clean the wound, and draw out the foreign bodies if they are loose; and if they are not loose, then let the wound fester, so that the extractions may be easier;
and for other wounds in other members is the judgment as we have said.
of the rupture of the belly
There are great, medium, and small ruptures of the belly;
Of the great wound, sometimes the intestine, or the nerve of the intestines, protrudes through which the entrance of air;
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one;
because one cannot put the intestines back in if one does not put them back in gradually, bit by bit; and because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, they close up even more if one does not warm them gradually;
and because it is useful for the more recent wound, one should reset the intestines to their place first. ii.
And know that the rupture of the belly occurs in four ways:
the two common sutures occur in the suture of the abdomen,
and the sutures of other wounds on the body and two other specific sutures are common to other wounds;
nevertheless, they are more suitable with the suture of the abdomen, and I will describe each one and clarify.
I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestine is protruding, and if something is dislocated, it can be put back by one of two methods: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a way: soak a sponge or soft cloth in warm water only or cook in water with squills and cypress and spice, and rinse the intestines until they're deflated;
and sometimes this wine is constricting, and it is better to drink it for deflation.
And when you see the swelling go down, then moisten the intestines with water or a mixture of herbs that have been cooked. For this alleviates the pain in the bowels and allows for easy passage.
And if it cannot be inserted easily, then make a small cut with the instrument used to remove hemorrhoids;
And the first treatment is more painful than the surgery, that one must not cut without great necessity.
and this is the instrument to split it with:
if you cut within the curve and do not cut out, and see here the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines pop out, if he puts it back according to its natural shape in its proper place, then you have the power, because this is possible.
When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on his back, and puts his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts if you put your understanding into this, that the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus one should manage what I say in both great and minor wounds.
For minor wounds, use what you are skilled at,
then have in your hands .i. minister compassionate who touches all the routure to his hand, and bring together the lips; and this is the common method of suturing,
and this is the common method of suturing, and you should thread a needle or more, depending on the width of the wound, then leave about a finger's width from the edge of the wound, and push an needle through it with a strong thread; and pierce the .2. heads of the skin with the .2. heads of the syringe,
then draw it through a double thread around the needle by .2 parts, then bring together the two lips of the wound smoothly,
and then leave a space of two fingers, and he thrusts in another needle; then tie the thread as you did for the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you need of needles, until all of the wound is closed;
and the needles are medium-sized, between thin and thick, because thin needles pierce all the way through the skin, and the very thick ones cannot pierce well enough. that is why they should be medium-sized;
and needles must not be pushed too deep into the flesh and through the skin,
so they do not tear and open the wound before it heals;
and then cover the heads of the needles with cloth so that they do not blister the patient while sleeping, and place wicks or threads on the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one needle,
The second stitch is common, and you shall assemble the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the syphilis together on one needle, having a strong thread in between; and when you have pierced these heads all four together,
and when you have pierced these heads all four together, then re-insert the needle into the part where you began, in the manner that one sews a cloth.
and place a distance between each stitch equal to the thickness of a thumbnail;
this sewing affects men,
and I sewed a wound that one man had on his stomach,
which was caused by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm-width large, and then of the intestines, well 12 palms wide,
and the wound was in his belly. I returned the intestine to where it had been 24 hours before,
and the wound healed in 15 days, and I cured him.
And they had judged him to have died, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I put cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until it healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle, and pierce it through the skin just to the bone inside.
when it has pierced the cortex straight-on, then insert the tip of the syringe or needle where you pierced the skin.
and then let it pierce through to the outside of the body from within;
and the technique for this sewing is the same as that used by leatherworkers to sew pelts: and let the הסיב  of one side go once, and take it back from the other, until the seam is completely stitched.
The second way of sewing, which Galen describes properly,
is such that they bring together the two parts naturally, and apply one end of the thread to one edge, in such a way:The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
stick a needle or sharp instrument near the eye, and pierce only that spot. and leave the two eyes of the tear duct; then turn the needle and pierce it from the outside inwards until you reach the inside, as two eyes of the tear duct;
then pierce both sides of the dislocated part, just to the bone inside, with .ii. other pins that are on the other side;
and it is the most common way to sew and the best.
Galen says this word, and some testify,
that one should sew the belly with .ii. needles, or it has thread in each;
and one needle must be pushed in from one side, and the other from the other, as those who sew up sores do;
and you should know that when a rupture is in the abdomen, if the rupture is more painful than at other places in the abdomen.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as long as the pus has moved, then re-insert the intestine and tie it off; then put on the powdered charcoal
then re-insert the intestine and tie it off; then put on the powdered charcoal and if the pus has moved, then put on some ointment that is available until the wound closes; and cut off the thread and tie up the sutures and the mastic; then heal the wound as with the others until it is healed;
and if you have no medicine, put old cotton on it immediately when it begins to ooze, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For you do not need any other medicine for various conditions when wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will spread to the principal limbs, you should wet a light cloth with tempered oil or rose oil, and place it around the nails and under the armpits;
and if there is pain or swelling in the bones, which often occurs,The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. if they are enema with red wine, and especially if the constipation reaches the intestines;
and it pierces inside, and you should know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to cure than the small one.
The intestine which is called "young" cannot be cured when it is raw, and it's because of the thinness of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
And if the splinter jumps out of the wound, then put it back in as far as the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it has become green or black, then you must tie off the area that is black so that no blood flow comes from there, because there are veins and arteries there;
then press on what is between the ligature, and places both heads hanging from the part below the wound to facilitate extraction when the sutures are cut and the wound opened.
of the wound where the boil was
When the intestines are ruptured, and the wound is small, one can repair it in some cases,
because I saw a man was wounded in the belly with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became a fistula and discharged fluids and gases;
I treated the wound according to what I knew, and did not stop treating it until it was healed and the wounds closed.
And when I saw him bleeding, I doubted that the patient had pain in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking;
and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a way: take thread from a ram's testicles, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the tremor has opened the mouth, he puts it against both lips,
then he puts another tremor after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely seized;
and examine the wound. If they enter the intestines and cause no harm to the patient,
one can tie off the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such a way: take the end of this intestine thread which is very charred, and then tie to the end of this thread a thin, twisted flax thread, then thread the needle with the intestine, and sew it up, and then return it to its original place;
and this way of stitching is not foreign except according to the path of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal grails, there is no healing without subtlety.
of fistula wherever it may be You should know that any wound or abscess, when it breaks open, is universally called a "fistula". and especially when it is swollen and filled with pus.
And a fistula is according to the green-colored, tough, white nodulation, where one does not feel pain, and is as smooth as the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it is clear and thin, and sometimes thick; sometimes it is small, and sometimes large;
and I have spoken of it in the section on wounds that any wound that is not healed and has no scabs this is only due to one of the seven causes:
that is, by the smallness of blood or body; or because of its wickedness; or because there is hard charcoal inside, and on the lips, which does not allow blisters to form; or because there is too much phlegm; or because the wound is putrid and the matter of poor quality; or because the medicine is not good for the treatment; or because the corruption is a type of pestilence; or because in that region digestion is slow and health comes late, and it swells by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Then I shall tell you about the treatment of a fistula which is caused by manual work.
You should know that a fistula can occur in any part of the body: because they come from large veins, arteries, and nerves, or the face, intestines, bladder, or any part of the body,The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. at the spine of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this way are of grief, and there is no other labor, and ignorance;
and if any fistula does not come to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you can see it, take a tent of copper or iron, if the fistula is straight, then want it;
and if the fistula is crooked, then seek a subtle tent of lead, because lead bends with the crookedness.
and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot properly seek it with tents, if he enemas through one of the openings,
because moisture quickly moves from one opening to another, and cleanses;
then you can see bleeding at your pleasure, and know if there is bone or nerve involved, and whether it pierces deeply;
and ask the patient about his pain as you press with your hand, and where he feels it;
and when you know for certain where it is located, whether it is near a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the places I have mentioned to you, then treat it according to what I have instructed.
or in any of the places I have mentioned to you, then treat it according to what I have instructed. and remove the putrefied matter and corrupted flesh from within; and then treat the wound until it is healed,
and if the fistula is very deep from one side to the other, then you must pack it as deeply as you can. then insert moist tents in the medicine water, and place them all the way to the head of the fistula,
then insert moist tents in the medicine water, and place them all the way to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes away the excess that remains at the bottom.
and then I put warm ointments on healthy flesh until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize it as we have said.
and if the bone is damaged from the fistula, then cut it out. If a vein or nerve causes pain in the main limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and darkness, then cut away the corruption, then treat things that are infected with a hot cautery until they are healed;
and if it is not healed and the wound reopens as before, know that you have not gone to the source;
if you uncover and dig until you reach the source, and remove all decay, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, that is good. If not, know that the decay is too deep for you to reach; if there is no other way except by lancing it to let out the pus;
and if there is a small bone rotten, and you can pull it with tweezers, if you extract it with an instrument suitable for this,
and if there are many bones, pull them all out, but do not leave any behind;
and if the moisture is causing problems, and there is no error or fear, if it burns and moisten and chars, and releases the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in one hour, then place on the wound something causing pus to form, and let it be until the puss has formed around the bones,
and then they will have more ease with the bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, then cut away only the rottenness until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large amount of腐肉, and it reaches all the way to the bone; if it should be bound and wrapped up to the point of putrefaction, and then treated until it is healed.
And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take example and help from it in your work.Car as il advint qu’il estoit si mal que il ne poait demorer sur son lit, si qu’il se deffroioit les lons de son lit et si qu’il gisoit sur le plancher.
He was a young man of about 30 years who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
so that the matter came to the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it;
but the surgeon, through their folly, operated so much that they opened the abscesses; and much matter came out, and it became a fistula, and many holes came out that all discharged pus from the body;
and many received treatment for two years, but there was no expert in the art of hand surgery
I saw his leg and the medicine they were using to treat him, and it did not seem right to me. and what was flowing through the holes was causing great harm; and the bodies of the young men were turning red and taking on a yellow color.
I pitched a tent at one of these openings, and then searched all the openings.
and found that they came together from all sides of the leg.
So I hurried and probed in one of the openings until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came to the bone within;
I saw what appeared to be corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except for that which I removed.
And I began to restore the wound with dried medicine over a long time, but it would not heal.
Then I started again, and exposed the bone as before,
and found that the corruption continued within the bone, so I treated it, then removed it, and struggled to heal the wound.
but I could not until I cut around a palm's width of bone, and freed it from all its tissue. then restored it with medicine; and he was healed and sewn up quickly,
and the operation did not need to be repeated except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure it, and because of the fear of death I had for him. For often because of bloodletting, he bled profusely, but he was completely healed.
For often because of bloodletting, he bled profusely, but he was completely healed. And in the place of the bone a hard lump appeared, and he was of good disposition and did not experience any harm or discomfort, neither when walking nor standing.
and stretch out the head, so that you draw up the corrupted flesh from below, and uncover the flesh above the spot where you see it is red, so that the red flesh does not bleed; and place a brand or a piece of wood under the bone to cover the rotten flesh; and one should go as far as one can see and feel the corruption, and go even further.
And if the bone is rotten and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part [of the body], then uncover the flesh completely; then place a brand underneath [the bone],
and then from one part to another the putrefaction, and let the suturing be done from the length of the putrefaction .a little bit, as we have said;
and if the putrefaction is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and sew up the bone on the other side;
and if the putrefaction is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other remedy but to cut it;
and if the putrefaction is at the joint of the hand, or at the joint of the foot, then this is a very serious matter, but nonetheless you must inquire about this corrosion, how it appeared to you; and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful not to harm the vein or nerve;
And know that the scissors and knives for cutting these bones are many, according to the seating of the bones and the appearance of them, and their thickness and their thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and because of this, one must prepare an instrument for each type of procedure.
And know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need according to your knowledge of this craft, and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; if you think about the instrument that you need according to what is appropriate for it.
from fire The shoulders may dislocate due to internal causes or external forces.
And when you have treated that dislocation with remedies, and they are not effective, then you should cover the affected limb up to the location of the dislocation, so that the patient escapes by death or by malice, which is greater, through defect of the limb;
so that the patient escapes by death or by malice, which is greater, through defect of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, appearing to be burnt by fire, and after blackness comes corrosion of the limb from one member to another, and affects throughout the body; so hasten to cover it,
and if it is by the sting of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion, adder, and similar creatures,
if the bite is on the head, then cut it off at the neck and do not give him any space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, then cut it off at the joint so that the sting does not come up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then cut it off at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death, and its efficacy should not be diminished despite the quantity of its virtue;
and it works in the same way when the corrosion comes to the foot; if it comes to the first joint, then the other joint after it;
and if it comes to the foot, then all of the foot; and if it climbs up the leg, then it reaches the joint of the knee;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no cure other than to let the patient die from exhaustion.
and the way of covering or binding the limb is that you tie it above and below, and one assistant pulls one of the ties downward, and another assistant pulls the other tie upward, and you loosen the skin that is between the two ties to a distance of one and a half finger widths, so that the bone is exposed;
then the cautery or silk, and place a piece of linen on each side so that the silk does not touch the healthy tissue, and cause further injury and abscesses elsewhere.
And if bleeding occurs when you operate, then cauterize the wound extensively, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete,
bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you what happened to a man in a dream:
There appeared on him a darkness that looked like a burn from fire,
And this corrosion came first in his right foot, so that it purpled all the foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he stopped covering his feet, and was healed;
and long after that, the corrosion returned to his finger, and he came to me,
and I applied striking remedies after cleansing his body, but he could not stop the corrosions;
and he asked me to cover his hand, but I did not want to, as I had no hope of stopping the corrosion; and I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand he would die, because the strength of the man was weak; and he became desperate and returned to his land, and cut off his hand, and was healed;
and I have not seen any harm come from doing so if one has need of it.
Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy area, and remains for so long that it causes a great gathering of pus. Then they rupture and drain, leaving the place hollow, just as with vessels; and the skin above is as delicate as a thin cloth, and it does not adhere to the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called 'healed'.
but if it extends to the bone, then it is called a "fistula".;
And for the scrotum, if you cut all around it, and especially when it is thin, just like a napkin. and do not worry about its decay.
And if you have confidence that the skin is healing, and the corruption is not complete, and the flesh is thick with pus, then treat it with a clyster thus:
examine if the breast is swollen and the breast that is in it has an offensive odor, then clysterize with Egyptian medicine made thus: take asafetida, oil, and litharge, equally, and put to cook in a vessel over fire, until the medicine is red and as thick as honey;
and then take some according to your need, and dissolve it in water and honey, And if used as a clyster, it will clear the bowels and relieve constipation;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. and leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it by squeezing it out;
do this several times until the breast is deflated and the swelling is gone;
and sometimes they are enema with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and take vinegar ash from grapevines, pour water on it,
then it flows and is cured by enema until you know that the breast is healed;
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither Egyptian medicine nor ashes water, then use an enema of water and honey with a little litarge powder; or you can enema with honey and sweet wine, so that the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine makes blood flow;
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is cleaned well, then cleanse it with a cloth soaked in warm water,
and you must apply a poultice of dried meat cooked in wine; or you cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken of the properties in the treatment of ointments;
and if the opening of the breast is small, and the tube of the enema cannot enter, widen it with a needle, and insert a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is widened;
and if the wound is too wide, then cut it and leave it only as wide as the place where the catheter can enter,
and if the opening that vomits is above, then cut it or lower to where it is. For when the bowel is perforated, one should not let any food enter. and if you cannot cut under the armpit as you wish, if fitted in such a way that the bowstring goes to the lowest place where it is;
and if you cannot cover the armpit underneath as you wish, if fitted in such a way that the bowstring runs slightly downward, and let nothing of the bowstring touch; and take strengthening medicines to place on the chest,
and they are placed on a linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then press firmly on the opening of the breast a bit larger than the first, then put ointment on another cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and place it over the aperture of the breast to ease the bowels, and do not loosen the large cloth until after many days once.
and that which is over the aperture of the breast, loosen often to ease the bowels, and know what flows from the bowels, whether it is poison, pus, or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has spread in such a way and you see the nature that leaps up from the hole of the breast, you know that the breast has opened, and approaches the saint.
And then loosen it in the morning, or at noon, and when you loosen the wound, change to another type of cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if breast milk flows crookedly after many days, know that the breast will not heal. And if subtle poisons flow after a long time, do not despair of health,
because health is approaching. For there are people who have slow healing in their wounds, and others who heal quickly;
and if breast milk flows crookedly after many days, know that the breast will not heal;
and if the breast is slow to harden, and is distant, then apply medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, as an ointment that penetrates, for it contains a large portion of vitriol, and it is the most powerful medicine;
take the penetrating ointment, and prepare it with rose oil, and equal parts of old wine;
then cook it and use it; and with the same, cook honey thickly, when specific diseases are not present,
take myrrh, aloe, and incense, grind them up and dust them over honey while it is on the fire; and then apply it to a cloth, and place it on the chest, and sometimes administer an arystologus, a long ointment, and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour of wheat and centaury;
and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour of wheat and centaury; and use simples or composites: grind them, make them into powder, and put them on the honey I mentioned, and use it; And if the wound is long, and not healed by this treatment,
And if the wound is long, and not healed by this treatment, then you will know that the corruption is deep, and it causes swelling in the bone, or in hard limbs, or in tissues; if the treatment for a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the nail
Panarice is an abscess that arises underneath the fingernail on the tip of the finger, or from the toe, or sometimes it can arise in other places too;
and when it becomes suppurated, and no attention is paid to it, then a hard abscess will form; and run and flow low until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps they will run all the way.
and the corrosion reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the shoulder is swollen on both sides, and the colour is yellow.
When you treat it as we have described in the division, and the treatment does not help, you must cut away all the excess that remains on the nail, then cauterize the wound after. Cauteries are a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail pushes against the flesh and starts to grow out, and the bleeding then you should put a thread under the nail so that it does not pierce the flesh, and pour it on top, and gently and lightly beat this thin flesh. and place upon the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it out and throw it away, because as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal.
and if you see the tooth decay, then cut it in half as it is said before, then clean it until it is healthy;
and if it is rotten and hollow, and he feels great pain, then you must heal him first; then cut the nail of the little finger with a slanting cut from above,
And make sure the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
And if it happens [the cut reaches the flesh], then place something on top to soothe it.
The joints of some people's hands are naturally very fleshy, and sometimes there is tissue or bone, and occasionally there is a toenail,
and some of them grow from the root of the joint, or the growth is in one of the fingers. That which grows in any finger of the hand does not move, and that which grows at the joint of the finger, sometimes moves;
the cautery of fire is light, in such a way: cut it at its root with a broad spatulum.
He who is born at the root of the joint is painful to cure; keep him covered.
In one who is born in the hip socket, you must first cut away the round flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable thread, then treat it until it is healed.
The dislocation of two bones together occurs through birth, or the sudden impact of a wound, or the scalding of fire, or similar things.
So you must cut that joint so that the bones can return to their natural alignment; then place between two tents or wet cloths in rose oil, so that they do not adhere; or you place it between two thin pieces of wood, so that they are glued together as they should be.
If the glue comes to either of his hands with the palm, then cover the glue as it should be.
Of the wicked
There are veins which are large and enveloped in excess of melancholy fluids, which come from various parts of the body;
and more occurs in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
Therefore you should administer to him some purgative medicine sometimes, and then heal the wound with basil.
The treatment with iron is done in two ways: one is by cupping, drawing out the black blood; and the other way is to open the vein and draw it all out.
The incision is made thus: first, raise the leg with very hot water until the large veins become细 small. Then stretch the leg of the patient from above the thigh to the part below the knee; Then cut the vein in one, two or three places, with a wide incision;
Then squeeze and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient can endure;
and then the scabs, and he is instructed to dye his skin with black gall;
and begin the evacuation and bleeding again when the veins are full, and this is harmful to the patient.
The treatment for him is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red, and open the veins;
and if you have no bath, heat it over fire, and then apply it directly to the vein from the knee to the ankle, or in the part below the ankle.
Then open the skin at the joint, and scorch the vein on both sides until it appears when you feel for it.
And when it enters the skin, it looks like a white cord.
Then push the thread beneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then it can be pulled out easily at the joint.
then cut in another place above it three times; then scorch the skin over the vein until it appears then ligature it at the base, as you did before, and bind it with another hook, as you did before;
then cut another vein, or several if you need to, then ligature it, and cut the toe of the foot,
then draw it and ligature from the second vein up; then draw it from vein to vein until it comes out completely, then cut it;
and if you cannot pull it out and lift it, then insert a needle on a strong double thread. tie it and pull it out, and insert it under the nail, and move your hand from side to side until it comes out; and be careful that it does not tear, for if it tears, then it cannot be pulled or lifted, and the patient will be harmed;
and when you have pulled it out completely, put over the wound wool moistened with wine and rose oil; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the eye is cramped and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, you should split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously stated.
you should split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously stated. The shape of the iron used to cover the eye should be curved, and not cut so that it does not cover the vein;
and is of a deep curve, for if it were subtle, it would cover the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
Of civil bleeding
This bleeding occurs in the legs, in warm regions where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land where there is no moisture.
It may also occur elsewhere on the body, and this happens due to a pustule that forms under the skin,
such as serpents and worms that infect between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then change the place, and the wound will come out as if it were the root of a plant.
When the shoulder opens up, you must wrap around it a piece of linen three and a half to four inches wide, and tie it,
and let the cloth hang down to the leg, and every time it is pushed out by the swelling, wrap around it with the cloth again, and tie it; and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, wrap up the rest, and do not cover the root at all until it comes out completely. because if you cover it, it will go back into the flesh, causing an abscess and pus in that spot, and a serious illness.
Because of this, it must be treated little by little until the very end, so that nothing is left in the body.
And sometimes this vein, when treated from five to ten palm lengths, and a man came to me whose penis was ten palms long; and when you grab it, it goes into one hole or opening, and you pierce it all the way through
so that all of its content is discharged; and after administering astringent remedies for several days, treat it like an abscess.
And sometimes the vein will open in the joint of the foot or the leg, and it will spurt out a lot of blood; treat it therefore as we have said before.
Of worms that grow between skin and flesh
This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land because it often affects oxen:
It is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, moving throughout the body, going up and down:and li vers ont la figure de l’escarne. And the worm has the appearance of a scar. And one feels it well as it moves from member to member, until it breaks through the skin where it goes, and jumps out:et s’il adont le corps, il est mortel.
and is filled with pus from some humors, like worms and snakes and roundworms in the belly;
one fears its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and bled, one cannot help but wonder when it will end:
if therefore thou must tie the part above and below with a strong bandage well and tightly,
then cut over it and pull it out, and if the blood flows profusely from the wound, and you do not stanch it, then cauterize it with fire until it stops bleeding;
and the greatest harm it does is that it makes the eye water, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye, then squeeze under it the eyebrow firmly, then pull upwards and out.
and one should use the patient's purification of the body with dissolving medications for putrid humours,
and beware of meat that is decaying and putrefying.
Of the pain that comes from flatulence: This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from one member to another; and I saw what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of her arm;
and soon after, I saw it rise up as a worm to her shoulder, as quickly as anything, like quicksilver when it moves from one place to another;
the pain leaves that spot and goes into the shoulder,
and then a little later it runs throughout the body until it reaches the other arm;
then she started twisting around her body, just as I saw her.
I marveled much how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never before seen this illness in this way. Nevertheless, I had seen many who had pain moving from one place to another, but I had never seen it as I did in the woman;
and I thought that it was because women had dry bodies and exposed their skin, and because of this the forced wind appears;
and they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and relaxed veins.
And when you see this disease being treated, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then press above and below until the forced wind emerges from its place; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it with your own eyes,
if the patient vomits up wind-eggs, as foul-smelling pills, and serapin pills, and similar things.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they land.
The diversity of their (wounds) is such that some have great points, others small; some are sharp, and others blunt. some have two angles, others have a tongue-like shape, and others contain fragments; and they can affect the body in two ways: they can affect a principal member,
such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder and similar organs. When it occurs therefore in any of these limbs, and the signs of death that I will tell you about below become apparent to you: then you must be careful about extracting this arrow, for death comes after in many cases. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the blood vessels burst above the brain, is when there is scrofula and sores and ulcers and redness, and inflammation of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is a discharge from the nose or ears; and perhaps they lose their speech and voice; and and there is also white moist pus from the wound, and also blood-clots;
And if these signs appear, then keep to the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is stuck in.
The signs of pleurisy when it occurs in the chest are that it is close to the left breast and feels as if it were pierced by a hard object, not hollow. And sometimes the chest mutes like the pulse, and short black blood comes out, and there is a coldness and cold sweat, and syncope. Then you know beyond doubt that death is imminent.
And the sign of pleurisy that affects the lungs is that without pain foam comes out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks the cold air.
And if an arrow pierces the sole of the foot, it is near the small bones; and it causes great pain and great distress and sighing; and all the shoulder joints move.
And if an arrow pierces the stomach, by chance some undigested food might escape from the wound.
And if an arrow pierces the belly, and no feces escape through the bowel, then there is little hope of a cure, nor of extracting the arrow.
And if an arrow pierces the bladder, and urine escapes and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
The other limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, forearm, thigh, and leg, and similar limbs, are safe according to various dispositions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a certain man that an arrow hit him in the shoulder joint at the root of the arm: I probed it, and pulled it out from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without pain.
And put on one leg an arrow which fell into the fat of the eye below the membrane below. and the arrow was drawn back so that only the tip pointed towards the body, and was shot from a Turkish bow, at a distance of about 200 paces; the victim was unharmed and no bad accident happened.
And they shot an arrow into the throat of a Christian, and it was shot from an Arabic bow at a distance of about 200 paces:
I shaved the beards, and subtlely as I treated her, she was healed, and the Christians were saved.
And I extracted an arrow from a man who had it lodged in his belly, and I thought he was going to die;
and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not improve; I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and he had no bad reaction.
And if you wish to treat a person who has an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound is sutured on top;
and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural dispositions do not change, and he experiences no harm in any of his natural functions.
And if you see a man who has an arrow lodged in his face, and the wound is sutured;
and remain thus without great pain; and many others similarly.
And I treated an arrow that had pierced the neck of a royal prince, and was slightly tilted to the right; and the arrow was fully embedded,
I was called to treat it after it had been pierced for four days. I found the wound very narrow.
I touched her all over with a subtle test, and felt nothing; and she felt prickling and pain beneath her right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
I placed a cooling and digestive plaster on the site, so that the swelling would go down; and I saw the end of the arrow.
and I saw the end of the arrow. I applied the ointment several times and healed the wound directly, and the patient remained in this state for a long time,
until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me so. I put corrosive medicine on the wound several times until it was open,
and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which protruded from the wound; then I applied the ointment to the wound until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and he recovered fully within four months,
and then the wound festered where I had cut it with the forceps, and it could not heal;
then I ceased not to devise and invent means of instruments until I took her .i. day with well-made tongs, according to what the form will be at the end of this chapter, as long as I treated her and restored the wound.
And I saw that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I restored it therefore, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.Et li mirent de sanz que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:
Now I have told you about the extraction of certain arrows. so that you may apply my instructions to those things which I do not explain, for books cannot encompass everything.
but wise teachers understand many things, and what is both present and lacking, they find new remedies, and nine instruments, for the treatment of foreign diseases that occur in this art.
I say that arrows are drawn from the members where they are stuck according to two methods: either through the entrance wound or elsewhere;
and that which jumped out through where it entered is an arrow that pierces through to the bone, and sometimes jumps out right away.
And if it doesn't jump out immediately, leave it until the flesh around the wound is rotted away and the exit is relieved;
and also if it is lodged in the bone, and cannot come out, then leave it there for a few days and move it every day;
and then it will pop out, but if not, then pierce around the edge with a very fine awl until the opening is enlarged, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged inside the body where it cannot be seen, then she will feel it all over her body; and if you feel it, then pull it out with an appropriate instrument;
and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein in the way, then cut through until the wound is large enough; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears on the arrow so it holds on,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears on the arrow so it holds on, then cut off the flesh that is stuck to it in two or three places that you can reach, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so that you may pull it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so that you may pull it out; and be careful not to break the arrow, for if you do, you will hurt them more when you pull it out.
And if you cannot at once, then let it lie until around the nail is soft, then pull it, for the extraction is eased. And if the flow of blood makes you feel contrary, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of cutting the nerve and of opening a vein, and use cauterization as you are able to draw out the arrow without danger,
either quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the way they were when the arrow hit them, for it is the greatest help he can get, and if you cannot do it, then follow what the signs show you.
Arrows that come from elsewhere, where something is seen or felt through the skin or the skin is swollen in that spot:
then cut into it with tweezers as deeply as they can grip, and then extract it; if it won't come out just yet, leave it for now.
If it is stuck in the bone, then rotate your hand around, as deep as it can go into the bone, and widen the wound, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it again, and then repeat the extraction until it comes out.
and if it is of the arrow shaft, then fill it with all the stuff;
and if the shaft is thin, and you want to administer a poultice, then administer a warm poultice, so that the tip of the arrow goes into the flesh of the wound; and then fill it up,
and if the arrow is lodged, he pushes .i. instrument into it to ease its extraction.
And if the arrow is touching [the flesh], then you should cut around the whole wound where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as it should be.
And if the arrow pierces the buttock, or the stomach, or the belly, or the bladder, or the ribs, and it is deep, and you can cut above it,
and keep from covering the vein and the nerve, then pull it out, then cut the wound, if necessary. and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the tongs used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and here is the shape:
And there are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
of the common veins of the body Of the veins from which one heals there are 31, from which it has in the head 16,
that is to say: 2 veins that are behind the ears, which are called the two "ear-veins"; and the 2 arteries that are in the 2 temples, visible; and 2 veins that are in the 2 eyelids of the eyes, which are called  "eyelid-veins"; and the vein that is within the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two windpipes which are in the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips on the mouth, and those are the veins called 'augerich'; and the two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins which are commonly opened are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, which is on the left side of the neck, and common people call it 'the head vein'; and the middle one is called the 'fast', and is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins; and common people call it the 'heart vein'; and the basilic vein is on the right side of the neck, and they call it the common people "wound of the belly", and it is on the scrotum, and it is the one that heals, which opens clearly above the testicle.
And the salvadora is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches:
and in the leg there are three veins: one is below the curve of the pouch of the left side, and the second sopmane which is at the ankle of the right foot; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other foot;
and in the other leg there are three veins below them.
The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old cataracts and with emigration [of the eye]. and the quality of the bleeder is that as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the quality of the bleeder is that as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then squeeze the patient's neck with a twist of thread, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places extending from the head. Take it in your hand, and where you feel the pulse underneath your finger, grab it tightly;
then take the lancelet, and stick it underneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein upstream, and cut both the skin and the vein well. Make two incisions through the skin, and let blood flow until you see it;
then stretch and tie it, until it is healed;
and I have already described the incision and cautery in the first book.
The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the temples, it is worth to treat with old bloodletting, and blindness, and habitual dimness of sight, and in the body of the eyes, acute tears;
and the qualities of the surgeon if he is as I say: and the patient stretches his neck so that the two veins are clearly visible; and feels pain in his chest, and then faints;
then gently touch the vein above with your thumb, and push the lance underneath. and gently open the vein above, and the vein, as you have done in the other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then loosen the bandage, and put your hand on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top;
and then tie it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their bandaging and their extraction, in the beginning of the book.
The bleeding from the vein on the forehead is just as effective as the bleeding of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face, and for headache and redness.
and the qualities are such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called a "borer", of which this is the shape:
and place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you wish. then gently cauterize the neck, and ligate the vein until it is healthy, and sometimes the work is done with a broad flame.
Nevertheless, the flames should not be too sharp; and it heals crookedly, because the bone is close by, and perhaps breaks the flame when it is delicate.
The healing of the two veins that are in two layers, aids the eyes, and tigress, and redness, and oriel in the eye, and diseases of the face;
and the qualities of their healing are such that the patient twists his neck by pulling with some thread, as before;
then cleanse it, and let the cautery be of the size of a straw, a little longer than the flame, for there is no flesh there.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps it will break; then blood will flow, as much as you need, and then tie it with a thread, and tie it well.
The cautery of the vein of the nose is useful for nosebleeds, and for sudden madness, and for facial diseases, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is persistent;
and the quality of the healing is such that the patient squeezes his neck, then squeeze his nose with your left hand, take a long, thin flame and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein will not open well otherwise, and the blood will begin to flow now;
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligate it for a night, because it is very quickly restored;
The juice of two yarrow plants helps with inflammation of the liver, and at the onset of malaria, and many illnesses, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and ulcers;
and the quality of the juice is such that it pulls the illness out from under both sides, as we have said; and let the master be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sitting on a chair,
then close the vein tightly, then open it a little widely, then draw blood moderately, as needed;
then tie off the other vein, then untie it, and gently press both veins, and let the patient not be strangled; and leave it until the morning, so that the wound is healed.
Of the bleeding of the lips The healing of veins on the lips helps with sores in the mouth, and gum decay, and splitting of the lips, and toothache and gum pain.
And the qualities of the healing are to have the patient sit before you, and stretch his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left; and recognize them by their being black, and by there being thin black veins around them: deal with them both; and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
deal with them both; and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then deal with the largest of each side, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below; for it is the same procedure.
Bleeding under the tongue: Bleeding from the veins under the tongue helps after bleeding from the head, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the bleeding are such that the patient cuts between their fingers in front of the sun, and lifts up their tongue, and looks under each side for a black vein:
Therefore bleed both sides, but do not go too deep, as there are arteries underneath.
The veins from which one bleeds commonly are bled in two ways:
or with a sharp silver needle, or a fine olive-wood point, and is called «aniseed»; and are broad and narrow according to the breadth and狭nessof the veins. The form of the flame of myrrh is highly renowned, and it is broad as you can see:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth and full of gross and troubled blood; and the form of the flame is like an olive:
is more pointed and is for bleeding the veins, where there is thin yellow blood.
The basil vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
and the bleeder must bleed freely, and be wary of the artery below. And if he hits the artery, and there is a gushing of blood, then he must stanch it, as I have said; and the flame must not be gripping, but cutting like a scythe.
And if the basil does not open clearly, then you must stretch it and change to another; or you can pierce a vein in his arm: it will open clearly; and apply the flame like a scythe, as we have said.
And if you wish to find the site of the bleeding, then you must stretch out the arm, feeling the area until you find the pulse; then sign the spot with a mark, and then tie off the vein above the flame, and stop the bleeding.
And beware of cutting into an artery when you see the spot pulsing; that is an artery, so avoid it.
And if you see it flowing upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is blood from an artery; hurry therefore, and put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens.
bind the arm and leave it thus, and do not move it until the patient is healed, and let him be on guard and not move it until he is cured.
And if the bleeding is not stopped and he faints, and medicine is not at hand, then press on the artery until it stops, for that is where the blood flows from; and stop the bleeding.
And take a piece of fistice, split it in half, and bind the wound tightly with one half until the next day;
if it stops the bleeding, that is good; if not, then treat it with the powders which stop bleeding, as we have said.
and the bandages are not too tight in many positions due to the small size of the wound, and the strength of the arm.
The vein's bleeding is helped if it draws blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is made up of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and the surgeon must be careful not to cut too deeply into the nerve below, and if he cuts it, it will inflame and harm the patient, and perhaps they cannot heal.
And this nerve opens in many people, and if it doesn't open in some due to its subtlety, then you must heal it with the instrument gently; and avoid harming the nerve as best you can.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they should cut it lengthwise.
The bloodletting of the head helps if it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes.
and it is necessary to bleed with a flame of olive oil or a flame of myrtle, because it is the safest of all veins, because there are no nerves or arteries underneath it.
Nevertheless, one should seek the lightest place, and not worry if one fails the first time, and one can try again. and perhaps it inflames the area in some men, when they fail the first time, but it does not worry them. The quality of healing depends on your thoughts.
The first thing you need to know about healing is that it isn't just about curing disease but also about maintaining health.
and preventing diseases from occurring; and it can be performed in one of three ways: through the head, stomach, or feet; and one must bleed in the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear.
and one must bleed the first or third day, after two hours or three days.
The bleeding which is administered for diseases has no specific time, but when the need arises during the day or night, at any time and at all times.
and one must not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman carrying a child until the fourth month up to the seventh month. No one should bleed those who are older than sixty years.
And when anyone wants to be bled, in any manner, it is necessary that he cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema, if he has accumulated feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful excesses from the intestines to the principal members;
do not bleed those who are too full from eating meat, nor those who are drunk, until they have sobered up;
and if anyone has a colic after pain, vomiting, diarrhea, and frequent intercourse with a woman, and from hard work, staying up all night, fasting, or injury to the body or soul;
then subtly modify their humor if it is thick, through food and drink and medicine, if you have the ability;
then take a bath if nothing else helps to thin out the blood;
and treat the vein around the navel as we have said;
and guard against that day of labour, pain, and lust, and similar things;
and be bound and joyful, and let the surgeon be higher than those being treated, and rub the arm two or three times;
then tighten the ligature above the vein, for if it is too loose or too tight, it cannot work;
and then rub the area with the hands until the veins swell and can be felt;
then moisten the bandage with the flame of a little old oil, then place your left-hand finger on that vein below the spot where you want to apply the cautery, so that the vein does not move and escape from the cauterisation. For there are veins which flow like cords when cauterised, and others which are full of wind, so that when one applies the flame, they withdraw from the heat and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with some people;
and if he opens the vein, then the wound is too tight, so it is necessary that the surgeons be advised about these things.
And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; but if not, open it again a little lower down or up above, depending on which way the vein is going, if the skin is not swollen.
And if the skin is swollen and the patient is frightened, let him go for a day or two without binding the arm: Perhaps hot abscesses will form; do not enter the bath, then restart the bleeding if she wishes;
and if the holes are small, then cut the skin around it carefully and you doubt that not so much blood will come out as you see, then apply the flame directly to that hole;
and work on it a little gently, so that the wound is not swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the area swollen, do not restart the bleeding, and place a little lamb's wool soaked in oil on it, for oil lightens the body of blood, and is beneficial in this case where oil is concerned.
And thus administer lamb's wool soaked in oil with every bleeding that you bleed the veins to stop the flow of blood;
and it makes a triacle and bowels of them when one places it on the spot; so subtly does it draw out the poison when it is too large.
And if there are large abscesses, which often happen, especially when there was no bleeding before the opening of the vein is small, if you are in a hurry, and place a moist sponge in warm water on the spot and hold it for an hour;
and you should do this after the bleeding from the vein, and if it remains in place for several days with some blackness or greenness, it does not harm him; and if you see it, place on it something of aloe or myrrh mixed with medicine, ointment, or similar.
And many times abscesses and appearances arise from the bleeding of the basilic vein; therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft to the touch, then that appearance is bad. Avoid putting anything we have mentioned on it, however, for it might come from an artery; instead, make a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat the wound with another treatment until it heals.
And treat each wound according to its nature and the color of the blood.
Because if the pus is black, let it flow out until it turns red; and if you see it is thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for those who are swollen and bloated, and need bloodletting, make the wound larger, and let the blisters be wide.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and let them be bled less and often, and they should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking;
and this method of bleeding is safe from bloodletting and cutting of nerves, and it is better than bleeding from the long or the wide vein.
And to one whose body needs cleansing, give moist bread in pomegranate juice; if he is scorched, then draw out blood three or four times.
And if he has a cold complexion, before the cleansing give moist bread in muscat-flavored syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and pleasantly scented syrup.
And if he faints during the cleansing, after losing a lot of blood, he should breathe in the fumes of warm meat broth and subtle aromatic syrup,
and use the other things we have described in the section on syncope for opening veins.
And if he wants to open his arm and bleed again, when it is weakened by heavy bleeding, he should bleed slowly according to the amount of his strength continuously.
And whoever wants to open his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong pulse, let him bleed seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, let him bleed on the second or third day.
Because there is a lot of blood in the body that has been heated and causes fever; so one must draw out a large quantity and enlarge the vein until it bleeds into the palm. then you must examine all signs of healing, and place your hand over the patient's pulse when it is healing, so that death does not come from a lack of blood flow. and this often happens when the healer is negligent;
and you must not press firmly on a closed wound when you see the arm dislocating and blood emerging a second time; nor if it is crooked and the patient extends their arm suddenly, for that would be harmful;
but let it grow back a second time; or poke the tip of the flame into the vein until the congelation at its opening melts away. and place on it .a. little wool saturated in vinegar, and press gently.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not bind it, until the abscess is relieved.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, then let him bleed in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Veins in the arm are healthy at the site of the vein in the head because it is composed.
And the manner of healing is for the patient to place his hand in hot water until the vein turns red:
Then let him move it gently so that the vein appears well, then heal it from the top, not from the broad or long side;
and the hole should be wide, and heal it well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot issue, then put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
and if it is winter, do not soak the hand in hot water, for we put it there more in winter than in summer.
and the bleeding of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves in it.
The bleeding of the right hand's salvatele vein is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how to do it:
Apply pressure to the hand and soak it in hot water until the vein swells up, as one will see. and if it heals crookedly, and you cut it from all sides, then it will not hurt.
and do not go too deep, because the nerves are completely exposed underneath the skin,
and then put the hand in hot water if the pain is frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
And when you have bled as much as is necessary, then put oil and silk on the vein to close it up, and do the same for each vein.
The surgery of the left hand is similar to that of the right hand, and you should do everything as I told you about the right side.
The surgery of the shoulder is used for all diseases under the chest, including diseases of the breast, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the kidneys, and of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
And the nature of its surgery is such that the patient puts his foot in warm water and rubs the wound until it breaks open, and lies above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, then it goes above the foot in many small veins;
then heal it at the largest vein, or at the ankle, whichever is better.
And if you heal it on the foot, then guard against the nerves that are underneath, and heal it across as well as up and down; and let the flames be anointed.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
And if the sutures come apart the first time, then sew them again the second time a little higher up, for the wounds are salty. Do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and likewise do to the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its treatment helps with hip pain when it is due to hot blood.
And its quality of treatment is that the patient lies on their back, and stretches his leg straight upwards. Then he twists the leg two times in a winding motion.
for otherwise it does not open; and if it opens, then heal it in every way you can, and by crossing over; and it is better that you cover it, for the place is safe, and it is very vulnerable to many people.
and it is better that you cover it, for the place is safe, and it is very vulnerable to many people. And if you do not treat it, then heal any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves;
and make the blood flow as much as you want, and then untie the ligature, and put on cotton and compress it; it is now healed.
Of bleeding with leeches
Leeches are made of horns, or brass, or glass; and bleeding is done in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
And this bleeding without striking is in two ways: either it is all fire, or without fire;
and two others on both sides of the neck; and the cupping glasses under the chin; and the cupping glasses on the shoulders; and the cupping glasses above the kidneys; and the cupping glasses in both arms; and the cupping glasses in both legs; and the leeches from the two ankles; and the blood-letting does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the body,
and therefore it weakens them no more, as they do through blood-letting from veins; and it should not be administered, neither on fire nor with fire, in any illness that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of illnesses we need to blood-let, or due to habits, then we administer it every hour in the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and in each time;
for there are some who, when they need to belch, have a heavy head.
and some who experience bloating and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and some who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and bleed; and there are some who dream, and see by night bleeding wounds and pain and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially if it is in the middle of the month, we command him to be bled after three hours of day.
Bleeding the nose helps with headaches ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this bleeding is in the place of the headache,
and it should not be used by those of a cold complexion, or who have catarrh, because it does them great harm;
and for this reason, the elderly should not use it, nor those with cold diseases in their heads.
And those who often heal themselves become oblivous, and because of this, the leech must place the cupping jar a little lower down to avoid oblivousness.
Cupping on the neck is in the place of healing from the head and basil, and for this reason, it is useful for constriction of the feet, and for splitting of the channel of the lung, and for coughing, and for retention;
and it must be pushed gently, because if it is held too tightly, it injures the stomach or heart.
Ventilation from the two ribs on the neck is good for headaches, and for pain in the eyes and brain, and for strangulation, and for toothache.
It is located in the basilic vein; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand when inserting it, so that he does not press on the artery and cause a bleeding of blood.
Ventilation below the chin is good for mouth diseases, and for gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is located in the area of the veins of the two lips.
The windings of the shoulders are effective for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
The windings of the armpits are also as effective as three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the patient not to cut too deeply, for the area is naked of flesh and has nerves and arteries underneath.
The cupping glass which is placed on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids and diseases below, and it must be a large one made of copper, which needs to be carefully handled; otherwise, if it were thin, it would break and cause great wounds.
Cupping glasses on the legs heal quickly, as they attract blood from throughout the body and are beneficial for old pains in the joints, the hips, and the bladder, and bring relief to flowers; they are placed at the inside of the thighs and ankles, and even though they weaken the body after prolonged use, they bring relief in various conditions.
The method of placing the cupping glass is to first put it on empty, then suck gently, place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the area turn red and swollen, and the redness of the blood appears; then pause, remove the cupping glasses, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those with thin skin and large pores: therefore, one should suck only once, and make wide and somewhat deep wounds, and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to suck twice: the first time to make the path for the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, it must be pricked a third time; and when we want to draw a little blood, we only prick once.
And if we want a lot of blood, we prick repeatedly; and if the vein is thick, we pierce it deeply, and the ends are such that the skin is suddenly pierced,
and it is appropriate for those who have thick and tough skin, and who have small pores, that you grease the places of the leeches with an aperitif and dissolving oil: if it is in the state of violets, of sweet almond oil, or of pumpkin seed oil;
and if it is on an artery, with oil of watercress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or similar.
And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or oil of aniseed, and similar oils.
And if one is healing a wound in soft flesh with wide pores, no oil should be used,
but if the swelling is hot and dry, then take oil of fenugreek, or linseed oil, or oil of Saint John's Wort, or oil of blackberry, or similar. But it should be washed after fomentation with rosewater, or cold water, or water of sorrel, or water of porcelain, or similar.
And those who have a lot of moisture, if they rise from bed, or water of myrrh, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those with large sores rise from old wine, or water of vinegar, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or other similar things;
and should not be bled with a cupping glass before the bath or em-bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and should not sleep after the bleeding,
and it is necessary that he be careful when he is to be bled and when he has been bled. And guard against those who are choleric, and if their blood is too hot and inflamed; if they should eat cool things, like pomegranates and endives and lettuce with garlic, and similar things;
and drink buttermilk, and meat juices, and moist meats.
And those who have a cold complexion should drink honey syrup, and moderate aged wine, and meat juices, and buttermilk, and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day he is bled, he must drink more than eat.
and it is necessary to give certain people a small amount of triacle or musk before or after the bleeding to strengthen the main organs. Dilute the wine, but those who are hot-tempered should not drink it.
The leeches that are used to cause bleeding are those that are placed on the liver, and the mouse, and podagra, and on the stomach and the gut, and the flanks, because these members cannot withstand bleeding on the eyes.
and is done only to attract blood from one limb to another, as we put leeches on the breasts when the nipples are sore; to reduce swelling in a limb, as we apply cupping to the abdomen and chest;
and removes pain, when there is obstruction or stone, and by its attractive power perhaps dispels the obstruction or ejects the stone from its place;
and it does the same when applied to the liver and spleen when there is retained wind,
and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with tepid water,
as in diseases of the lungs, and in such a way one fills the cupping glass with hot water, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
And it has 2 inches of width and half a palm of depth, and it has on the side all around in the middle a small hole, as well as for pushing through an awl,
and is of iron, carefully heated so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the limb;
and in its center has a bent rod of iron or steel, to hold a candle,
and are both large and small according to the illnesses and ages of those who take them;
because children's ventouses are different from adults', and thin people's from fat people's.
And one must then place this cupping glass over the limb:
take the wax candle or a liniment, and place it inside the cupping glass through the tube which is inside the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass so that it does not burn the patient;
and then place it over the limb, and your fingers should be over the hole that we have mentioned, so that when one wishes, the vapors will go in and out, and one removes the cupping glass;
and apply the poultice as before, and reapply it frequently if necessary.
In the cupping glass which is administered for pneumonia, for any acute disease, there is neither a tube nor an opening, and it is not removed until it is full of water, and is placed on the body only in this way:
and its shape is:
Leeches are not removed until they are placed in parts where cupping glasses cannot be used due to their small size, such as the lips and gums, and similar places; and in their naked flesh, as in the case of wounds or sores, and other similar afflictions;
and the quality of the leeches is such that when you find those that are in clean, fresh water without mud, then take them;
and put them in clean water for as long as they are hungry and have nothing in their bellies; and then cleanse the wound and use a cupping glass, then rub the member until it turns red, and put the leeches on it;
and when they are flat and swollen, if it is in a place where one can put a cupping glass, one should do so, because it helps a lot afterwards.
If not, then raise the area above, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it out;
and if the area around the bite is swelling too much after the body of the snake, then soak .i. linen cloth in cold water and place it over the bite until the swelling goes down;
and if the bites are multiple, then apply ground vitriol, or gall, and similar substances, until the swelling goes down;
or you put raw peas on the spot, leaving them until they adhere to the wound, which will now stop bleeding.
and if you need more, take some leeches.
And if the leeches won't attach, then rub the wound with fresh blood, or pierce it with a needle so that some blood comes out, and then place them on the wound, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach.
and when you see them defecating, then powder on a little aloe and salt, or ashes, and they will stop now.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the foolish people are talking about this chapter, which they have never seen in any ancient books or letters;
and for this reason medicine is strangers to our land, for I have never found any good ones there;
and I know nothing about it, except through the study of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have attained knowledge, and through experimentation, and through my own experiences in life;
and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained in it, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in these two previous chapters.
Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the matters and the chapters, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or break occurs in anyone, you must hurry to heal the patient on both sides, if anything doesn't hold him back, such as weakness of the body, or old age;
or if the weather is very hot or very cold; and eat cool foods, namely cold meats, and deer and rabbit meat, and do not drink any wine, nor consume any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have suspected a hot abscess, or the spreading of matter in the limb; then return to the patient's previous course of treatment.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, then one should nourish the patient with foods that promote swelling or粘稠度(viscosity), such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testes, feet, pig's stomach, ox's maw, fresh fish, and full-bodied wine, and similar things. For the body swells more quickly with moisture.
And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well set and joined according to their nature because of the dryness of the members, nor those which are also too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but have no cure, reset the broken bone with a large tendon which stretches and joins the limb together, as much as it enforced before; and do not stop at all in his work, and for this he must nourish on coarse meats, as we have said.
And you know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from that of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all types of fractures. Because there is a break that goes to the root, and another in sharpening, like the tip of a feather for writing.
Because there is a break that goes to the root, and another in sharpening, like the tip of a feather for writing. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break throughout a small split.
And each way has its own technique and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory comes to mind in its place;
and it is understood that the break of the bone is due to twisting, and it is evident by displacement, and sounds when pressed with the hand;
and when there is no crookedness or swelling, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
but it can still have crookedness, or a split, or a small fracture. You should not move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come below, and then hold it firmly and gently.
And you should know that the fracture that goes into the bone, and are the two disjoined parts, they must now be put back together evenly, just as with abscesses.
and if cold abscesses come, let it remain for a day until the abscesses are relieved; then reset it gently and quickly, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than that of the one with parts; then hold it as it should be held afterwards.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, then stretch with two parts, if it is a hand or foot, or with one hand if it is a small member, or with two cords, or with one cord and the hand:
and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you must use all your skill to put the additions in their places as much as you can, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient.
and align the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel it with your hand whether it seems well or not; then adjust it nicely, and do not strain it too much or press it as those who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is set right, then instruct the patient carefully not to move it, not while waking or sleeping, not turning or in any other way; and make sure the limb is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain at all, then he is not in any pain, and you should put him in such a position that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain at all, then he is not in any pain, and you should put him in such a position that he feels no pain; and be sure that he is placed straight, so that no crookedness comes when he is restored;
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
You know that broken bones are diverse in size, length, and shape.
For there are small members like fingers, toes, and similar: it is necessary to wrap these with soft, thin linen.
And for larger members like thighs and legs: it is necessary to wrap these with a wide, sturdy linen, as the wide linen wraps all around the large member and constricts it evenly all over, so that there is no swelling.
Then tie around it light bandages, 3 or 4 times depending on the member, and tighten your hand a little at each of the bandages, then go above the break and loosen it less, so that the break is then moved away a little.
and soften the ligament little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy joint, then take another ligament, and turn around directly on the broken joint;
then go to the part below the break, and tighten it gently, not too hard or too gently, as we have said in the first hour above;
then place between the ligaments, stuffed with flax or cloth, until it is all even, then tie it all up with a bandage above, and then put your splints on well, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or swelling, then put something hot on the abscess that removes the swelling, and leave it for several days;
then hold them over the fires, and let them be of half a cane’s length, wet with blood, or of wood used for making spades, or of palm fronds, and let them be in this shape:
but it is necessary that the fire brand which one places over the break should be a little larger and wider than the others;
and it should also be as long as it is appropriate for the limb in terms of its smallness or greatness;
then hold them over the fires as you did at first, then tie a string on tightly, just as in the first instance on the dislocation;
the tighter it is bound, the more it eases; and the thread should be medium-sized, not too thick or too thin, and it should be made of soft flax;
because if the thread is thick, as I have often seen fools make their strings by twisting the flax, and this is a great error, for the string cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be less than two threads between each eye.
And if the patient is sore under the eyes after the dislocation in their healthy state, then place beneath them linseed poultices or soft lambswool so that it does not break.
When the wound is with the fracture and the vein is broken, I will describe its treatment below.
And you shall know that it is not right to pull out all the broken members on the first day. For when the member is large, it should not be put in splints until after five or seven days, or more depending on your assessment of the hot abscess;
and here is the way of the ancient plaster for restoring broken bones, dislocation, and torsion: you should take flour that is held in the walls of the mill, and cook it with plenty of eggs, and apply this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common way of the plaster that restores broken bones in various conditions, especially for women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Another way of plaster that restores broken bones and dislocation and torsion: take 3 grams of absinthe, and ladani, and enule, and asafoetida, and gum arabic, and mastic, each 10 grams; myrrh and aloes, each 5 grams; alechimic 8 grams. Make these into a powder and mix them with plenty of eggs; if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and it is useful for many people.
Another method of plaster that is useful for twisting: take mugwort and viscum, each .10; myrrh and aloes, each .8; acacia gum .6; Armenian bole .10, and grind well, and confit with water or egg white, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for joints and where the bones are dislocated from their sockets, and to soothe the resulting pain, and reduce swelling: take lamb's wool, soak it in oil and cook it, and apply it to the affected area. These plasters do not heal, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and reducing pain.
Another method of plaster that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earthworm leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster from them.
Another method of plaster for healing broken bones and reducing swelling: take marsh mallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour, one part each; grind them together, and confit with wine. If the area is inflamed, confit with coriander water or water.
Another method of plaster is stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take roots of viscumsalve, and seeds of flax, bastard-balm, melilot, and sanserica, and flowers of violets and camomile, of each one part; and bruise, and cook with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Hypocrites says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to restore it except for cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between two things, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galen says that one should put on a broken member, to restore it, dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and lamb's tail, or owl feathers, and viscumsalve, and salt equally, and bruise them, and make plaster and lie in it.
And then loosen it a little after, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if so, loosen it by hand again.
And if pain comes to the area, or itching, discomfort or swelling, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster now; and take light cloth, and sponge of the sea moistened, and dip in water, and apply to the area until the itching ceases, and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry bandage, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it up on a splint, until you are sure of hot abscesses;
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain subside, then restart the gentle stretching, and a little of the plaster, and do not stretch it as hard as before; and gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, take it all out, and you need to apply a poultice and a bandage, and do this again as you did before.
And if nothing of what we have said happens to the limb, do not remove the bandage for 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days, and sometimes leave it for 20 days, depending on how long it takes for the fracture to heal and the bone to come close to the skin;
then tighten it more than before, and the meat will grow larger, as I said before. And if you see that the area is drying out more than it should, know that nourishment cannot reach it; then wash it with warm water every time you remove the bandage, and do this every third day, and loosen the bandage a little each time;
through this work, therefore, shorten the growth in the limb, and gently mend what the foolish do, that they restore the limb crookedly: it is bad, and such work is cowardly, and I see no good in it except to tire oneself and do it properly.
of the various methods of fracture Many types of fractures are there, with diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct.
for there are fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone breaks right up to the syfac which is under the bone, as with an axe or staff; and this type of fracture is called a "haichure".
Or the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures can be large or small.
And if there is a closed fracture, or a split, or from the impact of stone, or from falling on stone, or other similar injuries.
And if there is a penetrating fracture, which approaches the membrane below the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
And if there is a wound that is embedded in the bone as thin as a hair, and the fracture is small, then this type of fracture is called "capillary".
and if the wound is made by a stone, or by falling, or by a similar object, and the bone enters below, and the place is shaved as the blacksmiths do when they work on kettles; then the stone enters inside.
And this happens more to those who have soft bone at the top, such as children's heads;
and it happens in all these ways of breaking that small pieces are dislodged, as in the case of splinters; and I will speak about this later.
And let us know all the ways of breaking by examination, and by corruption of the flesh that is above it.
The hair-like appearance is discovered when one uncovers the bone and rubs it, then the black crack becomes visible.
In the treatment of fractures, be aware of accidental illnesses, and if you see any harmful events such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, extension, palpitations, fever, eyes popping out and turning red, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
And if you do not see a surprising accident and you hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
And when the newborn comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day that you can.
And if it is in this state, then you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the membrane under the bone is not corrupted, and the accidents we have described do not occur.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the fractured part thus: and you must press the head of the injured person, and expose above the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound more gently than you can.
and if bleeding occurs when exposing the bone, or pus forms, then treat it with what is appropriate, and you must fill the wound with moist bandages in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the pus is relieved and bleeding stopped; then begin around the bone to remove, and it is done according to 2 methods of treatment: one method is that you cut with a narrow chisel in front, and that is the shape:
And then he puts in another stitch larger than the first.
And the second method is that you should have various different stitches, some narrow and some wide, and they should be pointed and made of iron; and work quickly so that you do not pierce the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, then you should pierce it all around, so that you can use stitches with awls, not going deeper than the bone of the skull; and it must have a rim or circle on top so that the point does not go beyond the bone. You should have several of these so that each one goes into the thickness of the bone, and you will need awls for all parts of the skull. There are three types of awls:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is to place an awl on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the awl to another place a little later, and continue all around. Then use the chisels to chip away at the space between the fragments of bone, doing this as skillfully and gently as you can, as we have said, so that you draw out the bone with your hand or with one of the tools you are using, like tweezers or pincers; be careful not to touch the brain or the sinuses.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is fitting that you cut away the sharpness which remains on the bone with any other tool resembling an incisor, but it must be more blunt and thinner than the others.
If anything remains of the small bones or any chips, remove them gently with one of the tools; then dress the wound as we have described.
And another way of doing it which is safer, according to Galen, who praised it highly, is as follows: First, you must expose a part of the bone where the broken bone is visible, so that when you have exposed that part, you will place under the head of this incisor, a lenticular shape, which is its form:
And do not cut from one side, and the part is painful on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet upwards, so that you gently strike the bone all around, and take good care of the membrane that is underneath;
if it is adhered to the bone, then loosen the bone slightly, for one can loosen the bone without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is cut only slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then one must smooth that roughness, and remove the shards with a very thin rasp, of which you should have various sizes, in order to apply the most suitable one according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Take first a large rasp, and then a finer one, and do not cease doing this until it is well done.
In each of the other haircuts and subtle breaks, you must minister according to its nature; and this is not answered by one who has devoted his study to this art.
And if the wound is exposed, you should place a linen cloth over it, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rosemary oil, and apply it to the wound. Then take another folded cloth in two or three layers, moisten it in wine and rosemary oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not put too much pressure on the wound, then apply a bandage over it, and do not tighten it more than necessary so that it only holds the wound.
Let it remain like this for one or two days until the abscesses are relieved, then remove it and apply medicinal herbs such as lily roots, and wheat flour, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; make a powder from these things and apply it to the wound, and then apply other medicines without biting.
And be sure that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave any ointment on it, or let anything stick to it, for when something sticks to the brain membrane, it rots and causes great harm to the patient; for when one applies something biting to the brain, it pierces through.
Therefore, take care that no evil accident happens to the patient as we have said, for it is certain without a doubt.
And if blackness does not come from the medicine that is applied, but rather by some other cause, then you should take some honey and mix it with three parts of rose oil, and apply this mixture to the wound. Then treat the wound in the usual way until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the upper jaw are broken, one alone or both, for they are two bones; and the one underneath is cartilaginous, and does not break but only dislocates or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should place your little finger or a tube in the nostril and press the break evenly with your index finger and thumb until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and you cannot reach it with your fingers, you should place it at the end of a thick piece of wood.
And if the fracture is of two parts, do likewise, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses have healed, then tie to the head of the bone tent-like pieces of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you tie one to each side of the bone, if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the holes in the bone.
And some restorers say that one should wet the tents in butter and change them every day. It seems to me that this is not good, but they should be wetted with egg white and flour; then leave the tent until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes we put goose feathers in the wound instead of tenting, and then a thin cloth around it, and holds the fracture in place, and blows the patient's breath among them; now do as you see fit.
And if warm abscesses arise in the nose while you are working on it, then put on cerate or cotton wetted in rose oil, or a little diaquillon.
And if warm abscesses don't arise, then apply a hot plaster made of flour of linseed, and incense powder, cooked with egg white, then put on light tampons and don't bind the nose.
and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments for this purpose, then cut the wound, and cure it with warm, healing ointments and poultices, as with plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose;
and if there is no wound inside the nose, he should treat it with tenting and insert splinters of wood until it heals.
of the dislocation of the jaw
When the jaw is dislocated below, and there is no external wound, and the joint is only slightly displaced without any fracture in the bone, it can be easily recognized.
If the dislocation is on the right side, you should insert your right index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the dislocation is on the left side of the jaw, then use the right index finger of the other hand, and gently push it into the dislocation and pull outward with the other hand, keeping the pressure equal on both sides.
And if the break of the jaw is separated into two parts, then you must administer an extension of two parts until it is even.
And if there is movement of the teeth or dislocation, then bind them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, and then place ceratum on the broken jaw, and lay upon it a double cloth; and place upon the cloth a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather the same size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it onto the face as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and to eat light foods.
And if you see that the jaw is changing shape, then loosen it after three days, and then reset it to its original position; and apply a poultice over it of powder from the mill with an egg or flour of chickpeas, after you have removed the ceratum; and place over the poultice a light layer of lamb's wool, and if the poultice becomes hot, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it until it is healed; often it is healed within three weeks.
And if the jaw is dislocated due to moisture, then you must loosen and reset it, and instruct the patient not to move his jaw; and place over it light lamb's wool; and if you see that it is becoming dislocated, then place over it a piece of leather, or a small cloth, or lamb's wool, and the splint, and the ceratum, and the poultice, according to what is needed.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine whether any piece of the bone has been removed; then remove it subtly with appropriate instruments for this purpose.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains none, then close the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it an appropriate poultice to encourage flesh growth, until it is healed.
of the scrotum The collarbone breaks many times in front, towards the shoulder, and the break occurs in three ways: it can be broken and separated into two pieces, which is the easiest to heal; or there can be a break with a wound.
And the treatment is, when there is no wound with the break, to have two assistants: one should hold the shoulder where the collarbone is broken; and the other should stretch the neck towards the affected side. Then, with your fingers, adjust the break so that it is aligned and there is no sign or evidence of the break.
And if you need to extend it further, place a round pillow made of cloth or wool under the shoulder of the patient; and they should relax the collarbone, and you should hold the pillow in your hand, adjusting the break so that it is aligned correctly.
And if you cannot pull the head of the collarbone out of its socket because it is too deep, then the patient should lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder, and the assistants should push the shoulder upwards, so that the collarbone bone is raised.
And then address the fracture with your hands, and if you find it broken, you should split it open; gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined due to any protruding piece, cut it off with one of the knives you have; but place the tool under the forceps to direct the syrup.
And it resembles a spoon, and is not hollow, and is as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has two heads, one wide and the other narrow, depending on the nature of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
And when you are sure of a warm abscess, cut the wound, and if the opening is small, or if you doubt a warm abscess, dress the wound with bandages and tenting, according to its size.
And if hot absesses come, wet a bandage in rosemary oil and garlic and wine, and place it on top.
The stretching of the bone, when there is no wound and no break, is to apply a plaster made from mill dust and egg white onto the bone, and then place light padding on top. If necessary, put a splint underneath the padding. Then take a very wide strip of cloth about the width of a palm, place a double layer of padding on top of the plaster, and then wrap a thin staff around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs loose. and place the staff over the dislocation, and wrap the bandage around the neck, under the healthy shoulder blade, and then under the affected shoulder blade. Reset it from each side, and when you see that the dislocation is aligned correctly and that the staff does not move over the broken bone, then release the bandage and restrain it again the next day.
and make the patient lie on his back and place a small pillow under the shoulder blade to raise the shoulder while he sleeps. This will ease the dislocation by aligning the shoulder joint, or you can bind the arm to the neck for up to 20 days if no complications arise.
then recommence the poultice, if you see that it is needed, and hold it and leave it thus, until it is restored; and it is restored in at most 28 days, and less for some men.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
It happens that the shoulder is dislocated or displaced in its socket, and it does not hurt unless touched; then adjust it according to the shape of the dislocation, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can; then put over the wound powdered flour with egg white, and light bandages, and place over it a double cloth; then place over it a large and thin board, slightly larger than the shoulder, and if under the board there is a swelling on the shoulder, then apply that swelling with linen bandages so that the board lies evenly; and then bind it tightly with a large bandage, so that the board does not move from its place, and check the binding every day; and each time it loosens, tighten it, and adjust the board if it has moved out of position, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is restored within 20 to 25 days. And when this period is complete, then loosen it, and be sure, for it is not a bone that sets quickly.
And if a piece of the bone sticks out above, and not under the heart, then split it open, and the bone, and do as we have said in the dislocation of the shoulder to soothe an abscess with heat.Et se li os est brise, et point tent avant, si met sor le leu de la brisure, un poultice d’uef et de molin, si que li espaule soit frouide; et remettet sor la brisure, un poultice d’uef et de lin, et estoupes legieres, et l’estraint a grant bende.
of the break in the stone
The penis is sometimes broken in the middle, but this rarely happens; it more often breaks at the tip. And when it is broken in the middle, it hurts a lot, and there is bleeding, and swelling, and discomfort, and sometimes vomiting of blood, and the hair grows on the broken bone, and it feels painful to touch.
And the treatment is for the patient to lie on his back, and place a pillow between his shoulders, then press his shoulders together and bring the ribs closer together with his hands, making sure the bone is positioned correctly; then apply poultices and bandages over the fracture site, using a light pressure, and wrap it in a cloth, tying it so that it does not move; then wind the bandage around the waist tightly and comfortably, checking every hour to see if it needs tightening; and if there is corrosion or itching or pain or an abscess at the site, quickly remove the bandages and poultices and treat the area as needed; then re-apply the poultice and bandages, tightening them until it is healed.
of the fracture of the ribs
You should know that broken ribs only occur on the large ones in the back and in the chest, and they only bend because they are slippery; this can be discovered through examination of the two areas.
And the treatment is that you put it back in place, as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage if necessary.
And if the broken ribs are bent downward, the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; they also have a cough and vomit a large amount of blood, which is a serious illness, and the elders have given it great concern.
And there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the broken ribs outward.
We do not believe that hot abscesses will come to life unless they have first died down. And if it has come, then heal it.
And some say that one should put cupping glasses over the area to draw out the excess fluids, and this seems reasonable; however, there is a risk that the cupping glass will draw out the vital fluids due to the weakness of the body.
And some say that one should cover the area with soft wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to apply even pressure all around, then it should be treated with a poultice of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure due to the bone piercing through the flesh, and there is doubt in the patient, then one should split above the broken rib, and one should place a tool underneath to ward off the pain; and then one must cut the bone and pull gently, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals. And if a cold abscess comes, then moisten a cloth in rose oil and place it over the spot; and treat the area around the abscess as needed, and let the patient lie carefully on his side where he should, until it is healed.
of the break in the neck
Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and it can be bent; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if his hands are soft, swollen, and lifeless, and if he cannot move or straighten them, and if he does not feel it when you poke him with a needle, know that it is a deadly condition in many cases. But if he can move his fingers and feels the pain when they are strained and poked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be healed if proper care is taken.
And if a similar thing happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if it is broken or not, then take care whether his feet are swollen, and whether the symptoms are there which occur in paralysis, and in the back wind and involuntary evacuation; and when he is laid on his belly, there is involuntary evacuation. And when he is laid on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that it is fatal: do not labor over his treatment.
And if this accident does not occur, then the condition is lighter.
And the treatment is that you apply a hot poultice to the spine if there is an abscess, and then apply one of the comforting and drying ointments, and bind it with a bandage; and instruct the patient to rest and not sleep on the painful part until he is healed. And if any bone is broken, you should cover it with a bandage; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a single stitch, then treat it with ointment as needed until it is healed; and if the shoulder-bone is broken, which is called the "bone of the cow," grab your left little finger with your right hand, and apply the poultice and bandage evenly, if you need to; then bind it tightly, and if there is a broken bone, splint it and remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bone of the hip
It may happen that the bone of the hip is fractured, and if it does, there will be a slight lessening at the head; and it extends long and declines to the sides, and brings pain to the area, and puncturing, and swelling in the place that is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as far as you can reach the fracture; and know which is the fractured part and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the head, then put it back into place so that it is in its natural shape.
And if the fracture extends long, or declines inward, then let the patient lie on his stomach, as far as the restoration of that fracture can be prepared. And when you have made it even, then apply the plaster, and then put a splint of wood or of horn on top, and hold the fracture still so that it does not move; and treat the area beneath the rib cage until the color is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if swollen abscesses arise, do not touch them until the swollen abscesses are resolved, and apply what we have said before; and then return to restoration, and treat it as appropriate, if there is no bad development; and that is the way to do it.
of the shoulder dislocation
The shoulder is that which is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it must be restored according to one of two methods. The first method is to take a wooden staff of average thickness, in this shape:
Tie the two ends of a rope to the staff, and pull them upward, and let the patient sit on a chair; then have the patient swing his broken arm over the staff until he feels pain in the shoulder, and put a curve in the staff, then stretch him downward while a helper holds him steady; then have the patient hold the break in place with both hands together, until the break is set as it should be.
The other method is to have the patient lean forward over his knees, and tie his hand to his neck; then have one minister hold the broken part in place with his hands, and the others pull on each end of the rope, stretching him apart.
And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then tie a rope under the break, and over the break, and have each minister pull in their own direction. And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you must put one rope gently underneath the shoulder joint, and another towards the neck, over the break; and likewise, if the break is towards the neck, then tie a rope lightly, without labor, so that the break is aligned with its proper location, and with the neck; then align the break as it should be, and hold it in place, unless an abscess forms.
And if a deep abscess comes, do not drain it until the seventh day, and put soft linen in vinegar and rose oil on the abscess, so that the deep abscess is soothed; then drain it, and the way to drain it is to put the ointment on the break, then assemble the arm above the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the cloth, and drain above the shoulder, and above the arm, so that the arm is in place, if nothing moves it or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone will move, use a splint, and put a larger and stronger splint over the break, with an inch of space between each splint, and let each splint be large enough that it extends 3 inches beyond the break on each side; then drain over the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter, more strongly and less slowly.
And if you see the position of the splints and the draining, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the deep abscess, then leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the bandage every 3 days, so that itching or swelling does not come to the site, or the pus cannot come to the member because it is too tight. Then loosen it, as we have said.
And if such accidents do not occur, then it should be dislocated no sooner than three days or more; and the patient should sleep on his back, and keep his hands on his stomach; and place underneath the shoulder a plain woolen cushion evenly, and watch every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or soften the ligament; then treat it with medicine, and give him the meat we have mentioned earlier, in such a way that the meat is at first subtle; and when he begins to recover, make it thicker. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be treated for forty days altogether; and then it should be dislocated and administered baths and medicines of ointments to heal the area. And if the dislocation is severe and swollen, it should remain dislocated for one or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "ulna" and the "radius". The ulna is smaller and is located near the armpit, while the radius is larger and is situated below the small finger. Sometimes only the large bone breaks, sometimes only the small one, and sometimes both together.
When the small bones are broken, their restoration and healing is easy; but when the large bones are broken, healing is difficult, and more painful than when they are broken together. If only a small bone is broken, it should be extended slightly and set evenly.
And if it is the large bone, it must be pulled harder; and he should extend himself on a cushion, and hold the pouch of his hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the other fingers, and he should cross his arms over his chest, and there should be a cushion in front of him, so that the patient does not experience any pain; then the minister should extend his arm to the part below his hand, or to the elbow, and another minister above. Then he should set the splint evenly according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, place each one in its place, and if any stick in the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make an incision through the skin and bone, as we have said before.
And if there is a wound with the fracture, I have spoken about it in the individual chapter; take the cure.
And if in the beginning of the restoration, there are hot abscesses, then apply .i. bandage of cerotic ointment made from rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and bind .i. bandage over it gently, until the hot abscess is soothed. And then remove the cerotic ointment, and apply the plaster of mill-powder with egg white, then put on the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be a little stronger and larger than the others; and understand that he must have six splints on his arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one or two bones; and bind more tightly over the fracture than anywhere else, and every day looser as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages over the fracture be soft and moist, neither hard nor rough; and let the thread with which he is bound be made of linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said. And re-examine the limb and the binding after a few days. And if any bad accident happens to the limb, as itching coming to it, then you must wash the limb with warm water until the itching is soothed; and let the limb not be bound tightly but rather loose. And then begin the binding again, and if the ligature becomes soft and the bone dislocated, and similar things, then treat it again.
And if you perceive that the nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must loosen it a little and leave it like that for some days, until the nourishment reaches it; and then bind it again.
And if none of the things we have said come to the patient, do not release him until twenty days have passed or until around that time; then he can wash his hands, and his neck should be even, and he should guard against movement and exertion, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that in the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from bending many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, one should make the patient's arm straight, and have him extend his hand and straighten the broken bones as much as possible; then he should place an emetic on the skin, and if there is no abscess, then he should apply a poultice. Then the patient should rest for 24 hours in a comfortable position, with the affected area elevated above the heart, and keep the wound clean and dry to prevent infection.
And if the fracture is around the stomach of the plant, make a sphere of fabrics, and instruct the patient to hold it against their broken plant; then stretch it with a long strip of fabric, and hold the cloth in place with a hot candle as big as the palm of your hand, stretching it as needed.
And if the fracture is on the outside, you should place one cloth on top and another underneath the plant, so that the hand is open and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the fingers.
And if the fracture is on one of the fingers, if it's the thumb, set it straight as needed and hold it in place; and if the fracture is on another finger, like the index finger or another, straighten it and bind it to the adjacent healthy finger; or you can bind them all together, whichever is easier, or you can place a cloth on top, like a poultice; take care with the restoration and treatment of a hot abscess, and dry up any fluid that arises, as I have said.
of the broken thigh
The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see this when they move forward and backward; their restoration is by binding one above the fracture and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then each assistant stretches their band to their side equally; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, then one band should be towards the buttock, and the other band below the fracture. And likewise, if it is close to the knee, then the band should be beyond the knee, and the extension should be down; then the assistants should put the bone back into its natural position with their two hands, and then apply the poultice and bandage, unless an abscess forms there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside and then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is done in the following way. You should wrap a bandage around the fracture—a tough, doubled length of cloth two or three times—and leave the excess, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the shin, and thread a long strand between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, so that the end of the strand comes up above; then return to the leg and the thigh with the bandage, then place splints over the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft rags to even out the pressure, then begin to tie tightly three or four times around the fracture; and when you go higher up over the fracture, lessen the pressure; then tie two strands of the thread that you have threaded between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are above, then return below to the end of the thread, so that you come by the foot; and tighten it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus until no swelling or inflammation or anything similar comes.
And if something happens there, then loosen it and address what is happening, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone sticking out, they should be removed if possible; and if not, then the area should be split open and the wound cleaned, as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in this way when splints are placed on it, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, with treatment made in this way, the patient is not healed.
And you shall know that the leg is restored in one day or a little less or more, according to the different complexions.
of the groove of the knee
You shall know that in the groove of the knee there is little bruising, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a single fracture, or a hole, and it happens with and without wound, and it feels good to everyone.
And the restoration is to put it back in place with the fingers, as long as it can be; then apply the plaster, and if necessary, put on a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions; then treat each incident as needed until it is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
You should know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is properly called the "tibia," and the other is called the "fibula"; and all other breaks occur as they do in the arm, and therefore their treatment is the same, and the procedures are all alike.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg is turned completely inside out.
And if only the small bones are broken, then it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and it turns underneath. Therefore, administer extension, and make it even, and bind the splints evenly; but nonetheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust it according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that reach from the top of the leg to below the knee on either side; then wrap two bandages around them, one above and one below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this point the leg should not be able to bend to the right or left, and thus it is well; and some administer a wooden bar that extends from the top of the leg, and they place the leg upon it so as to prevent movement, and properly they apply it at the break where there is pain; and move the leg every day to check for any hot abscesses or other accidents; and treat until healed.
from the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the foot there can be a fracture and in both feet, and there is only bruise in various positions.
If the leg bone is broken and you see the bones protruding above each other, then have the patient lie on his back as if he were walking, and then place your foot on top of his, where the bones are raised, and then press down until they return to their places; then apply the ointment and bandages, and put a small, flat stone under the arch of the foot, and then bind it firmly in place with bandages and other materials as needed.
And when three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the toes are broken, treat them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint along the length of the toe, making it slightly larger, and place under the foot the stone that I have described, and bind it firmly in place; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the stone underneath the foot; and let the top of the stone press firmly against the sole of the foot.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have already discussed; and treat each case as it requires.
of the fracture of the bone of the finger
When the bone of a woman's nature is fractured, have her sit up and lean forward, then bend her back backwards; next, fill the vagina with cotton, placing pieces as large as an egg inside; then help the woman to stand, lifting her back slightly, and the cotton will emerge with the egg when it reaches the opening of the vagina, taking the bone with it; after she urinates, remove the cotton, and repeat this process for seven days; the fracture will be healed. If you wish, take a goat's bladder, tie a string to its opening, fill the bladder with air by blowing through the string until it is inflated inside the vagina; the bone will be drawn back into place by the pressure; then fill the vagina with cotton and leave it there for several days until it heals.
And when the bone of a man's or a woman's finger is fractured, it is restored in the same way as we have described for the hip bone; these fractures are not hidden from those who devote themselves to studying and understanding my book. For the fractures teach us, through their various arrangements, the right path to restoration; listen, therefore, and learn.
For a broken penis, take a goose's gullet and insert the penis into it; then wrap a cloth around it and leave it for three days, checking on it occasionally, and it will heal quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, or similar, to be bled immediately, in accordance with the bleeding we have described earlier.
And if the wound heals, then remove the vitriol, if you don't have anything else, and then start to reset the fracture in that same hour, or that day, if no abscesses appear.Et si la brisure est en jointe de corps, ou il n’y a pas de plaie, s’il le peut demourer ains que il n’y ait pas de contusion ou de lesion, qu’il demoure assiez sans se muevre, si com nos avons dit avant.
And if the fracture is in a joint of the body, or there is no wound, if it can remain without movement causing contusion or injury, it should remain seated and still as we have said before. And if abscesses appear, then leave the reset until the next day, as long as the abscesses are soothed, and don't touch them on the third or fourth day, because you would bring about a bad accident.Et si li membres sont contuziez ou les os briziez, et qu’il ne demourent pas adés, si covient que tu remettes le membre a son leu, et le repos par tuit le jor, et la nuit, et la matinee, et par tuit l’endit qu’il doit demourer asez.
And if the broken bone is apparent on the uncovered heart, then you must gently put it in place with your hands, with a small extension.
And if the extension is not apparent to you to make it equal with your hands, then reset it with this instrument which is made of iron and is seven or eight inches long, and the width is according to the amount of the injury; and for this reason, it is necessary for the surgeon to press into the wound three or four times, according to what he needs in each case of broken bone; and let it be round and somewhat thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb while you are working, and let it be pointed at the end, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called a "splint", because the curved shoulder should be placed over the visible head of the bone; and the bandage is wrapped around once, as tightly as possible, so that the bones are brought together and made even. And if the fracture is small, and the instrument cannot grip the bone well, then you must cut notches in the head of the bone so that the instrument can get a good hold.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either an incision or a saw, according to your ability; then take out what remains in the bone of splintered pieces and small fragments.
And when the bone is put back in place and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. Do this until it is in its proper place, then wet a cloth with black wine vinegar and apply it carefully to the area; do not put any ointment or anything else on the wound that would cause pus and corruption. Then administer poultices once you have set the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the bandage all around according to the size of the wound; be very careful that the wound is not constricted by the binding. And many times fools have done this and have caused death or corrosion on the patient; the constriction should be looser than other bindings.
And if the wound is large or deep, and you fear that harm may come to it as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then do not put poultices on it; but wrap around it, instead of poultices, hard cloths tied tightly. And when you see after a day or two swelling at the wound, remove what you put over it completely, and apply ointment that heals wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon ointment and similar.
And you should loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is healed and closed.
And one must prepare the limbs in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly downward.
And if they persist for many days, and it cannot heal but keeps dislocating the bowstring, know that there are tiny pieces of bone causing this, so you must probe the wound with a needle, and remove all the broken pieces causing the pain.
And if a fistula or other form of corruption appears, then one must treat it according to what he says in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as with the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and similar large bones, do not split it, for many die from this, but leave it until it calluses over; perhaps it will fall off after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can, and if you cannot, then leave it.
of bruises that come upon the healing
There are many times after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, that an ugly sight appears in the member; and by chance the member cannot perform its natural functions.
Take care then that the patient is free of moisture: if the medic gives astringent remedies such as aloe, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla and similar, so that you grind one or all of these substances together and mix them with wine, vinegar, egg white, or garlic; and put it on the night-time as poultices, and hold it firmly in place and do not remove it for several days; then remove it and start again until the swelling is gone. Or press it onto a well-made piece of plaster; for the property of plaster is that it removes all swellings from the limbs; if the swelling has become as hard as stone, and there is a need to remove it, cut into it, and make the excess apparent; or have it cut by some surgeon so that it is removed and healed.
When the bone fracture is healed, and the limb remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and the limb could not receive nourishment; or due to excessive swelling; or due to too much movement, and not at the right time; or because there is a lack of blood in the body, and so it is weak.
And the cure is that you should make the patient eat and drink to soften his body so that blood multiplies within him; and give him a bath, and joy and relaxation; then apply pitch to the affected member, so that the pitch attracts it to itself greatly, and often wash it with warm water until the pitch is drawn out to the member and it returns to its natural shape.
and the limb straightens after health
When the member is crooked after healing, and the broken bone opens, and the shape of the member is deformed, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function; yet one must not believe foolish people who say that the limb should be broken again completely anew, and many fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm results, and sometimes death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are recent, one should wash them with warm water, or cook softening herbs such as marshmallow leaves, and roots, and mallow, and similar medicines that soften. And you make a soothing ointment, such as well-prepared diaquilon, and you take the mucilage of marshmallow, and confit it with goose fat or sesamen oil, and apply it as an ointment; or you take figs, and grind them with colon fodder, and similar medicines that soften.
And sometimes the dislocation is opened by constantly rubbing and lengthening it with moist hands. And movement should be encouraged in the member every hour.
And if the crookedness is awoken and hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, then one must cut it to the bone with a subtle incision; and apply poultice and care in the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in someone, one must now reset it without delay.
For if one delays, the place will swell and by chance be reset to its place; therefore, one should not move it at all when it is swollen: many times this brings about phlegm and other pains.
However, when this happens, let the patient bleed, then leave it until the abscesses are drained; then raise the member with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the healing comes to its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations of the head down to the feet.
of the jaws
Then the jaws become dislocated and the dislocations of both are in two ways: they are slightly displaced from their place and softened a little; or they are entirely dislocated and hang down towards the feet, and saliva flows from the mouth which he cannot hold back, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is enveloped with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through various positions.
And if it is complete and accomplished, you must reset it quickly and not delay.
And in such a way that the minister grabs the head of the patient, and pushes his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and let the other two hands be relaxed, to apply pressure equally; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all parts.
And she looks at it equally, until it returns to its place.
And if it is stuck, especially if both jaws are together, then they should be soaked in warm water and oil, so that they are gently reset; do not pull hard on the jaw, as we have said.
And when they are reset equally, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then place damp cloths on it made from rose oil and wax, then tie it gently with soft bandages.
and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his shoulders be between two pillows, so that he does not move them to the right or left, nor effort to chew, but take soft food, until the pains are removed, and the jaws are bound;
and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not bother to open his mouth to eat and drink as long as the jaw is well bound and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be reset in an hour and are not converted to their place, then come fever and usual sickness, and perhaps intestinal distress, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is deadly; and many die from it within eight days.
of the fork
The forceless cannot dislodge from the ribs within its continuance of the armpit, and it is dislodged sometimes to the outside, and they feel it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then he presses the area firmly with his palm, and it will return to place; then apply the ointment and bandage, and keep it tight.
And the shoulder which is toward the armpit cannot be dislodged; if it can be moved at all, and if it does move, then put it back in place as we have said; then apply the ointment and bandage, and keep it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
And in the same way, the shoulder blade is put back into place when it has been dislocated from its socket.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
You know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one way it dislocates at the part of the acromion below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and by chance it dislocates above, and this happens rarely.
It never dislocates behind the shoulder, and it never dislocates inward for the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the acromion, especially in those who have little flesh, because in them it is forced out violently; but in those who have enough flesh, it slips out gently and goes back in gently.
And by chance it happens to some men that they get a concussion or a fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore you must test it until you are certain of its effectiveness; then begin the treatment.
And you will know there is a dislocation when it sinks towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest difference between them. And you will find a pit at the head of the shoulder, and under the armpit at the top of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way;
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can clearly see it by touch;
and this method of dislocation is not difficult to cure when it is new, or if the child is ill.
And the method is that the minister lifts the hand of the sick person up high, then places his fingers under the shoulder blade, and raises the joint with force to its place; and the minister lifts the hand and extends it upward, then lowers it; and it will come back into place quickly.
And if it does not come back into place as we have said within several days, then the sick person should be bathed in warm water; and he should be anointed with softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of aniseed and fenugreek and mullein in water, and he should be made comfortable.
Then the minister should press on the sick person's back, and place a layer of wool under the shoulder blade, neither too soft nor too hard, then he should place his heel on the wool and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and pull the hand of the sick person.
and other ministers dye the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; the shoulder will return right away, and if you see that it is reset according to this way:
and it is that you have a man present who is larger than the patient; and let him stand straight towards the side of the patient, and press his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upward, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the arm of the patient downward towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, they can use something heavy with them, and the dislocation will return right away.
And it is reset in another way as well: and one is to thrust a long stick into the ground, so that its head is as high as a palm, and not too thick nor too thin; then it should be placed under the patient, but with a soft cloth on top, and the patient should be upright and still; then his hand should be stretched out below on the other side, and the joint will return to its place gradually;
and if it does not want to return due to all these things that we have said, then perform this cure: take a stick 1 yard long and 2 inches wide, with a hooked end to fit into the joint, according to this form:
then tie a soft cloth to the end of the stick so that the stick does not hurt the patient, then place it under the joint of the patient; stretch out his arm along the length of the stick, and tie the shoulder to the stick, and the arm to the head of the stick; then place the arm on top of a pillow, and stretch out the hand below, and let the body hang on the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in place, in whatever way it is, you should then place a woolen sphere under the joint, then apply the prepared plaster made from mill dust, incense, and egg white, all over the shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the joint gradually, and tie the string onto the plaster, and hold the hand to his chest, and let the hand remain like this.
And he must eat little, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not softened, it will be healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that it has encountered, or for any other reason, then you should administer cautery to three openings, as described in the chapter on cautery.
And if you do all this and it still dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upwards, then you should know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are torn or stretched or relaxed; and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Dislocation that is towards the bottom, and the breasts, or behind, is done by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one should treat it in the same way until it is healed.And if there is dislocation of the jaw, one should not let the patient eat anything hard for as long as the joint is uncomfortable, so that it can heal quickly; and then he can eat more after five or seven days, and move his jaw; and if it is stiff and not softened, it will be healed.
And if after healing, there is pain in the limb, and with movement, the patient suffers many times, until that pain is relieved and returns to its original state.
from the dislocation of the shoulder
You know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated by pins, and it returns with pins; and if it is dislocated everywhere, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one sees and feels it well, and it dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the dislocated shoulder with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is twisted, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
And you must reset it so that the abscesses heal, for if the abscesses heal, then it will be painful to reset; and by chance it may not be able to be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and death may result.
And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend its hand with your two hands; and its arms should be spread out, and the hands bent according to the elbow, around and underneath, and push the joint into its socket at its wrist, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it will return when he bends his hand towards his hand, and strain at the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then give strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers pull, so that he does not move with the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it;
and when he looks at the joint in his hand, then he should anoint it with oil to soften the joint, and then bend the joint properly so that it recovers.
and when it is in place, he should put a dry poultice on it with egg white, and hold the joint tightly, and bandage the arm to the neck of the dislocation, and leave it for some days, then loosen it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not healing well, then reapply the poultice and the bandage, and leave it for some days until it is firmly in place; then loosen it.
And if he feels stiffness after the return of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press it until it is relieved; then put a fat lamb's snow on the joint, leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath. And when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the bandage back on, and then enter the bath; and do this 1 or 2 times, until he is healed; and if you see that [the bandage] is too tight, put moist cow manure heated with butter on top of it, and then apply it; thus it will return to its proper state.
dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand is healed, and its return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place gently, in the same hour that it was dislocated, so that the joint swells or an abscess forms.
And the remedy is to place the patient's hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he should place it evenly so that his palm rests on the appearance of the joint, and he should push it until it returns to its place.
Nevertheless, you should check that it is in the correct position; then place the patient's hand on a table, with the palm facing upwards and the fingers stretched out. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then place the patient's palm down on the table and put the examiner's hand on top of the joint. If it goes back into place now, that is good.
If not, then strain with soothing plasters, warm abscesses, and leave it like that without re-dislocating it.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after a few days, then the joint will remain dislocated.
and it does no harm to the patient as long as the hand is weak and cannot grip anything: then you know that nerves or arteries have been cut; there is nothing else to do except to cauterize by the wound, and perhaps nothing else will help.
And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it for .v. days, then loosen and leave it like that.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then wet it with warm water and rub it until it heals.Et s’il adons li viens de l’engien qui li i a en la maint, si le frote aigue chaude et li met sus l’emplaustre susdiz.
of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or the underside;
then you should put the finger back into place and hold it there while it is being readjusted, then support the head of the finger and bend it toward the affected area where it was dislocated;
and let it be for one day, then put it back into place the next day; and don't bind it, as we have said, but loosen it every other day, and make it move, and tie it up again at night; do this frequently until it is healed,
and do likewise if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and likewise do, when it is dislocated elsewhere.
from the dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
When the shoulder blade or collarbone is dislocated, there is no remedy, for death hastens the malady.
And the signs are that the bowels move without voluntary effort, nor can they be held back, and many times some member becomes paralyzed, either the two legs or one arm or the other.
And many times it changes color in four parts, that which changes at the back is called 'gilding.'
The treatment for this is to find out if the gilding came in childhood; if not, there is no cure or healing from it at all.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient writers describe many ways of treating it with great detail, but they offer little real benefit.
But I have summarized it according to my understanding and created instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gout that comes to the foot in front, no one is healed.
and also that which comes directly to both sides, and cannot be cured except for the one that comes properly in the back, as I said;
and it is that the illness be extended on his face in one equal place, and he has to strain underneath him so that he does not bleed;
then push a torch to the head in the ground firmly, and another one at the feet, and tie a string under the sore of the illness, and one other at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two ministers know the bonds, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the .ij. brands;
and be well closed, the brand as we have said, and the minister puts his palms on the spine forming, until it comes back.
And if it does not return through this cure, then take a table of 3 yards long, and lie down under the wall, and let the patient be on his side, and put the head of the table under the wall, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and put the minister's feet on the other end of the table, and press well, until it comes back to its place; and if you see, do it at the joint that turns to the hand.
And you put two coals on the head of the patient's arm and two more towards the feet, and there should be between each coal, above and below, a palm-width of space.
And in each coal there should be a hole where the wire passes through, and the coals should be firmly in the ground so they do not move; and between each pair of coals there should be a turning coal, over which the wire turns, and there should be on two turning coals two small coals a palm's width long to turn the wire.
And then tie the wire which is between the coals to the turning-wire towards the head, and the other wire towards the feet at the other turning-wire, and each of the ministers turns their wire all the way around, and the master puts the needle evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, put on a drying plaster with egg white, and then the wool pads, and then the cloth of a tablet three inches long, so that it covers the joint and the healthy part of the spine and the healthy shoulder blade, and then tie it with a wire as we have said, and use the patient's subtle pain-relief until he is healed.
and if nothing comes of it in terms of health, then one should administer softening and soothing medicines, with the ointment that we mentioned earlier; and sometimes they administer a piece of plaster,
and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower spine of the back, and one assumes it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that protrudes, so one must not be presumptuous about it: otherwise, it might bring about death.
of hip dislocations
You know that in the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only dislocations occur, not as in other joints; and the hip joint is divided into four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and most inside, and less so in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee appears more so than the healthy one, and the diseased person cannot bend their knee towards the fire; and the area that is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh bone comes there.
And the sign of those to whom it comes from the inside, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of those who get it from the front are that their leg is well according to its condition; nevertheless, they cannot bend their knee without pain, and if they want to walk, they cannot go forward, and they retain their urine, and the anger swells, and when they walk, they pass over the heel.
And the signs of the one whom it happens to in the back, is that he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
The remedies for this type of dislocation are that you examine whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, and there is no treatment; and he must not be presumptuous.
And for the one who has a fresh dislocation, and it is of the four types of dislocation, you should quickly turn the joint, and stretch it in and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.Et si ne revenra pas, sache que c’est des  .iiij. manieres de dislocations; et si est qu’il demoure au leu selonc sa disposition, si covient qu’il ait cure.
And if it does not return in this way, then you must use a strong assistant, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with one tied to the knee; and another assistant stretches his hand over it in such a way that he pushes his hands under the armpits, then pulls tightly with a leather strap above the thigh; and another holds the head with a strap;
and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground once, and remains hanging.
This stretching manner is common to all four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
If not, then the patient should be treated based on their appearance. When dislocation occurs in the hip, you should have the patient lie on their healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the thigh and the part beneath the armpit; then have the bandage go upward toward the armpit and the shoulder.
Then have another assistant hold the patient's arms and embrace the large part of the affected thigh, pulling it outward in a straight line; then release it immediately; and this type of dislocation is the least severe compared to others.
And if you cannot pull it back into place as we have described, then you should tie both feet of the affected leg together with a strong silk bandage around the heels and knees; let the affected leg be extended two feet further than the healthy one.
Then let it hang from the end of a pole, two arms' length above the ground; then have one assistant embrace the head of the hip, and another assistant hanging with the affected leg embrace it firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
And when the dislocation is in the shoulder, the patient lies down as we have said for the one with the hunchback, and .I. ligature is applied properly on the affected leg, and also on the foot;
then put two charcoal pieces, one at the head and another at the foot, then insert a piece of charcoal between the buttocks in the affected person in the middle; and have wet sheets laid around so that they do not burn the affected person, then extend each minister towards him, and the surgeon holds the dislocated joint steady with his hand.
If it goes back in, that's good. If not, put it on a table and press it as we have said for the hunchback, and let the affected person lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is forward, then one should stretch the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and place his weight upon the sore joint, then press with the other hand, and the leg will move downward toward the knee.
And if the dislocation is backward, then one should not stretch the affected leg downward, nor lift it up, but it should be as though the hip were dislocated backward, just as we have said about lying on one's side on both hips; and be on his face, and the ligament stretched as we have said before, and someone must press upon the joint against the table;
and it will be at rest when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the thighs, and apply the ointment, and tighten with a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
and let him rest for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it and apply the ointment; and if you see that they are even, then straighten them as before and leave them for 3 days; then loosen it and make him walk beautifully, until the limb is comfortable.
of a dislocated knee
The knee is dislocated in 3 ways: that is to know, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate in front.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, you know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient lie down straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee gently; and another minister extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg lightly at his thigh;
and put the plaster on it, and make the leg straight at the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then loosen it; and the patient should not walk around while the limb is healing.
And if the member is not straight, strong extension should be administered as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
Heels are sometimes split, and sometimes fully dislocated, inside and out.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tender in front at the place where it is dislocated:
the reduction should be gentle, and one should gently extend it with their hands when it is only partially dislocated.
And when he has recovered from it all, you should have the patient sit up straight and hold him with one minister on each side, holding his legs above the ankles.
Then draw the leg to you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards and push the foot up nicely;
and do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the leg; if it returns, that is good; if not, then repeat the operation, for it will return.
And if he cannot return in this way, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground and put a stick firmly into the ground between his thighs, and wind cloth around it so that he does not move;
then the assistant grasps the thigh, and another assistant extends the leg at the knee or at the ankle, holding it against the leg's collarbone; then each assistant holds steady, and the patient's legs are held between his thighs to restrain him when he is extended;
then place the dislocated joint in your hands, and have an assistant hold the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, put on the plaster and bandages, and apply pressure firmly, and tie the leg to the leg, and be careful of the nerves that are on the ankle behind, that the ligature is not too tight;
then let it be for two or three days, and if the bandages are loosened, then he pulls; then untie on the third day or fourth, and they go away ill patient in four days; and if it goes before that term, it is not safe for him to be sick again.
And if hot abscesses come, you must calm them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
and if it comes from fever or from a cold, or from a disease of the bed, or from a disease of the litter, you treat him in the manner that we have said;
When the arms are dislocated, they must be carefully extended without effort, and this is an easy matter.
And if the dislocation is in the shoulder or the foot, then you should have the patient sit upright on a bed or table, completely straight, and put his foot on that which is exposed by the joints, then press firmly with your hand until it pops back into place.
And when it is back in place and there is nothing exposed, then put a board under the sole of the foot, then stretch it firmly and leave it for three days, then release it; and let him rest until he is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to anger, do not attempt it.
and at the beginning use things that soothe the abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see hope, dislocate the member into its place so that the hot abscesses heal.
and when the limb is raised, apply hot compresses to the abscess, and treat the wound, as it should be, with drying ointments;
and if there is a fracture with the dislocation, and small bones are displaced, set the bones, and do as we have said in simple diseases;
and beware of going the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it will be better for you according to your creator, and for the safety of your soul and body. Amen.
