O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and through its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hand, namely surgery.
And because the work of the hand is very little treated in our region and is unknown everywhere, the knowledge of it has been lost and only small descriptions in books by the ancients remain, written from the hands themselves.Et si li fuers et la science de cest uvre ne demore pas en nostre region, il demore en l’autre parti de le monde, car il ne peut diez ne poer ne paitre que de ceus qui conssent li science de li corps et de li mebrues. And because the strength and science of this work do not remain in our region, they remain in the other parts of the world, for it cannot exist without those who possess the knowledge of the body and its functions.
I think it is appropriate to animate this treatise together with the order of this text according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the tools of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation for it, as it is necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And one who undertakes this must excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as long as he knows the judgment of the members, and forms and conjunctions, and separations of bones, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins, and the number of ears, and the movement and of their blood vessels.
And for this reason Hypocrites says that what is known by name is little, and with the work is less; and the same is true of the art of the hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously discussed, must be careful that he does not slip into error and harm people; just as I have seen many of those who meddle in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish physician who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and lanced the arteries in her neck; so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another physician who treated a stone in the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would surely die.
And I saw another patient who received treatment for a broken leg, and with the break had a wound; and the ignorant surgeon bound up the break above the wound with tight bandages, leaving no room for swelling, and left it thus with a fixed end; and he commanded that it not be unbound. And thus it remained until the leg, foot, and toes swelled and came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to loosen the leg; and when I had loosened it, he was at ease and felt no pain.
However, the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until the entire leg was lost.
And I saw another patient who had a wound, and then it became inflamed due to the wickedness of his lord.
For a ulcer, when it is clear of melancholy humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove all that is corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, you need to know that the work of the hand is divided into two parts: there is work where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each section of this book where there is danger and peril.
So it is necessary that you be careful, so that the foolish multitudes cannot speak ill of you.
Now take up your arms in caution, and undertake your diseases lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind the terrible diseases of grief, and dispel from yourselves what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not take on a difficult illness unless you are called by a foolish master."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it is ordered from the head to the feet. It includes the forms of instruments and all that is necessary for the practice.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping, wounds, extracting arrows, and similar things. It includes the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisting, and similar things; it is ordered from the head to the feet, and concerns the forms of instruments.
So that we may remember the work, I must describe the nature of each humor and its harmful qualities.
I say that the qualities of humor, and their harmfulness, are the most lengthy speech and subtle science, and the secret responses; and the sages spoke about it at length, and agreed upon it; and I am satisfied with a little of their words, for I dread their lengthiness.
I say that cautery helps universally in all humors where there is matter, be it in two humors: namely, hot humor without matter, and dry humor without matter.
In a hot and dry complexional matter, some people said that cautery was a great help; while others said the contrary - that cautery is of no use for a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat nor dryness; and those who said otherwise, claimed that cautery helps a great deal with hot and dry diseases that originate in the human body. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body to be cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
But nevertheless, let only those intervene who have experimented with this and who know through long usage the treatment with cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and their outcomes and the timing; we are not afraid of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the doctors agreed and concurred with the cautery treatment.
And know, my son, that cautery brings fire together with the secrets of healing, and is of greater goodness than burning cautery of medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not spread beyond the cooked member, nor harm any other part if only slightly applied.
Burning medications travel from one member to another by dispersing, and bring about diseases of great healing for the sick; and sometimes they kill the patient.
Fire, because of its heat and because of the goodness of its substance, does not harm if there is no excess.
And I have found this to be true through experiment and through the longevity of service and study that I have devoted to the art; and because of this, I excuse myself for the length of my speech, for it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of its work, describing how it cures illnesses in bodies, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration. So receive this in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed upon what time the cauteries should be performed, and chose a propitious moment.
I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harmfulness underneath is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially if the cautery is for necessary, urgent pains that cannot wait until a more convenient time arrives, so that greater harm does not come to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as the foolish multitude believe; for a disease that is healed by cautery does not return, and they say it does, but it is not so as they imagine, because cauteries are not medicines that move the complexion, and dry up the humors which cause pain, and are better than remedies for their quick action, and for the virtue of their action and their lordship.
And it is possible that the disease may sometimes return according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its power; and the superfluities are accumulated in him through the digestion of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return, but that rarely happens.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is considered the last resort of medicine; but it is true, nevertheless. They do not believe that cauterization works better than medicine, but their intentions are false. Cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer healing methods for any illness and they do not work, then we turn to cauterization, and it does work. Therefore, it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the opinion of foolish people.
The ancients said that cauterization with a golden instrument is gentler than with iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that cauterization does not cause swelling, but this is not true, as I have experimented and found that it is true in some people. Cauterization with gold is better than with iron, just as they said.
However, when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down immediately; and if it is heated too much, it will melt in the fire; and thus there are many problems.
And for this, we use a fire cautery, which we have made appropriate for our work.
Now I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet, so that the road is easier to find.
of the olive-oil cautery
This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness in the head, and there are two reasons for its use: one is because of a disease called "soda", and the other is due to many humors descending from the head to the eyes and ears, as well as for numerous ailments such as pain in the teeth and throat, and especially for diseases caused by coldness, such as paralysis, soda (a type of stroke), and similar conditions.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient is purged with a cleansing, solvative medicine for 3 or 4 nights, depending on what the strength and age and condition of the disease can endure; then have the head of the patient shaved.
Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his thighs; then place the root of your palm between the roots of his nose between his two eyes; and where it will come to your middle finger, then cut, then scorch with the cautery which is called 'olive', of which this is the form:
And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while twisting; then lift your hand gently, and inspect the area if you see the bone slightly protruding; and if not, then re-cauterize until you do as I have instructed; then take a small piece of silk, and insert soft cotton inside it, and place it over the spot, and leave it for 3 days; then apply an ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon' to the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, let the wound remain open for a longer time, as the more it is exposed, the better it purges; and therefore help to promote this with leeches.
And some say that one must let the cautery burn until part of the bone is scorched, and then one should scrape off what is burned from the bone, and it will be cured.
And others say that one must let the cautery burn so long and press so hard that one dislodges the bone as much as a needle that women put in their fuse to draw out fluids; then one should leave the wound open for a long time, then cure it and bandage it.
And I do not consider either of these two methods of cauterization to be good in all cases, except for those in which there is fear; and I would rather leave it alone, because the shoulder joint becomes weakened through natural processes, as we see in other joints; and likewise when the shoulder joint of the sick person is weakened by nature, and the first appearance of cautery seems better and gentler to me, therefore I apply it together with a salve.
from the old pain in the head
When in the whole head there is chronic pain that lasts a long time, one should use herbs and pills for the patient's pain, and also purgatives for the head, and oils and plasters; and if they perform the cautery we mentioned earlier and it does not help.
Take care that the head of the sick person is not too hot in nature and not too cold; then cauterize it under the fire cautery we mentioned earlier for a short time.
After that, cauterize each horn of the head right up to the bone as we said before, and make another cautery in the place where the windpipe is located; this is a spot where ventouses are usually placed. Use a light touch so you don't go too deep; the patient will feel great pain from this cautery compared to the others, but I will speak of that later. The cauteries on the horns should be finer than those used on the middle part of the head, and here is the technique:
of the cautery on the head When sudden pain occurs in the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulders are purged with purifying medicines, and the other treatments I have described in the division of diseases have been performed, but nothing helps: then cauterize according to two methods, that is, with hot iron and with fire.
The cautery with hot iron: take a clove of garlic, remove the skin and cover it with a piece of cloth about two inches in diameter; then make an incision where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the garlic underneath the skin. And when it is placed, tie it tightly and leave it for twelve hours; then untie it and draw out the garlic, leaving the wound open for two or three days; then put on a linen cloth soaked in butter until it heals.
After the wound is healed, use an ointment until it is completely cured; and if you see fit, apply some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
The cautery with hot iron is performed as follows: Heat the cautery until it is red-hot, and then apply it to the wound in a circular motion. The cautery should be made of iron in the shape of a small needle or spike.
It is called "cauterization" because the head is formed in the shape of a dome with a slight curve, and in the middle has a small appearance; and it is placed over the painful area, and you hold your hand and slightly turn the instrument, so that half of the thickness of the skin is burned; then lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is forced away, and an abundance of blood flows.
Afterwards, put cotton in the wound and leave it for three days; then put moistened cotton on the area, and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this vein with the cautery called "cultellare", cauterize all of its tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this vein which is not old.
of veins
When you cure veins as we have previously discussed in the sections on diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the previously mentioned cauteries of medicine and fire do not help, then you must heat the cautery called  "cultellare" until it is white; and sign thus over the painful area a line half a finger long, and lift your hand once, and press so that you do not cover the artery and it reaches the bone; and be careful of the mandible which becomes mute when one chews, and let the nerve have no regard for the mute and let no spasms come to the patient, and be careful of blood flowing from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and especially for one who is not experienced and untried; and leave the wound open in the middle; but I will tell you how to stop the flow of blood from an artery when it is cut, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the face as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have described in the chapter on extracting an artery, with a cautery that has two blades; this cautery is better than that one and more effective.
from pain in the ears due to cold
When pain in the ear persists despite treatment with solutive medicines and other remedies that we have described in the previous chapter, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery called «poins», which has the following shape:
After puncturing all around the affected ear, or both ears if the pain is in both, and then move slightly up from the root of the ear where you have marked the area to be treated; and administer 10 punctures around each ear; afterward, treat the area until it heals.
of the mouth's torture
There is no cure by cautery for those diseases that cause fluid build-up, as we have said in the sections on diseases; and do not perform cauterization on conditions that arise from dryness and nerve swelling.
When you treat this type of torture that involves fluid build-up and discharge from the head, along with gargling and purging, if this does not work, then you must cauterize the patient using three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another just below the temple, and the third on the junction between the two lips. Apply the cautery to the area that appears healthy, and also cauterize the top of the ear, about a finger's width below the horn-like protrusion at the top of the head, and likewise cauterize the temple for about a finger's length. Allow the cautery to remain in place until half of the brain is scorched. The shape of the cautery instrument should be as follows:
It is similar in shape to the scalpel described earlier, but it should be slightly thinner, and the blade should be a bit wider. Treat the area as I have described before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the site called "vassels" as we have said before; and do the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach, and let it be treated as we have said before.
of quicksilver
For this disease, give the patient large and purifying pills to the brain; then shave the head of the patient all over, and put on the ointment of mustard seed which is written about in the treatise on ointments; and this is the way of the cautery: do it as I have said.
If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries in the middle of the head, descending just to the neck, and have one inch of space between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see a need, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, do two more on the two horns, and cure him as before. And let the cautery be that which is called  "olive oil", as I have said before.
from the coldness of the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and anything else we have mentioned earlier. Then, the patient should be laid down, and cauterized in the head, and on each horn, one behind, and three on the spine of the neck; and if you require more, and the body is moist and the patient can endure it, and the illness is severe, then he should receive four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave them until the heart burns the most, then lift your hand. After healing the wound, the cautery known as "olive" which we mentioned earlier, should be applied.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic; it is first necessary to cleanse the brain of hair and other things that we mentioned in the division when the illness is great and suffering, taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, make him gargle and chew, cleansing the brain often with good meat; after the king, wash the head in milk, and do to him .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is strong and忍耐, make cauteries to him as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said.
If the disease is in an infant, make to him 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupted humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with mild cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
And if through the cause of melancholy there is the surplus declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain is cleansed, according to what it says before in the division.
After raising the head of the patient, make a turnip well and in the shape of a circle, place it on the head; cross the patient's arms, and hold them tightly from all sides; then present the linen, and wet it with the butter of old goats; heat gently over the fire so that the patient can bear it; remove the turnip from inside the head, and let it cool; do this for the patient once a week until he is healed.
Or, if you see that the patient needs to be cauterized, make many small points all over with the cautery tool. This cautery method moistens the brain greatly; then place wet cotton in butter and chicken fat on top.
of their eyes When eye disease first appears in the eyes through the signs that I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in the bath several times while fasting.
After commanding him to look down, and cauterizing his head, and making two cauteries on the two temples if the sinuses of the eye are both together, or one if they are separate; and closing all the veins and arteries underneath the heart, and making the cauteries long according to the width of the temple; and be careful of blood letting, and if you see too much blood emerging, then stop it as best you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision, the cauterization how you should do it; and sometimes a cauterization or hatchet is done underneath the two bones at the back.
where tears come from the body
When the tears from the eyes are old and habitual, and are on the veins, or among the arteries that are in the appearance of the forehead outside; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I said at the beginning of the eye: .1 cauterization in the middle of the forehead, and .2 cauteries on the two temples, and .2 cauterizations or hatchets underneath the two bones; and if there is a need for more, then he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery all around.
through which the body cries inside them
When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of poultices; after that, bleed the head, and cauterize the middle of the cautery with olive oil; and make two cauteries, called "clavilis", on the two sorces, a little under the hair; and be careful not to touch the artery. And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the paper of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery, which is called "olivare". And here is its form:
And if you see two warts as long as the warts are; and do not let go of your hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that points the eye Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are converted to warts, and prick the eye, and they make cauteries according to two manners: that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a warm bath; afterwards draw on paper a figure that is as the leaf of the myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be amongst the hairs; then place wet cotton soaked in egg white and parsley juice over the eye, then heat the cautery from which the shape comes:
After cauterize on the figure that you have marked little by little many times, until the skin is burned in that place; and the sign of the health of the work is when you see the paper drawn back, and the hairs raised at the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus. For three days, then place wet cotton in butter until the burn is healed; afterwards treat with ointment until it is cured.
And if afterwards the hairs come again, and the paper becomes soft, then repeat the cautery on that same place, as you did before; and if the hair is lost, then cauterize until the paper returns to its natural state, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
The cautery of medicine that burns is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow until they are long and even; then make on parchment the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and quicklime, of each a third, and grind them together well; and make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape you made as the leaf of myrtle, and put on the paper of the eyes; and if the illness is in one eye only, then do this in one, and if in both, also; and place under the eye wet cotton soaked in egg white; and let the head of the patient be in a warm bath, and place your hand showing over the medicine, and press one moment and release it every time that the patient feels biting from the medicine, for it bites like fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger. And when the bite has passed, lift up the area that was bitten and examine it to see if the blisters have risen as they did due to fire or incision; if so, then it is well. If not, apply more medicine to the affected area where the medicine didn't work, until your efforts are equal and your eyes are focused; then place wet cotton on it until the burn scars heal, then treat the area with an ointment called "diafenes" and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine doesn't get into your eyes, and if the blisters become soft and hair grows in them, then restart the medicine on the area that is softened by the blisters properly, just as you did before; then treat it until it is healed. And this is how you deal with a wound from a nettle:
And know that people's eyes vary in size and shape, and according to this, your constraints should be adjusted; and do not rely on the correct method for someone who is an expert in this art.
on the treatment of fistulas by cautery
When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should use cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap; and have the assistant hold their head between your hands so that it does not move or tilt back. Then wet cotton with egg white or juice of parsley and apply it to the eye. Next, heat the cautery which is made of iron: it should be shaped like a pen nib, curved at one end and pointed at the other, but any shape will do for your work.
Then press the fistula if it is open and draw out the pus, and dry it. If it is closed, pierce it and draw out the fluid. Next, place the hot cautery firmly on the flesh around the eye, holding your hand steadily on the cautery near the eyelid so that your hand does not shake. Place the cautery in the grease of the eye and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, then the cautery is repeated again once more, and another time if necessary, and it is left for three days; afterwards, put on wet cotton in oil, and treat with a drying ointment until healed, and if forty days pass without healing, then apply an acidic medicine to uncover the bone; and the king will proceed according to what happens in his kingdom.
There is also a way of cauterizing a fistula that some of the ancients spoke of. Approach a fistula, and pierce the site; afterwards, place into the slit a thin piece of wood which carries the shape: and they make it to the size of a pea; and hold your hand or the wood firmly so that the patient does not move, so that when the pitch melts it does not run into their eye; and one should put on the eye of the patient wet cotton in vinegar or in wine: the pitch will then close the fistula, and heal it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed through the cautery that we have described, that is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a poultice to the nose, and bring the fistula back into the body of the nose according to what is proper in its own place.
cracks in the lips Many times cracks occur in the lips that are called "hair," especially in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections above, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this shape:
And place it quickly in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; after that, treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, after it makes swelling and pus and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in sections, and it does not help: then you should have a cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron comes to the bottom of it, and in the rear; and do this once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then you must expose the site and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
of the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and it does not help, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heat the cautery whose form will come below in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside until it reaches the root of the tooth; then lift your hand and reheat the cautery according to your will; after fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and let him gargle for an hour and spit it out.
And in this way, a tooth that was loose is made firm, and the gums are made soft and moist, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
of toothache
When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies are ineffective, then there is need for cautery in two ways: cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautery with butter is such that you heat butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon made of iron or bronze; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and moisten it in the butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools; and do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see that the butter-soaked wool and cotton are cold, and apply it to the aching tooth, and place a hot iron on top until the fire reaches the gum around the tooth.
The fire cautery is such that you take a rod of iron or copper, as thick as to keep the fire from reaching the mouth of the patient. After heating the cautery, so that its shape will come out as desired, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be gone the same day or the next. The patient should fill his mouth with good butter in anticipation of the cautery, and then spit it out; and this is the shape of the cautery:
When scrofula is due to cold moisture and is resistant to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery so that the desired shape comes out, and have 2 openings for the fumes to exit from the other side of the cautery; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice if needed, going to the depth of the abscess. If the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for 3 days. Then treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be purged with solubilizing medicines. After that, make cautery at the root of the throat, but be careful not to come up to the throat, and don't burn the heart, but only a little bit. Then make another cautery at the joint between the neck and the head of the spine, using the cautery called 'clavicle' which we have described earlier; and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
of the tongue When all diseases of the lungs are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then make two cauteries on the chest in open wounds; and another cautery between the breasts, using the cautery called 'clavicle' as described earlier.
And if you see fit, make cautery in puncturing with the cautery called 'points', of which the form is given above for diseases of the ears; and let the points be at intervals of thirty or so. After that, cure the area as described before, and let there be three cauteries according to this form:
And for this reason cauteries are gentler when you do them three times.
of the shoulder dislocation When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, press on the patient's back and side; then lift the heart which is within the breast with your left hand's fingers; and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery which has two knots of wool, here is its shape:
and cauterize the head until it penetrates to the bone, and the figure of the cautery will be four cauteries; and for this reason there is made a cautery with the cautery that has three nerves, and so the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve so there are eight cauteries.
After putting the broiled porridge on the cautery, let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until it is well healed.
And if it is dislocated again, which rarely happens, then cauterize above on the thick cautery clave, or with many cauteries in a line. For the joint has been closed and the moisture removed and the patient healed.
of the cautery for pleurisy
The ancients said that one must do cautery for pleurisy with roots of aristologus, and in this manner: take a long, dry root of aristologus, as thick and as long as your fingers; moisten it in oil, heat it in the fire, and cauterize with 1 large cautery between the sternum and the collarbone, and 2 small cauteries further down into the part that is under the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, declining a little backward; and 1 cautery in the navel, and 1 other on the stomach, and 1 between the 2 shoulders, and 2 at the sides of the navel, deflecting the cautery that is between the 2 shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it gently, as if you were applying a perfumed ointment.
And some ancients said that some men use a cautery made like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and if there is pain, as we have said in the case of the liver abscess, then it leaps out, and a fistula results which cannot be healed. But in this procedure, there is now fear of death for the patient, or a fistula occurs from which there is no recovery.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of warts with what we have said about the divisions of treatment, and it does not help, then they resort to three methods of cauterization, all of which are good.
Of these, one method is to make three or four cauteries, lining up according to the length of the wart, according to the shape of the cautery that we have described earlier. Do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on his back.
Another method of cauterization is to heat the cautery which has two points, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the hair which is toward the left side, where the wart comes from, and let the elevation be according to the hair, following the length of the body, and let the cautery follow the width of the body.
After that, insert the two points until they pierce through to the other side; then pull out the cautery, and so there will be four of them. If you wish, cauterize with all three points at once. After the cure, when he has bled pus for a long time, it is as good as any of the cures mentioned earlier.
of dropsy
Cauterization is not effective for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes." When you treat it according to the methods we have described in detail, and your treatment does not help, then you should make .iiij cauteries around the belly, and .i over the stomach, and one over the liver, and .i over the spleen, and .ij behind the back over the spine, and .i in the groin; and let the cautery be close to the heart's surface.
After that, let the cautery remain open to ooze pus for a long time, and do not stop the treatment after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the key that we have shown you before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there before.
of foot swelling When the feet are swollen in those who are dropsical, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep, thus you will drive out the yellow water, and the cautery should be in this shape:
After do on the .ij. legs .ij. cauteries in each leg at the tip of the cuticle; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries uncovered for a long time without curing, until the water comes out; then cure the others that we have mentioned.
of menstruation
When there is an issue of the belly due to coldness and moisture, as the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are affected, and it cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly with a strong constitution, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before regarding the cautery of the stomach, using a circulating cautery; and four small cauteries around the belly, one subtle cautery on each hip, and two cauteries on the buttocks.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the shoulder, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
on the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are in the rectum, either one or more, and they are old and consist of large amounts of cold, moist, corrupted humor, and they are treated as we have described in divisions, but it does not help, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is completely under the armpit, poking and poking in a triangular shape, and one cautery under the hip.
and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face swell, then on the face put .i. large cautery on the stomach, as it is before said, and .i. another on the liver, and i. another on the mouse all over the cautery clave; and let the cautery remain open for a long time. After cure the place until it is healed.
of the carnosity which is named "thelul"
When you scrape the thelul, heat the cautery which looks like  .i. razor, and then put it all ablaze on the scraped thelul; and keep your hand so that the cauteries come to the source of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or .ij., and if there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each one as we have said. After curing with profiting ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the alchatim, it will have more help.
of a badly cured wound
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
When there is a fistula, and it is suppurating and exuding pus and corrupted moisture, you should test it with a thin probe, and be careful to only go as far as the tent is inserted into the fistula. Then heat up the cautery like a razor and place it into the fistula according to how deep the tent went in, and repeat the cautery until the corrupt flesh is burned—once or twice or thrice, depending on the amount needed; be careful not to burn the nerves surrounding the area, and avoid the large veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestines, be careful of these areas as well, and do not apply the cautery directly to bone, and think that it is not feeling anything; after that, clean the wound until it heals completely, and if there is still pus coming out for a long time, know that the wound has been fully healed.
of kidney disease When cold pain comes to the kidneys, and there are strong winds, and it does not go away, then you should cauterize the kidneys with a hot iron on both sides, as we have said before. If we cauterize in the middle, it will require three cauteries in a line, and they will be more effective.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the part above the bladder where the hairs of the pubic region begin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as the tip of a thumb; and he makes another cautery over the back, or two if you need it; and the cauteries should be curved as described before.
of the mare When the mare is cold and moist, and does not conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore one should make three cauteries around the womb, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries over the back; and the cauteries should be curved, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moistors descend to the socket of the hip joint, and due to this it moves out of its place, and the sign is that one leg is longer than the other when measured together; and if the places of dislocation are discovered as hollow, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip socket with a .i. cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and the cautery should be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, make .iij cauteries of the olive-sized great, and let the cautery be as deep as all the wounds; and heal it until it is better.
of hip pain When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the disease is cured with what we have said in the section on cures, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the disease of the gross humors with stinking pills, or other good-smelling pills.
After that, let him be cauterized; and the manner of cautery is according to two methods: one is with burning medicines, and the other is fire cautery. Fire cautery depends on many methods, among which one is to cautarize the hip joint in a triangular shape according to this form, and make a good depth and size, and let there be between each cauterization the thickness of a thumb, and the cauteries are olive-shaped; sometimes a cauterization is made in the middle over the head of the hip, so that there are four of them according to this form:
And if you want, cauterize with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire hip, and all the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it reaches the thigh and leg, then make two cauteries where the pain is felt, and one above the ankle on the inside of the foot; and let the cautery be cuticular, and burn the thickness of the skin; and if the pain extends to one or both sides of the foot, cauterize where the pain is felt with three or four cauteries, using the cautery called "points".
And if necessary, do it more; and if he feels the pain below the knee towards the thigh, do cauterization with a knife or circular cautery, and be careful with all your cauterizations that you don't leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
And I have seen several who had cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg was completely swollen, and the feet as well, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the feet. After that, he received a stomach solution from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, do cauterization in one and the other, according to this manner. // And they said about the cautery of the hip, of which here is the way, make a piece of iron and let it be at the head as thick as a little finger, or a little less, and let it be pierced from one end to the other with holes spaced out the width of a finger joint; and let the holes be on both sides, and also like knots, and there is a handle of iron well made; and this is the shape:
And let it be heated until it is all red and dripping, and then put it on the box of the hip joint, and let it be turned to the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery and leave it for 3 days; and then make a plaster of butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly because of its regard, and see little of those who employ it; and yet it is one of the good cauteries which can endure it, and where it occurs.
of the pain in the back
When pain comes in the back, whether from falling or impact or from excessive evacuation, or from similar appearances of cold matter, none of these appearances are worth cauterizing for, except for that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
It is necessary, after the patient has voided foul pills or other similar remedies, to make three lines marked with ink on the back, where the pain persists; and in each line, make 5 cauteries, or more according to the strength and amount that the patient can endure. The cauteries should be performed using the cautery instrument called "poins". If you see fit, make 3 or 4 cauteries with the medium-sized cautery instrument according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a stiff neck when they wake up, and fear; and you will find in the lower spine in the back and in us the appearance that comes over the other vertebrae.
When you see this and you cure it, then cauterize it with a silver cautery according to this form.
So that the purple cautery colors each part of the vertebrae evenly. And if you see [the vertebrae], cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery .ij or .iij lines wide, and have the points close to each other. After curing the area until it is healed according to what we have said, be careful not to apply cautery in gurbosity which is in the webbing of a nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When joint pain is caused by moistors that spread throughout the body's members, and when pain comes in the feet, which they properly call 'podagra', and when it is caused by a cold condition and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is cured by cautery in the following way: make the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this form:
And if there is a need to prick the face of the foot, then do the cautery all around the point on the foot they call 'point'. And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then do cautery on each knee with 3 or 4 cauteries of each part, using only olive oil cautery; and if you need more, then do more, but hold your hand no harder than until the thickness of the skin is burnt.
And if the pains descend to the knees and the back, then administer the cautery we described in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then prick around the wrist 2 lines; and if there remains any pain in the fingers, then prick each joint and the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbow or up to the shoulder, then cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and give medicines. For if you take good care of him and purge the flux, then he will be healed with God's help.
of the rot of the jaw
When a hernia occurs in the groin, and the testicles descend into the scrotum, this is new, so when you see it being cured, he must not eat that day. He should use things that loosen the belly so that the feces can exit his belly; after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and order him to hold his breath until the testicles are healed, and bring them up to your fingers, and sign underneath the hernia on the bone of the groin, and all around a sign that looks like half a circle above the body; then heat up the cautery so it has this shape:
until it turns white and drips blood. Then bring the testicles back to their place; and the minister should hold his hand over them so they don't return, and treat the groin area well, and put a pillow under him and a servant on each side of his legs, and another one on his feet holding his hands; then hold the cautery against the sign with your whole hand, keeping it straight and keeping it there until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, do it again until you hit the bone. Be careful that the testicles don't pop out when you're using the cautery so you don't burn him, and so that the patient doesn't die or suffer other ill effects.
And you should know that when you don't reach the bone with the cautery, your work is for nothing. And the cautery for children should be smaller according to the size of their testicles, and for adults it should be larger according to their size; after 3 days, cure the area around the cautery with butter until the scalding is gone; then cure it with other ointments until it's healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well sewn up; and you should keep his testicles tied up for a long time so that they don't pop out when he stands up and walks around.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and against too much loud talking; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed. And I will now describe the treatment by cutting in his chest. of stomach ulcers
When ulcers come in other stomachs and are known, and you see that they are not growing anymore, if he makes .a. cautery of the fire according to its quantity, and burns it to the third of his heart; after the cure according to what we have said. And some of the ancients have said that it must be cauterized with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
but first sign the incision and draw a line over the breadth above the ulcer, and another from below, and hold your hand steady throughout the cauterization. But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to a limb, from falling or from injury, and the pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help, then it should be cauterized with a cautery called a "point", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness, and its condition of twisting and of its pain. If he is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, do another cautery upon it, for such is the custom, that it should change in the limb nearest to it, so that you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
of mixing
The mixing of medicines is sometimes helped by cautery with great benefit, and also the disease that comes from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see this cauterized, take care if the disease is in its beginning, and is healed according to what we have said in the division, and does not stay or return, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the body, then do 5 cauteries on the head: 1 on the crown of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and 2 on the 2 horns, and 1 behind on the nape; and let your hand be so that the cautery reaches the bone, and as much as the skin comes out so that the vapors of the gross humors may come out; and cauterize the wound according to what is before it.
If the disease is scattered throughout the body, and it is clearly evident, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned: one cautery on the head, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large cautery on the groin, and one additional cautery on each hip; two cauteries on the elbows, two cauteries on the knees, one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the back of the heel. Sometimes a cautery is applied to the bone of the wrist, and one to the bone of the stomach, and one to the liver.
And you should know that the more cauteries you apply, the more benefit they will bring to the patient; and you should know that the sick person does not feel pain from cautery as a healthy person does, because their body is already corrupted. The cauteries should be large or small depending on the limbs and joints, according to how you find them using the tools of iron. After cauterizing, treat the area with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
of swelling
When swelling occurs in a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but is not healed, then cauterize the limb according to its size; let the cautery be slightly penetrating into the depth of the vein. Then treat it with ointments until it is healed. Sometimes cautery is done on the hand, foot, or back, at the outlet of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; yet no one should attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the outlets of the nerves moving the body.
of albaras
When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a moderately deep cautery according to the thickness of the vein, so that the whiteness is removed and its color changed; then treat it with a poultice of equal parts linseed and lentil flour, rose oil, and plantain leaves, as well as blood from the colon and almond blood. Mix everything together and apply it, binding it with a cloth and keeping it in place until it is healed.
the treatment of sores by cautery
When cancer appears at the beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a circle, all around the edge of the cancer. And yet the wise men say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the cancer; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen many times; and a more appropriate thing is that it is cauterized around, with the cautery called 'circle', as we have said in many cauteries.
of the swelling that cannot subside
When someone has a disease called 'adubelati', and it is slow to die, either because of the superfluity that it causes or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, very old) and have little blood, or because of the time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries, pricking; after that, leave it as it is. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it piercing all around with the cautery, then heat the cautery from which the form comes:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the skin, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it in a way that alleviates the course of the pustule. After the healing, once he is perfectly healed.
the fire cautery by iron
Another type of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing more than a eaten-away member, for it eats away at the members just as fire burns dry branches. If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries, some small and some large, according to what is needed in the location of the disease; then cauterize all over until you reach all the corruption, and none of it remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed. And then leave it for three days, and place soft bandages soaked in oil on the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are healed and all the corruption is gone. After the healing of the ulcers caused by fire, use ointments to generate flesh. And if you see after three days that new flesh has not yet grown, then restart the cautery on the parts that still have corruption. This eaten-away condition can sometimes be cured with medicine instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already described the cure for medicine ague in the division: take it when you need it.
of warts that come on the feet
Many times it happens that in the feet due to coldness there arises a disease which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and is a large faulted growth that blisters the foot. And cauterization for this disease is according to two methods: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is such that you heat 1 cauterizing needle as much as an owl's feather, and it is made of good iron to the size that it can prop up the nail on all sides, and that it has thin edges; after, place it hot on the nail and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for 3 days until it begins to secrete pus; then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will drop off and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the place with ointment until it is healed.
And if they are converted to the body from coldness, and often happen in both hands and feet, then you must use hot water cautery; and it is in this way: take a brass or iron rod, or an owl's feather, and place it on the nail and the warts, that is to say, verrucous growths; and place the rod so that it presses all around, then pour a little hot water, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail, and can find the hot water a deep path to the root. Then let the patient endure the biting pain of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted at all its roots. Thus do one after another, until you extract all those in the body, then cure them with ointments that promote healing.
the shaking treatment
When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other [ailments], you should make four or five cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spinous process; and one cautery on the penis, and one on the stomach with an olive-oil cautery; this will stop the trembling and hasten the recovery from the cold disease.
of stinking pustules
Sometimes they appear in the body as bathes or stinking pustules, which come from thick putrid matter. At their first appearance, one should make cauteries on each tip of the pustule: with a thin stick of myrtle, the tip taken into the fire, or with a long root of aristolochia, or with the lenticular cautery. Sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning as they appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow any further, but the surplus from which they come is disrupted, and they are healed; but this should be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut There are often great flowings of blood from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery on the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stanch.
And yet when this happens to someone, you must quickly put your index finger over the wound of the vein, and hold it very firmly until the blood is quiet under your finger and no drops issue forth; then take a number of olive-oil cauteries, both large and small according to the wound and the location where the artery runs, and apply the cautery to that vein where you are holding your finger, and keep the cautery there until the bleeding is staunched.
And if the bleeding starts again when you lift your finger from the wound and the cautery goes out, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is staunched; and be careful that you do not harm the nerve nearby, and that no other ill comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well staunched by itself if the artery is large, unless by one of four methods we have described: by cautery, or by extraction if it is untreated, or by a strong ligature, or by medicines applied which have the power to staunch bleeding; and it should be bound and compressed skillfully.
He who administers a tight bandage or places hot objects on top, or similar things, will not benefit much if at all.
And if this happens to someone and there is no medicine or healing available, then one should put their index finger on the wound as we have said, and press firmly on the wound and the vein; and they should not move it but moisten it with cold water often so that it becomes very cold until the blood congeals and swells and becomes firm; and they should make a splint in front of what is needed for cauterizations and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all the diseases that require cauterization with fire or burning medicines, and their causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter from the head to the foot, and I will continue in this chapter by the same way for what one can more easily find.
And so that I may begin this, it is necessary, dear son, for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of that greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to be foolish. For people come in many ways to be healed. Some are so overcome by their illness that they would easily change it for the folly they find in their disease, and because of the greatness of their folly, one must fear for them. And among these there are some who give their consent and say: "Wait, I am cured." But the disease is stubborn. You must not consent to those who come to you with this attitude, but place more importance on your honor than on your desire, and do not act foolishly but wisely in what you are certain of, and from which you can take pride and profit; and use prophecy and indication in curing your illnesses so that salvation may be turned towards them. And this will help you achieve a good reputation, glory, and praise.
Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have assigned this chapter to you in discussing the topic of cautery, according to what has been presented before in the chapter on cautery from head to foot, so that you can find more easily whatever you need.
the head full of water
You should know that this disease often comes to children during childbirth, and when the baby's head is squeezed too hard; and sometimes it comes from a relaxed cause that one does not know about.
I have never seen this disease in adults; and of all those I have seen, death has always resulted; and for that reason, it seems best to me not to continue the treatment beyond a certain point.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and his head swelled every day until he could no longer bear it; and the moisture accumulated under the bone above the brain, between the heart and the bone. And if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make a large slit in the head, as long as two fingers, so that the moisture may flow out; and see the shape of the spatomile:
If the hollow is deeper, and the abscess is larger, then make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the openings of the head wider on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not close up again: then you must make three slits in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, draw out all moisture forcefully. After that, squeeze out the folds of clothes and powders, and apply wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then loosen it, and cure the wound by tenting and poultices, and let the head be extracted equally, and give the patient dry meat with a little moisture as long as the limb is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you observe where the aperture of the abscess is, and the gathering of the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Cut therefore where the abscess opens, and the gathering of the pus, and cut it according to what you can; and be careful not to cut the artery, and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
from gout
When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or the feet, and the disease is old, and the medicine does not help, then the last resort is cautery with which one will cut the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them open, the patient should bend his head back; then rub the area around the arteries with a rough cloth until they appear, then tighten the patient's neck all around with .i. cloth; then look where the vein bleeds, and the places are after the ears, and they are pressed down; then sign the spots in, then cut both with an acute spatulum of .ij. parts so that the incision reaches the bone, and this is through the wide part of the head.
And if you see, insert the spatulum under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also .ij. fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood will flow out continuously upward.
If the artery does not open to feeling, then you must measure the amount of space of three digits, then cut through and slit up to the bone; and what amount of blood is needed to be let out is 1/6 of a pint, and by chance a little more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains on the bone no trace of pus, so that hot abscesses do not come, then drain the wound and ligate it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
from the emetic
When old-age anemia comes, and catarrh is acute, due to moistors of the eyes and heat in the temples and ancient soddeness and similar things, and he has been treated by various methods of medicine and all of it does not help him, then we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient should let the hair of his temples grow, and feel for the artery in his temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is not very swollen in some people who are too cold; and if it is swollen, then the patient should press on his neck with some folded cloth, then rub the area with some rough cloth, and anoint the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulum made of this material:
then lightly scorch the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with tweezers, and carefully separate it from the tissue beneath in each part; and if the artery is thin, return it to the tip of the claw, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two joints. For if it is not cut off, the blood will not flow everywhere.
And draw out the blood from 1/4 to 1/2 ounce, and if the artery is large, you should tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus will not come before the wound heals, and the blood will flow smoothly; then cut off the excess between the two ties in that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot-iron knife up to the bone until the joints are cut; and this is the best way, if the patient does not have a fever and is of a warm complexion.
For cautery helps to end moisture; for this reason it is of greater help with moisture. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the hole with old cotton and puts it on top of well-made tenting; and when they are removed, they are cured with dry medicines that cause scabs to form, and with tenting, until it is healed; and if without cutting into the artery as much as you work at it, you hurry to cover it with cautery, or you use vitriol and press it in your hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you don't have this present, put a finger on the spot so that the blood is frozen, and moisten the spot with cold water so that the blood stops, and press it as it should be; and what is best and easier in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of 2 parts, but the cutter must be very thick to retain its heat for longer. Because when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat. And between the two knives there should be a distance of one finger's width, and then when you have made an incision in both places, put the hot iron on it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and keep the two heads apart because they are not welded together by this cautery; and this is how the cautery should be formed:
tears
When tears are falling from the eyes that are above the testicle of the head, and medicine does not help the healing, and you see the face of the sick person turning red, and there is movement in the front as if it were trembling; and when the oil is thin and moist so that the hair of the eyelids has fallen out, and the eyelids are scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed.
And the ancients called it "cure contused," and you shall do to the patient who has this disease that he lets the hairs grow on his forehead, then make .iiij cuts on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the cuts be as .ij fingers all over the forehead going down to the nose, and the others .ij at .ij sides above the eyes, and beware of cutting the arteries that are on .ij sides above the eyes; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the .ij mandibles, and each wound be the quantity of .iij fingers across joint;
from the incision that is to be made on the temple up to the second incision; and scorch all the skin between the .ij cuts as far down as the cheek bone, then make another cut from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then take out this spathanium.
if you put into the first cut the instrument that is called "culter", and is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, and this is its form: And cut the incision towards the breast bone and the soft part towards the bone, and tie it so that it comes to the middle slit. And press all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to the heart, and then make another cut in the middle slit up to the other side; and then draw out evenly and express the site for the blood taken; then put a tent of old cotton into each slit, and put wet clothes soaked in wine, oil, and garlic on top, and guard against hot abscesses coming; and on the third day loosen the ligature, and administer copious amounts of warm water, then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until healed.
from the eyes
When someone has a sudden catarrh and you see the eyes are sunken and small, and the vision weakened, and the eyelids burnt, and the hair falling out, and pain in the head, and the patient sneezing; then know from these symptoms that this matter and these catarrhs come from many veins, and the cure for it is to let blood.
And you must instruct the patient to look up, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another smaller one. Begin cutting from the left temple to the right, incising down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples' nerves that move the jaw. When the bone is exposed, use a sponge to soak up all the blood, then separate the two lips of the cut and insert old cotton, and tent with linen; then bind dampened cloths in wine and oil over it, and beware of hot abscesses. Once it is healed, you should rub the bone until new flesh begins to grow, then treat it with astringent substances that promote healing.
In this way: take two parts of wheat-flower and four parts of colophony, and make an ointment; then administer it in these wounds to promote healing throughout.
When the bone is exposed, use a sponge to soak up all the blood, then separate the two lips of the cut and insert old cotton, and tent with linen; then bind dampened cloths in wine and oil over it, and beware of hot abscesses. Once it is healed, you should rub the bone until new flesh begins to grow, then treat it with astringent substances that promote healing.
All that falls from the ears is one of four things: grains, animals, minerals or similar objects like iron; seeds, such as peas, beans and lentils; or flowing substances like water, garlic and similar things.
When a stone or other object that does not adhere to the ear falls into it and does not grow in the ear, one should expose the ear to the sun. If you can see the stone, apply some violet oil or sisament oil and then remove it with forceps; have the patient sneeze while applying an ointment, plug the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and tie a piece of cloth or wool around the ear. Often the object will come out through this treatment; if not, it should be extracted with fine forceps, like these:
If it comes out with the forceps, that is good; if not, use a thin, small pair of tweezers made of soft iron and insert their tips into the ear canal firmly; then stop the area around the tips with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the forceps; then pull it out firmly. Often it will come out in this way, as we have said. If not, take a glottis (a pair of forceps) similar to those used for birds and insert an instrument designed for this purpose, then put some cotton around it; press the glottis against the object, whether it is a stone or something else, and pull out. If it does not come out with these methods, you should split the ear so that pus and blood come out, causing a chalazion  and spasm; the splitting method is as follows: first, bleed the patient's head, then make him sit between your hands and turn his ear upward, then make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat depends, and make the incision in the shape of a moon so that you can reach the stone; then extract it according to your ability, and suck it firmly with your mouth until it is healed. And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer .i. spatumile tenve subtle according to this form:
And administer incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to moisture in the ear until you have made many pieces; then extract it with small pincers and a suction cup, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In the eardrum where the pain is, the patient should use snuff of the first remedies, and fill the ear with old cotton. And he should lie on that same ear where the pain is. If the pain jumps out through the ear, that's good. If not, take many thin and light stones according to the length of your finger, and heat them in fire; and insert one end of his finger into the ear, and press down with the other part, and place another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to do this with stone after stone until all the water comes out, and thus it will all come out; and if you see that, take a straw, and put one end into the ear, and the other end heat with fire until the thin straw is burnt; then do the same with another straw until all the water comes out, as we have said in the case of the stone.
In the extraction of the insect, if it is of a small body, such as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of a large body that can be felt, administer extraction with pincers; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations, and if the treatment is not effective, then you should examine the ear in the sun; if any worms appear, pull them out with fine tweezers, and if none appear, take a sample of the fluid where the pain is located.
And it is narrow below and wide above. And insert the thinnest end of a rod into the ear according to the amount of pain from the malady; then suck forcefully at the entire rod, doing this repeatedly until all the worms come out. If they do not come out, stop up the ear with cotton as I said for the stone; and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective for the extraction of worms, and you will find them in the section on distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, from which the pain is originating, just as you see:
And it can be made of silver or brass with small holes below and a wider opening above for distillation; and to press the distillation into the instrument use a well-made brass rod, and if you see fit, wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicines you use, into the rod, and let the rod be in the ear; then put the rasor, filled with cotton, into the ear, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled into the ear canal; and he feels the medicine inside, and let the distillation be a little warm, as one would heat it over fire to distil it into the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
of the cleaning of the ears
No child is born without an earhole; and the same thing happens to adults due to the cleaning of a wound or a cyst inside the ear. This cleaning sometimes opens a perforation in the eardrum, which cannot be seen; and sometimes there is only a small defect, which can be seen clearly.
Therefore, when there is an opening that cannot be seen, it is a sign of a poor prognosis in many cases. In such cases, one should hold the affected ear towards the sun and examine it. If you can see the perforation clearly, then its appearance indicates the nature of the disease:
And it should be narrow and sharp in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear. If the perforation is due to a cyst or body part in the ear, then one should hold it with fine tweezers and gently scrape away at it until all the foreign matter is removed.
And if the wax is impacted in the ear, take a small, thin rasp and heat it slightly in the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear. If you feel the wax which the patient feels aching when he hears, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the aperture, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, then take a tent and moisten it in rosewater, and powder over vitrialed vitriol; and if you see swelling in the ear, it is appropriate to draw out the tent and move another tent moistened with cerotum made of rosin oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then clean it until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, take a sponge and dip it in cold water, and apply it to the ear, and use other remedies which stop the bleeding that come from distilling treatments.
from the ash of papers
This treatment involves papers on the eyes when they are moist and dry; you should then extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the head of a spatula from its roots; then place powdered vitriol over the area.
And if it is without skin, one should cauterize it with a thin lens, and the cautery after the incision will help; and many times they return, as long as something remains in their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of hail
Many times they come as papers of things that look like hail in their shape and hardness, and this is why the disease is called "hailstorm"; it is a gathering of moisture, large in the paper above and below; its work is such: first, if the hailstone moves from side to side, and it is light enough to know, then they open it with tweezers and pinchers, and pull off the head. If the split is large, there should be a stitch, and the wound treated until it heals; but if it is small, no force should be used, for the ointment will restore and heal it quickly.
And if the hailstone is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then reverse the paper, and hold the hailstone with pincers, and press from both sides; and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not matter; and when the hailstone is crushed, wash the eye with salted water, and clean the place of that which causes pain until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinah is a fat that is woven into the paper above, and this happens most to children with no adults, and it affects their eyes greatly, and they get cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot look at sunlight because the tears hasten to their eyes; and because of this, they lie on their faces, and sleep on them, and their eyelids become moist which covers the swelling and appearance of the exinah which opens in the eye. And when you press on the area with your fingers and feel the exinah between them.
And the method of treatment is that the patient puts his head on yours; and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains the exinah from each part, and then place it over him; and press with your fingers from both sides, so that the exinah is gathered within the circle. Then cut through the moisture with the spatulum, making a slit no larger than the wound made in the vein when opening it; and in some cases, the exinah comes out of the slit according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
So take a piece of cloth and hold it between your fingers and thumb, and turn your hand to the left and right until it is stretched; and be careful not to push into the fissure so that you do not go all the way to the sphenoid bone up to the eye, lest you damage it.
And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the fissure, then widen the fissure slightly so that it opens; then withdraw as we have said, then moisten a piece of cloth in vinegar and water, and apply it to the spot, and draw out with a bandage.
And if there are such people who grind their teeth and put something on to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then he should be cured until he is healed. And if there is a hot abscess at the site, then he should be cured with soothing poultices until he is healed.
of hair from papers
When hairs grow from papers and are not of their nature, and they harm the eyes, causing various diseases such as tears, softness of the papers, and albuginea, leading to destruction of the eyes; the cure is according to four methods: through cauterization with fire, or with medicine water according to what comes before the chapter on cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching or with splints, according to what I will explain.
You should place the patient's head in your lap, then hold the paper of the eye in your left hand; if it turns easily, that is good; if not, insert a needle with thread through the paper, either at the edge or where the hair is growing, and pass the thread over the entire paper, then hold it against the razor; next, cut into the skin under the paper, under the aberrant hairs, up to the great tear duct and down to the small one; then remove the thread and place a small tent of cotton and linen under the paper; mark a figure on the paper, like a holly leaf, but adjust the shape according to the amount you see the divided paper rising.
And if there is a large amount of divided paper due to moisture, one must cut out the paper according to the amount it has softened; then cut into the skin along the two lines you marked, starting from the great tear duct and ending at the small one; make one incision near the natural hair in the thickness of a hair root, then insert the needle in one of the angles of the wound, and lift the skin entirely; then bring together the two lips with a single stitch using a fine woolen thread and an aiguille, and wipe away the blood; and dry up any surplus thread above the two eyelids with any sticky substance you like, if you wish to do so; otherwise, leave the stitch and threads in place for three or four days; then remove the stitch and treat the wound with dry, constrictive substances, for the paper will adhere on its own once the wound heals, but the stitch is painful (as the ancients say), and this method is without fear.
and in another way: and it is that you draw the paper with a shape that is like the myrtle leaf, as we have described, with three notches according to the shape that is here:
then cut what is on top into small pieces evenly according to the shape that is there:
And if you cannot hold the tweezers and it is not even, take a needle with which there is .i. thread, and push it into the figure; and another thread from near the large artery, and the second thread from near the small one, and pull the threads evenly between your fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have described, then bring the two lips of the wound together with a stitch, and heal it until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with cerate and similar soothing ointments.
And sometimes the paper's hairs are reversed: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitch in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of bones is as follows: turn the paper and cut it inside according to what I have said, then make two bones by art, and two thin threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatulum; then tie two knots at each end where you hold the threads; then assemble them skillfully above what is on top of the paper of the eye, and pull out the two bones from their formed parts; and leave it for a few days, and the skin that was pulled will die, become numb, and fall off, as it heals.
If it is slow to heal, if the cut still hurts, then treat it until it heals; and when the wound is sewn up and the paper lifted, the hairs will no longer hurt; and this is the form of the two bones you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
the procedures are such that you pierce a thin needle and thread in it with a fine silk thread; then assemble the eyes and tie them skillfully, and let the length of the threads be about a palm long; then arrange another fine silk thread in the case and tie it at its end; then put the patient's head on your hand; and have it exposed to the sun so that the procedures are revealed, for this is a subtle and delicate procedure, then pierce the needle all the way through the paper until you draw it over the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the case, and thread that hair into the case, whether there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand back so that the hairs are drawn outward through the paper with the natural hair.
If the pustule is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you shall treat the pustule from underneath to the very end that you have directed, until the pustule comes out from above the opening, and you see it with your eye; then you shall draw out the pustule and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair grows back in its place, and new skin forms over it; and if the hair is short, accompany one long hair from the eyebrows, and let them grow together until they are stretched out, and then cut them.
of the eye pustule
When this disease called "alacrati" or "eye pustule" occurs, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. It happens suddenly due to injury, surgery, cauterization, or similar causes.
And the way to treat it is to split the wound and separate its edges, then put in a tent of linen and apply a poultice until it is healed; and one must not use in its treatment anything that would dry it out or constrict it. For if you do, the disease will return worse than before; but rather use softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or watered-down wine with ground linseed, and apply an ointment of softened diaquilon in one of the oils, and cover it with a tent, and treat it thus.
And the treasure of your cure is that you must be careful that it does not heal according to its former shape; and these works which we have said are not remedies for this disease, but only to prevent it from returning to its former shape.
from the pus that comes in the eye
This disease which is under the eye and is truly called "axacrati", has natural and accidental causes. The accident comes from wounds, incisions, cauterization, and similar things; and the way to treat it is to take a needle with a double thread, and pierce it through the flesh so that the thread goes into the left tear duct and emerges on the right, and then the flesh above the needle is cut away, leaving a 1.5 cm wide flap.
And if the shape of the paper returns to what it should be, that is good; if not, then take a razor and put it in the incision, and turn the paper over, and make 2 incisions along the edges of the paper; and let the edges of the 2 incisions be at the 2 angles of the incision that you have cut, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter "J" in Greek; then remove this flesh, according to the amount that its sides are cut under, from what follows the paper, then join the 2 separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then treat it with the medicines we have mentioned for softening, and tents, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a crack or a wound or cautery, then one should make a plain slit under the hair of the skin, and according to what is above; then draw between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one should perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares machines with all his power how he makes the figure return to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what he needs of operations and instruments in various dispositions.
Sudden movement of the skin
When this suddenness happens to the skin in such a way that the paper above is separated from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then one should push the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it upwards; and they are held by tweezers, so that you grab what is open on the surface of the staphitis, which is neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot bear for the staphitis to be too sharp or to cut into the eye; and your incision, by which you scrape this union, should be light, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and all of this union is healed, and sometimes in the eye there is a salty water, and it is lifted with sweet water, and a collarette; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put over the eye soft lamb's wool soaked in egg white; and after the third day use the collar and soothing things until it is healed.
of the nail of the eye
Know that the nail has two forms: it is nervous and resembles a hard cyst; the other is not nervous but resembles white congealed moisture which, when touched with iron and crushed between pincers, cannot be crushed by anyone; and both types originate from the lower eyelid, growing little by little until they cover the entire eye, its light, and its movement.
And the method of the incision is that the patient places his head on your lap, then opens his eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then grab the nail with pincers made of thin metal, and pierce it at the top; then take a needle, thread a horsehair, or cow's hair, or ox's hair, through it, and double its point over and insert it into the nail, and tie the nail to the thread, and extend it upwards, then scrape away all around the nail where the eyelid continues towards the tear duct until you reach the soft tissue; then cut off the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with gentle motions, using a delicate instrument, and leave the natural skin of the eyelid, so that no incision comes into contact with the tear duct, as we have said; then extend the nail to the little finger only, and tie it to the thread, as we have described.
And be careful that the instrument does not touch and break the carnous membrane, and that the tear duct is not pierced; and after the incision, apply a little ground chalk to the eye, and a collar made of linen soaked in it, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
If the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, nor can the hooks enter, many times this kind of nail is cured by medicine; and it grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work on the eye of the disease, and take the spatulum slightly pointed according to this form:
And gently lift up the nail and if you see that it does not diminish and the inflammation draws near, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper ore and powdered, and stop up the eye until the next day; then begin again the other work according to this same method, until it is all removed.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin again the work as before, until it is healed.Et se il y aveit aposteme froid, adonques cure l’aposteme par le chaus; et si tu vois qu’elle ne voulent point arder, si distille en l’oil du vin de groseille, et du coliere dou ver, et du litargire, et du sal amoniac; et si la chose n’est pas trop chaude, si peit de ta bouche.
And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid hurts in the eye with great harm, then suspend it on the hook and scrape off a part but not all so that no body of tears comes into it; then distill into the eye red copper ore made from litharge.And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid hurts in the eye with great harm, then suspend it on the hook and scrape off a part but not all so that no body of tears comes into it; then distill into the eye red copper ore made from litharge.
of the flesh that grows over the pupil
In some men there sometimes grows red flesh over the pupil, covering it and pushing it back against the eyeball, resembling a rose-colored bulbous flower. The treatment for this is for the patient to press his head against something solid, then open his eyes wide, and then cut off all of that flesh with nails or a similar tool, holding tightly with one hand; next, cut away the first piece of flesh, and keep cutting all the way to the root, being careful not to scratch the eyeball during the procedure. The incision should be made with a sharp instrument, as we have described in the section on incisions for fingernails, and with gentle pressure so that the instrument can penetrate the flesh;
once the incision is complete and all of the flesh has been removed, apply eye salve made from egg yolk and red wine vinegar, and cover the eyeball with cotton padded with egg white so that it is protected from hot abscesses; if nothing remains, and the white part of the eye turns red, then leave it alone and treat the abscess with remedies for hot abscesses; then return to the treatment until the eye is healed, and do this for as many times as necessary.
However, it is necessary to adapt the treatment based on whether the condition is natural or accidental, and to use tools made of iron; do not insert your fingers in any of these treatments until you see that the patient can tolerate it.
of the veins of the eyes
There are red veins that cover the eye, and they obscure vision and weaken the eye every day. Therefore, first you should examine the eye to see if it is healthy and normal, and not suffering from any other condition beyond the red veins; then proceed thus: instruct the patient to tilt his head back so that you can reach the eyelids, and with a delicate instrument, according to your skill, grasp and lift the lower eyelid gently, making sure to use a double-edged tool according to this shape.
And two edges in .I. body according to this form:
Then draw gently on the veins with a subtle force, and let the blood out an hour after another, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to wound the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not touch anything beyond the veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the sebaceous material.
And if you cannot pull out all of this in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye with soothing things for the pain of them, and let it be for several days until the pain is assuaged and the hot abscess is secured, then begin again according to this method which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
of the eye fistula
The surgeon should examine the "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cautery and with burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a hole in it that you must open over the abscess, where it should remain, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you will see the corruption and blackness, then return to all of the instrument by which this form is made; and it is called a "sharp point", and it should be made to pierce one tip, and it should be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put it on the site of the corrupt bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption has been removed; do this several times, then restore the site with drying medications.
if the fistula is closed and new skin has formed, and the body of the bow is closed, and remains in this way for 40 days, and does not renew itself and there is no bad accident, you know that it is healed; if not, then there is nothing else to do but to open the fistula at the opening of the nose according to this form: then you remove the bone a second time with an iron instrument, and with watery medications, and when it has been removed, take .a. forest according to this form, and let the head of the iron be .ai. angles, and let the staff be thinned at the top as far as you can see in the picture:
then put it on the bone next to the earring, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then turn all the way through the forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through his nose; then restore the site with dry medications as I have taught you, and when the skin forms and hardens, the matter goes to the nose; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the exit of the eye:
When the eyes open fully, and there is no disturbance to the eye or diminution, then you should ligature the patient; then let it heal, then put leeches or suckers without piercing, then apply a poultice of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla on the eye, then bandage it with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the bandages is that you take soft bandages, doubling each one four times, then place them one upon the other according to the quantity that the eye needs; then tighten it from above with a firm bandage, and repeat the leeches without piercing to suck; then remove the leeches and leave the eye tight day and night, and if the ligature softens, you must tighten it much; then remove the ligature after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, then repeat the poultice, bandages, ligature, and leeches until it is healed.
from the rupture of a woven cloth
When disruptions occur in a woven cloth, then it opens and comes out like a grain of resin, and is terrible to see; therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the lower part up to the upper part, then insert another needle where there is a double thread of the upper arm; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then pull on the place of the double thread and tie one part of the weave tightly, then pull out the needle and put a wet lamb's wool over the eye; and let it be until the threads cut through the weave, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the weave on each side of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes give a strong indication, he should pierce them with a sharp spatulum which comes from under the eye, and dry up the white moistness and draw down the eyes, and then let him enter immediately; then he should extract it until it is healed.
from the socket of the eye
This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but an inflammation of the eye socket, resembling water but not being water; and the way that it appears to be treated is for the patient to sit on a prepared seat and straight, then take hold of his head with both hands and move it until you see the socket coming towards your eyes; then it should remain there, and the light should not disappear and the patient should see things as he used to. And if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the swelling of the socket does not appear as we have said, take hold of the patient's head with both hands and take the sharp spatulum and put it on the white of the eye gently and move it until the socket comes out; then drop warm honeyed water into the eye, or water or fenugreek which has been boiled and mixed with honey, and then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
of eye waters
We have the appearance of the ulcers in the division, and what is needed to pierce it; then work according to health. You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light so that the sun does not affect him, and close and hold his healthy eye very tightly; then place the paper over the eye if the ulcers are on the left side, or on the right side if they are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the ulcers are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if they are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument next to the crown by the thickness of a hair in that part of the eye where the tear duct is located, then carefully insert the instrument called "almagda" and turn your hand so that it pierces the white of the eye, and feel when the almagda reaches the hollow; the depth of the path of the almagda should be equal to the thickness of the space between the pupil and the edge of the iris; this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the horn-like membrane, and then insert the instrument as far as the place where the ulcer is, then express it under one path after another. If the ulcer drains now, the patient sees in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After a short rest, if the ulcer rises again through the second path, press it with the instrument; and when it is firmly lodged and does not rise, gently withdraw the almagda by turning your hand slightly back and forth; then put in the ulcer a little seal gem, and remove it from that eye. Then moisten a cotton ball or lamb's wool in rose oil and bind it over the eye with the healthy eye. We, and those of our time, place on it crushed comfrey with plenty of egg yolk.
And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
And so pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deeply but make a slender slit, then insert alum, as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare for the patient a dark chamber in which he can sleep on his back in a dim place; and let him be deprived of all movement, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and let him be bound according to his condition for three days; then release him in that same dark room, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then re-bind him until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of the operation or after the incision now, but you should alleviate it, so that the fluid may ascend gently.
And if a hot abscess comes, release the eye before the seventh day, and use that which soothes abscesses; and when it is soothed, release the vision and place upon his face an eyelid to cover one eye, and let him be in that dark room again. And then exit the room little by little, and return to his condition; and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
And one came to us from the Land of Israel who told us that in his country they pierce with alum, and they suck out the fluid, but nonetheless I have never seen anyone do this in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books by the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagest, for those who do not know them can see them; and they are properly made of brass:
And let the ends of these be of the same subtlety, and the hindmost have four points.
of the eye socket towards the nose.
Sometimes there are various types of nosebleeds that emerge from the nose, some resembling scorpions with feet-like tips; and among them, there are those with a dark-colored swelling and others with a light-colored one. For the latter type, which is not swollen, you should make the patient lean back towards the sun, pinch his nose shut, and pour the blood into those veins, pulling them outward; then press hard on what you can sustain using a very sharp and subtle pair of tweezers from one side until you are sure that the vein has been completely blocked.
And if there remains any thing which cannot be covered, open it with one of the subtle instruments lightly so that nothing remains; and if without it swells or an abscess forms, dry it as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the corruption is removed, then pour on wine or vinegar.
If the nose works and moisture comes to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not drain as it should, know that there is corruption in the bone above, and the instruments do not work to cut it: therefore you must place a thread of linen about a finger thick into his nose at his own will, and let it hang down from one nostril between each nostril by a distance of a finger or less; and let the patient hold the end of the thread in his mouth with his hand as far as he can, and draw it through to the palate; and many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it; then hold the end that comes from the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes from the mouth in the other hand, and pull them gently towards each other so that you know that they have touched the corruption, then draw out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all the corruption; and then place a plug of cotton in the nostril for several days until it is healed, and if he needs dry medicines, use them. This is the instrument used to cleanse the nose, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils.
And it should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and the conduit should also be made of the same material; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full for purging the nose; and it should have a handle at the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the heart above the diaphragm
Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the top of the diaphragm, and grows and becomes large, so that it is visible to the eye; therefore you should cut it at the beginning, and remove all of it, then place the cautery or burning medicine on top; and if one delays cutting until it has become large, then beware if it is hard, of dark color, and lacking in feeling: do not touch it with iron, for it is an ulcerated abscess, because when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due only to pressure, not due to dark color, and you see that one can cut it all away, then evacuate the patient and cut it without fear, and clean the area of dry and constricting substances.
when the heart is cut and sewn
You should know that when pus of a continuous flow comes from one of these damaged cartilage areas, it does not benefit some people as much as others. Therefore, whenever this happens to someone, you should examine whether the wound is fresh and full of blood; then attach the .ij. lips with a stitch, then clean it until it heals; and if the lips are separated on both sides, you should scrape all parts of their heart until they heal, then stitch the .ij. lips together, tighten them, and powder them with dragon's blood and incense; place a piece of strong plaster or other healing plaster over the powders, and leave it to heal by itself, then clean it with ointment until it heals.
The manner of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
of lip abscesses
At home, there are hard abscesses within the lips, resembling grains of wheat, smaller and larger; therefore, you should turn the lips inside out, and slit them on each knob, and pinch and cut into each part; then apply crushed vitriol to the incision, until the blood is stanched; then use the leechwort, and cleanse the area of dry matter until it is healed.
of gum swelling
Many times a growth arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albus"; you should hold it with tweezers, cut at its root, and let the blood or pus flow out; then place powdered vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders, over the site; if the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cauterization, and this often happens, then these are the forms of estrume for coping.
of the eyes, and to the
Some are clustered at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and some are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green, so that the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; so you should have the patient sit in your lap, and open his mouth wide, and inspect the teeth where the sores appear, until nothing remains; and thus you should do for blackness, and yellowness, and other discoloration, until they are clean; and if one is removed at first, it is good; if not, then repeat it again the next day or the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth require various forms of estrume to remove them, according to what the work demonstrates, so that the rasors with which one scrapes the teeth have different forms from those with which one scrapes between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you.
It is necessary when you cure a tooth of its pain that you delay pulling it as long as you can, because no one should do this; because it is a very high substance until there is no excuse to pull it out. Therefore, when the patient is forced to pull out the tooth, you should be sure of the toothache. Many times the pain deceives the patient and believes that it is in a healthy tooth and makes them pull out a good tooth; and yet the pain does not go away through this, until the evil root is removed, because we have already tried this with these doctors; and when you are quite sure of the toothache, you should scrape around the tooth all around. Open your mouth wide to push back the gum from all sides; then grab the tooth with your fingers or with thin tweezers at the very tip, and pull it out little by little until it is well loosened, then hold the tweezers tightly; and let the head of the patient be in your lap between your knees, and hold him firmly so that he does not move.
After pulling out the tooth straight without breaking it, if it does not jump out, take one of these instruments and put it inside on each side, and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and rotted, you should fill it with cloth where the holes are; and hold it tightly with tweezers so that it does not break while being pulled; and it is necessary to work gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And then he must move all around his gum and gum, as he did before, until the tooth comes out, as it is said, without moving it. And after that, he should wipe his gum from pulling gently; and let his head be in your lap between your knees, and hold him firmly so that he does not move, and move the gum where the tooth came out, as he did before.
The forms of instruments, which make the teeth loose, have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth. These are the forms:
And be made of large pieces so that they don't bend during pulling, and be made of good iron, and be serrated to hold the gums.
from the root of teeth When the root remains during pulling, you should put wet cotton on the area for one or two days, until the gums are softened. Then use forceps, which are called "algefri", to grip the tooth like a pair of pliers; they should be made with teeth like a file, and this is their form:
And if the roots will not come out with all these tweezers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root and insert the instrument called 'althali', that is, forceps, of which this is the form:
Let it be sturdy and strong so as not to break, and if the root pops out through this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, of which the forms come below:
And let one assist with this instrument which has .ij. tips, of which this is the form:
and other tools which are before in the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, of which this is the form:
And let this instrument be outside so that it does not break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise master subtlety finds by himself his instrument, according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are many diseases in which the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity; and if it does not break in the cart or the other bones, or it protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, which I have told you about, and helps with gestures, so here is its shape: And let them be large and well-fitting to hold the bone, so that it does not slip but can be held and removed; and then restore the site with appropriate medicines, and if there is a protuberance in the bone, and it is small, then cut it with all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to nature, and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, you should know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down; then cut it, and if there is an air-bubble with the tooth, take this instrument, of which here is the shape, and it is like a small beak, and it should be made of iron with a sharp point:
And the gum recedes little by little day by day because of the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others; and if it is apparent that one can be filed down, then file it with a file such as this, according to its shape:
and it is also like the file used to make needles; and file the tooth little by little day by day gently, so that it does not move until it fits; then smooth it at the end with a rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file down the roughness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or distort speech.
When the tooth is loose:
When the front teeth loosen, whether from a blow or from falling, and the patient cannot press on what he eats without them falling out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines without success; then they must be restrained with a gold wire, because silver wires turn green and rot, but gold never moves; and the wire should be medium-thin or thick, depending on the amount of space between the teeth. And if you want to direct the teeth, take the wire and wind it double between two healthy teeth, then place the ends between the loose teeth, whether there is one or more, so that you reach the loose tooth on the other side; then pull your hand gently and tightly, so that it does not move. Then grab the wire with a pair of tweezers and assemble it, and tie them together between the healthy tooth and the loose tooth, so that it does not cut the tongue; and leave it as tightly as possible for as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone or the wire breaks, then tie it with another wire. It will remain this way for as long as you want, and this is the shape of the teeth and the form of guiding the two healthy teeth, whether there are one or more loose teeth, as you can see:
And when a tooth falls out, it is reset in its place, little by little, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and experienced should attempt this, and sometimes the shape of a tooth from a cow's bone is made, and it is placed in the gap where the defect is, and it is held there as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
to cover the wound in the tongue
Sometimes this condition occurs naturally, and sometimes it is caused by an injury; and the treatment is to open the mouth of the patient, and press his tongue against your hand, and then lift the tongue up; next, cut the nervous membrane under the tongue, so that the tongue is separated from its attachment, and if there is any swelling or wound, and this is due to a recent injury, then insert a needle and cut the membrane under it; and be careful not to cut too deeply, so as not to injure the artery below. And when you have finished, rinse the area with rose water or cold water, and then place a linen tent under the tongue; and every night apply a plaster to the affected area, so that the skin cannot heal. And if there is any bleeding, apply crushed vitriol; and if the bleeding continues, cauterize it with a lentiginout cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat the wound with other treatments until it heals.
And if you see it has turned purple or black, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it, as it is a chancre; and if it is inclined to become a blister, and there is moisture, then insert the needle, and open it with a thin spatumile, and release it from both sides; and if bleeding occurs due to your treatment, apply crushed vitriol until it stops, then return to your treatment until you draw out everything. Then rinse the area with rose water and salt water, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
of abscesses in the throat
There are sometimes swellings in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called tonsils. When you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, be careful: if they are hard abscesses of a small size and a dusky color, do not touch them with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron because of the blood flow; but let it be until it bursts, or it will burst on its own. And if it is white in appearance and the root is thin, have an instrument ready to lance, but first check that the abscess is calm and soothed. Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head should be in your lap, and he should open his mouth and the assistant should hold his hands between his jaws and press his tongue down under the instrument, with which the lancing will be done; it should be made of silver or thin bronze like a dagger.
As you press the tongue against this instrument, and see the abscess, take a needle and insert it into the tonsil, and pull it out above as hard as you can; and draw out some of the pus with it, then cover the instrument again, so that it is ready for use. It has a very sharp point, and the tip curves in one direction or another, and it is made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument present, cover it with tongs, of which the shape is like this:
And it is cut on one side, and named on the other; and when you have cut one of the glands, then cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and garlic, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with water, or with scorched pomegranate peels, or with bay leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses besides the two glands appear in the throat, so cut them then just as the two glands are cut.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely, one abscess of small size; and it had almost closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained like this for one or two days. And the abscess had become so large that it had pushed out two bumps from the openings of the nose. I quickly took action, and inserted a needle into one opening, then drew out a lot of pus; then I did the same at the other nasal opening, and cleared her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I inserted the needle into the abscesses, and cut out a portion, and only a little blood came out; and thus the passageway in the throat of the woman was unblocked, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to cut this abscess for a long time; and the abscess would grow again and fill up the space that I had emptied, so it became very large; therefore, I packed it and cauterized it inside her throat; thus it did not grow anymore; and I left these parts, and she was in the hands of God after me.
of the grape
When a catarrh descends into the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; if it is thick and round beneath, it is called an "eye". When it has been cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the surrounding abscesses are soothed, and it is delicate, then you should cover it; and if it is round and not long, and blood-red, or yellow, or black, then you should avoid cutting into it, for there is great danger to the patient. Therefore, when you see it according to the way I have described, in terms of its whiteness and length, you should have the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument that we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, pull it down, and cover it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned for cutting into the two almonds. You must not cut deeper than the natural limit; otherwise, you will harm the voice and speech. After the incision, use what we said about the cure in the incision of the two almonds, until it is healed. If the patient fears having it covered, then you should use a cautery to treat the fear. The method of cauterization is as follows: the patient puts his head down, and then presses his tongue against the instrument that we mentioned earlier; he breathes in very hot air, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and uses this implement, which has the following shape:
And it has a handle at its head where the medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and the instrument is pressed into the eye with all the medicine; and the patient lies on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from the mouth due to the medicine, so that it does not go down the throat and cause vomiting; then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it become numb and the stinging of the medicine is soothed. If you see something, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton on the eyelid, so that the cotton lies on the eye; do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry for four or five days. If you need to renew the cautery with medicine, do so, and after the cautery wash around the eye with cold water, and treat it with gargles until it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this way, take calendula and hyssop and marjoram and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and mix them all or some of them into one pot, and add garlic, and let it boil. The pot should be well glazed with strong clay, and the pot has a handle shaped like this: And it can be made of silver or bronze, and one of the tools is placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapors rise to the eye through the tube, until the eye is deadened; then repeat often until the eye dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, because many things can happen; nor should you do this except at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not available, take a tube and put an egg white inside it, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the egg white does not allow the vapors to burden the mouth, and this is a good and safe treatment.
Many times a fish bone or spine, or some other thing, becomes lodged in the throat; therefore you should try to remove whatever you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with the entire instrument, so that you can move the object; and if it does not reveal itself and is stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting. Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry piece of bread; and tie a string to the sponge, then swallow it; and when it reaches its destination, it will stick there, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out as we have said, take an instrument made of soft lead according to this shape:
And the instrument should be curved at the tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and the tip should be lifted upward; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or it may be torn, nor should you push the bone in; and move it so that the patient swallows the instrument, so that he can feel where the object is stuck; then he should swallow the instrument, or pull it out with the instrument, equally, until it is out.
of the blood from the throat
Sometimes the blood is stopped by medicine, as I have said in the division, through the use of remedies; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument that I have told you about. And if you see any blood, draw it out with a very small hook, or with fine tweezers suitable for this purpose. And if this does not work, take a small knife, insert it into the throat of the patient, then heat the tip of the knife and do this frequently. And if the disease is caused by water, take a full glass of cold water, open his mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, moving his hand frequently; and as soon as the blood comes into contact with the water, it will stop.
And if it does not stop as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida, using the instrument that I described for smoking out the throat; do this many times, for it will surely work. And the way to smoke him is to place burning charcoal in a pot with a perforated lid, and insert the tip of the instrument into the hole; then blow your smoke into the pot, and let the patient hold the knife in his mouth, closing his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches the blood; and the blood will stop immediately. If it does not, repeat the smoking many times. And let the patient be thirsty, eating salted and dry things, and drinking no water; and then he will surely pass the blood through this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument used to draw out the blood is, when one can see it, like curved tweezers that can enter the throat; it is similar to a surgeon's forceps, and has roughness from lime, so that it can grasp firmly. See its shape here:
the chapters on abscesses
There are many types of abscesses, depending on their appearance, as the recollections that follow this in this book show, and they differ in puncturing and size; and there are two main types, one is the same in its appearance, and the other is due to the location in the body. Abscesses in the head are different from those in the foundations, and abscesses in fleshy places are different from those that occur in joints, and each type has a different treatment method.
And with some abscesses one must not puncture them until the pus is mature according to its completion; and there are others that one must puncture when they become ripe, without waiting for their completion, such as those near joints. For if an abscess comes near a joint, and you leave it until it becomes pus-filled around the joint, it can corrupt the ligament and nerve of the joint, causing contraction in that member. If the abscess is by a principal member, and you delay puncturing it until it is mature, it will harm the principal member. But if it is near the foundation, one must puncture it so that it may mature; and one must not puncture an abscess before its completion has been digested, except for those by the foundation, which may become pus-filled and elongated inside without causing a fistula, and may heal in a short time.
And you must know the time of the rupture of the abscess which is dead according to its completion, and that is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and from the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you must make the rupture in the most dependent part of the abscess, and where it appears to move; and let the rupture be made in the longest part of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and on nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no fold.
In those that fold, according to the part of the body. And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to let the rupture remain until digestion is completed and as we have said. For if you pierce it before that, it lengthens the body with venom from it, and it is full of filth; and perhaps the lips and depths of it harden. And for some abscesses which are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.  And you must treat small abscesses with small openings; and large abscesses with large openings, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and in some there is a chewed kernel, and it is covered when it has become as soft as a grape, and is dead, as one does with blisters: and in some they are split into three angles, and some are covered like the leaf of a myrtle, as in abscesses of the fingers; and in some an circular incision is made, and other incisions and similar covers.
Those which have no head, as in a superficial abscess, you must pierce it directly; and when the abscess is large, and it has drawn much pus, and you cannot draw out all of it at once, then stop the abscess, then the next day draw out some more; do this repeatedly until all the pus is discharged; likewise if the patient is of feeble constitution, or a woman carrying a child, or a small child, or an old decrepit man. For sometimes the pus jumps out with the release of the pus sac and the patient may not notice it; therefore be very careful in this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, wash the wound, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain incision, dress it with tents made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess with many openings, then plug each opening with a tent so that they come against one another; and if you have cut into the skin of the abscess and chewed it all around, then fill it with old cotton or the lint from a linen cloth without moisture, and let it lie for three days; then remove it and dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, then bring cold water and vinegar, and wet a cloth, and place it over the bleeding area many times. And if the bleeding persists, apply a poultice and treatment, and the powders I have described earlier in this book; and if it is wintertime, and the abscess is very nervous, then you should place warm tents and cloths moistened with wine and hot oil over it; and if it is summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should place moist cloths over it, wetted with water and oil, or with cold wine and oil for a third of the day, as we have said; then open the abscess, wash it out, and treat it as necessary until it is healed.
And now you should know generally about the treatment of abscesses; I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter on it.
of sores
From the head come small abscesses, and they are like us, like the jaw of a chicken, and there is much resemblance to it. There is fat and suchlike in them, where there is moisture as well as pulp; and there are those which are hard and stony-like in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not do the opposite. The action of the body is that you must test with all .i. instrument called 'entromissoire', from which form comes afterwards, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, then they make it from above, long. And when the moisture is evacuated, it scabs without leaving anything behind, the skin that contains that moisture; for it returns again when one leaves nothing behind; then plunge cotton into Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who stay overnight should do the same. And then start the cotton again, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it stays no longer overnight; then cure the wound with ointment suitable for healing, until it is healed. And if the abscess contains .i. piece of fat, cut it according to this form, from above; and let out your fingernails, and scrape it all over, and put all your care into drawing it out under the skin where it lies; and if the artery does the opposite, do what I told you after. And so do with the abscess if it is stony, and in terms of cutting and curing as I have told you.
And the incision on the stony abscess and moisture is lighter, because they contain little blood. And there are some of these abscesses in the head where there is no moisture, and one of these was an abscess that I cut on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if anyone had made an incision, it would have done just as much harm as a stone. In other abscesses coming to the head, other than those that come to the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should be in the most dependent part, so that mucous can exit; and cure them as appropriate.
of scrofula
There are many types of scrofula, some containing moisture and others that do not respond to treatment. When you find one that is soft to the touch, has a similar color to the rest of the body, and does not pulsate or press on any nerves, vessels, or ducts, and is not deep, then you should cut it open and scrape away at each part. The two lips of the heart should be pinched together if necessary, as mentioned earlier regarding abscesses in the head; draw it out little by little, being careful not to cut any nerves or veins, and without using a spatula or knife so that the hand does not slip. Do not cut too deeply, only as much as you need to.
If you cut into a vein or artery and it will not allow you to work, put vitriol powder or any other blood-stopping powder in the wound and press on it; then leave it until the abscess is soothed and the wound softens and begins to suppurate. When the blood has clotted, return to your task and finish it; then check if there are any small scrofula remaining, cut and clean them. If there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, do not cut the scrofula at its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread and let it drop off without causing harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment and treat it.
When cutting out the entire scrofula, you should bring together and sew closed the two lips of the wound so that no superfluity remains due to the size of the scrofula. Then you should attend to cutting away at its root and drawing it out as mentioned before. For scrofula that contain superfluity, pierce where it seems to be dying; then pierce it in the same way as mentioned earlier, allowing for an outlet, and then treat it with poultices containing ointment and similar remedies so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption. Once the wound is clean, dress it with ointment and a poultice of charred wood until it heals.
from squint
The ancients spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is a written record of their words.
For those with squint, the flap of skin in the throat known as the "epiglottis" should be cut; and this is done to aid them, because all the veins and the pormon are affected by the illness in those who have a hot abscess in their mouth, or in their throat or in both testicles. When the illness is in the channel of the pormon, one must cover the epiglottis to avoid loss of life due to strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it underneath three circles or four, a small split across, between two circles or according to the amount of the split in the hyoid, not at all in the cartilage.
and those places if they are suitable for the splitting of the epiglottis so that there is no bone, and the vessels are long from there.
And if the masters are fearful, they must extend the skin of the throat to the entire length, then split the meat until it reaches the larynx; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the hyoid, as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the splitting of the windpipe of the larynx which jumped out through the opening that was broken, and by the defect of the voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed that we doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and sew it up entirely without the cartilage; then administer medicines which promote flesh growth, until it is healed.
Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to be near death, and the deficiency of blood has been restored. Therefore, one should press on the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death;
and for this reason the ancients commanded that the wound remain open until the mischief of the disease was passed, and it is passed in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maiden take a knife and stick it in her throat, cutting some of the windpipe;
and I was called to heal her, and I found her as if she were dead.
I discovered the wound and found that blood had come out of it, and that she had not coughed up any phlegm or spittle except what came out through her throat, and the wind was coming out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed it until it was cured;
and the lady had nothing but hoarseness, and returned afterwards to her usual state;
so that in the cutting of the epiglottis, one need not fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called a "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess the color of saffron, and it occurs often in women;
and there are two kinds: natural and accidental; a natural hernia has no cause.
And accidents happen in two ways, one of which resembles a cyst, and the other way is like an abscess that comes out of an artery; and there is fear in them, and one should not operate on them using force unless they are small, and test and examine all the openings: if you find it like a cyst, and it cannot move at all, then cut it as one would cut a cyst, and pull it out with tweezers if there is any hair; and look inside thoroughly, and treat it as it should be treated until it is perfectly healed.
from us
There are many ways of us, of which I will tell all the similarities;
and now I must say about the difference between us and an issue.
I say that an issue is a fever and chills while the eruption has not yet passed and the rash is complete; then the fever and chills cease.
With no heat or fever, and no pain, and it contains a syphilis, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a pimple, and becomes large;
and are according to their appearances, either dry or moist, and much in color as I have said in the division.
You should, when you come to the treatment of the nose, test and examine it first with all the instruments called "endoscopic", according to what its shape will allow in the chapter that follows.
And the manner of examining abscesses in the nose is that you press the moistest part that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
then remove the forceps, and take care of what jumps out.
If pus flows freely, whatever its color, treat it as I have described for other abscesses:
and if no pus flows after the forceps are used, know that it is sluggish, so they must make a cross-cut and take it with tweezers and gently scrape each side and guard the skin where it lies so that you draw it out healthy with the needle;
and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if it stays in place, it will return many times;
and if it stays for a while, and the pain bothers you, then employ some corrosive powders on the wound, and hold the wound, and apply hot poultices to soothe the abscess, and treat the wound with other treatments until it is healed;
and if the abscess is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with that which causes pus.
and if the wound is bleeding profusely, and it is contrary to you or another, then quickly apply ground vitriol, and leave it for two days or three until the wound festered and stop the bleeding; then return to covering what has been left exposed.
Here are the forms of the instruments for probing, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small; and there are three types of probes called 'albaret', and one type called 'breb'; and there are three types of these, large, medium, and small, for probing abscesses and fistulas.
They are similar to the needles used for sorcery, made of brass, iron, or silver; and the yellow-tinted ones are better, and more tested with black pitch, for probing the curvatures of fistulas.
They come in three types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the aperture.
The shapes of the knives are of many similarities, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are knives with .1 curve in three ways as well.
and if there are onions with .iij curves, and they are also in .iij ways; and if there are onions with .ij curves, and onions with only one curve, and they are in .iij ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these which are used for cutting are sharp, and there are some which do not cut except from one side, so that we do not cut the vein or nerve;
and among these introducers are those with handles placed on them so that the patient does not hurt themselves when opening abscesses;
and they are in .iij ways: large, small, and medium, as you can see;
and do not use it on bare flesh, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas;
and sometimes another small instrument is made, like slices of a fist, according to this form, with which blood is stopped:
and it is sometimes placed in the area that heals by stopping the flow of blood from the veins and arteries, and sometimes they are cut according to this large form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they become infected, so that they look like women's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and those who want to cure them must bleed according to this form from b. up to .g.: then burn the fat, and fill the wound with ointment, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing, and heal it until it is cured;
and if the breast sags down and becomes saggy due to its size as it does in women, then make two cuts above, at two similar places; so that one cut is next to the other at the end of each line, and so that the longer line contains the shorter according to this form, from b. to g.; then burns the skin between the two lips and removes the fat, and applies what we have said about sutures and powders, and what is necessary for healing, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely done, because the patient will not rest, or due to blood flow, you should fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and let it be until it absorbs the remaining pus and fat, then heal it until it is completely healed.
of abscesses of the armpit
This abscess that comes under the armpit is like a hard scrofula, and some contain moisture.
Those therefore who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b. to the line g.: And when all the pus inside the abscess has been drained, employ the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat it with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is like scrofula, they should proceed as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound becomes pus-filled, they should apply cauterization as we have described earlier.
of the rupture of an artery
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sewn up, this often leads to abscesses forming, and similarly with a vein that is swollen and abscessed.
And if one knows it is due to an artery, the abscess will be long and deep. And when you feel it with your fingers, you feel a pulling; and when it is due to a vein, there is a cold, numb feeling.
and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpit and in the groin and neck and many other places, and it is very large. One should therefore avoid the cure of iron, and one who is at the head should also avoid it, as well as one who has inflammation of an artery that bursts through the skin of the neck;
One should therefore avoid the cure of iron, and one who is at the head should also avoid it, as well as one who has inflammation of an artery that bursts through the skin of the neck; then open the incision with a scalpel, and carefully cut the artery away from the veins, so that it is exposed;
then insert a needle under the artery, and pierce it all the way through to the other side, and compress the artery with a double thread in .2 inches, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples;
then point to the location between the two ties of an intruder so that the pus flows out and the abscess is drained.
then administer the treatment that turns yellow, until the wound heals over. then treat it with an appropriate ointment, until it is healed.
and if the abscess is due to a wound in that location, then you should dye your hand with the pus from the abscess all over the skin, then insert the needle under the area you are holding in your hand, and pierce it, and put .i. double thread on it, so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I told you, on one of its two sides with the thread;
and if you are afraid the thread will come undone, then tie another needle to all .i. thread underneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in .iiij. ways;
then scrape the abscess so that the excess comes out, then scrape the excess from the skin and leave what is tied;
then put on a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer poultices and ointments until it is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Also, as abscesses come in the artery and vein, they come to the nerves when they are hurt, or from too much work, and similar things.
And this happens most often in the shoulders and elbows and in all places where there are joints, and it is a type of abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it has various dispositions without pain;
and when it is firmly held, the patient feels pain, and it is not in a superficial part of the body, but deep under the heart;
and must be completely still, and not move forward or backward, nor down or up, and those who have dislocations should not have their joints covered by iron; otherwise, they might contract.
And those who are on the head or forehead, use the skullcap. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, he should suspend it from the hook, and scrape it, then cut out the bone and stitch up the wound to heal it.
large bumps hanging Sometimes they occur in bellies and nowhere else; this is a disease called "fungus" because of their resemblance to nuts, and it has a thin root and the bumps are large; there are small ones and very large ones.
And I saw a man who had two on his belly which looked more like fungi than anything else; there was no other difference, they were white and had thin roots, and they oozed moisture when cut.
I examined them and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6. The treatment for the incision is to look at whether the patient's joint is moist, and the color of the articulation is white and moist with a delicate root.
if the cut is too large for the spatula, and the blood flows profusely, then hasten to cauterize it. For in cutting there are often great flow of blood, and if it does not stop, then quickly apply the cautery.
And if you see that the patient is frightened and fearful of the incision with the iron, take a well-prepared thread and tie it around the articulation as we have said, and leave it for two days;
Then release it, and keep tightening the thread until he copes the articulation, and if the roots are large, he may fear to cope the entire articulation at once due to the pain; but you can cope half of it first,and then come back later to cope the other half.
then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound and be careful not to cover the thistle which is of a foul colour and poor odour and milky appearance.
For this is a deep abscess, and I will come to the treatment of sores next.
when the boil bursts
If the appearance of the boil comes from a wound or a fissure in a ulcer, and it is on the belly and some of the bowels, as it happens in other ulcers, or from blood coming from veins or arteries, according to what is before, or from windiness;
and if it is through the rupture of the sinus and from the outlet of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles that of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and discharges from various outlets. And if it is through the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it recoils, and then returns, and sometimes it becomes serrated, and grows larger at the entrance of the bath and from great exertion.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is a minor issue, and it opens easily when you press it with your hand, without constraint; and if it is due to blood, then it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a certain quantity;
and if it is due to the rupture of the bowel and the sinus, then the color resembles that of the body, and it discharges from various outlets, and it is a light thing without pain; and if it is due to wind, then there is swelling in the touch, and the procedure is to examine whether the appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or wind. If you must let it heal. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is in the intestines or bowels, then you must instruct the patient to tighten his belt and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the stomach. Then command him to lie still between your hands, Then go around the area that you have signed all over the stomach, then cut half of the abscess from the top down to the large claw;
then cut half of the abscess that extends above the string, and push your finger inside, and probe the intestine; if you find it caught on the string, release it and push the intestine back into the abdomen;
and if you find a boil, they take it at the base, and cut off the excess;
and if the artery is doing the opposite, or the vein, go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread them with two strong threads, and insert the two needles around what you have done in the shape of a cross, as though you were piercing;
then draw the abscess in four places around the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles and let it drain until it can no longer, and push out the dead flesh by itself; or you cut it when it is thin and flowing, then clean the abscess as necessary, and close the abscess as we have said;
or you cut it when it is thin and flowing, then clean the abscess as necessary, and close the abscess as we have said; And extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the area as it should be, and bind the wound.
from cancer
We have discussed in the division the similarities of cancer, and how one should work with medicine, and how one should avoid the cure of iron; and they say that ancient people believed that when cancer is in a place where one can scrape it, like cancer which is in breasts, and in the thigh, and in similar places, one must completely remove it when it is in its beginning stages. And when it is old and large, one should not approach it, for I have never been able to heal any of them; nor has anyone ever healed any before me.
And the treatments, when it is in a place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile; then let them fester if there is a sign of fullness, then open the wound . Then cut off the cancer, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow out freely, and squeeze the wound with your hand or something else, and if the bleeding from the artery or vein makes you feel uncomfortable, cauterize it until the blood vessels are closed; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
of dropsy We have already spoken of the appearances of dropsy and how the gathering of fluid occurs in each appearance, and its cure by means of medicine and also by the use of iron; therefore we will only briefly mention it here. And one should not use iron on these two appearances: that is, tympany and hydropsy, for they are deadly. So when you treat this type of dropsy called "eclites" with medicine, and the cure does not help, then one should look to see if the patient is weak or has any other illness besides dropsy, such as dysentery or similar conditions; in that case, do not use iron, for there is a risk involved. But if you see that the patient is strong and has no other illness besides dropsy, and is neither too young nor too old, then you should proceed as follows: Examine the patient's abdomen and press it gently with your hands to force the fluid towards the lowest part of the abdomen near the groin. Then take a spatumile (a type of needle used for bleeding) that is curved like a hook: it should be about two inches long but not so sharp that it punctures the intestines when inserted, nor so blunt that it does not Bleed the patient.
Then determine if the dropsy is located near the intestines: in that case, you should make three small incisions on the right side of the abdomen below the navel. If the dropsy is due to a disease of the liver, then the incisions should be made on the left side, and if it is due to the spleen, they should be made on the right. The patient should not lie directly on top of the incisions so that the fluid does not flow into that weak area.
then pierce all the skin with the instrument and insert it, and take your hand off the spatulum between the skin and the syringe as if you were skinning to the depth of a fingernail or nail; then pierce the syringe so that the spatulum comes to the desired location, which is where the water will go, then pull out the instrument, and insert this instrument from which there is the shape: And it resembles a thin silver rod, and it is made of brass or light bronze, and has in the lower part a small hole; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other, and one on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and it is the shape of the incision from which the scribes cut the pen:
at the top of which is the handle, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it will be drawn up onto the instrument immediately; therefore empty half or a third, because if you empty more than is appropriate in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the shock of the tool, or he will faint, or he will come close to death;
but empty according to the amount of his strength, and according to what the dispositions of his strength signify, and his pulse; then pull out the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the stopper in the hole on the syringe, about which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then resume the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw off a small quantity of water;
do this for a few days and avoid following it with food until only a little water remains in the stomach. And if you doubt the disease, leave a lot of water, the heat of the grave or sand, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if you dye from drinking; and with medicines that dry out until he is healed, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I said before.
of the penis Sometimes children are born without an opening on the penis, or the opening is small and out of place. In this case, one should immediately pierce it with a very thin needle according to the following procedure: then put into the opening a very thin plug made of lead, and tie it and leave it for three or four days. And when he wants to urinate, remove the plug, and let him urinate, and then replace the plug; and sometimes none is needed at all, because the urine that comes out does not allow it to close. Those with a small opening will be cured by the lead plug as we have said, and it will widen. Those who do not have the opening in its place are infected, for some are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the testicles, and this is a serious illness.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, then the head of the penis and foreskin are cut to the size of a feather, so that the incision is in the middle, as it should be; and you must guard against bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, then stanch it with something that stanches blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the penis Many times these blisters come on the penis, and they have an unseemly appearance; and there are harmful ones and harmless ones; so you must take them with a very sharp knife, cut them and clean them all out, then put on wet cotton with Egyptian ointment; then cure it with thin ointment until it is healed. And if the blister is malignant, with pus and discharge, then you must apply cautery to it. When you have cut it, and if the blister is on the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the blister that is inside; and when it is sutured, then cure the outside. For if you cure them both together, the skin of the penis will not be secure and might be pierced, and blackness and corruption will come into his penis and testicles; so you must cut away all that is black and corrupt, then apply the ointment of honey and flour made from pomegranate peel and vetch, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
If there is bleeding, administer the lunar cautery in the following manner: Cauteries have two functions together: that is, to stop bleeding and to prevent corruption. If the glans of the penis are damaged and retracted, you must insert a tube into the penis and let the patient urinate through it. And if the foreskin is inflamed at the tip of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised or due to an injury or abscess, then you must make an incision with a sharp instrument, so that the membrane is cut, and the foreskin is freed from all sides.
And if it is a difficult thing to cure, you must make an incision with a sharp instrument at the tip of the penis and under the foreskin; then gently open it and put a thin piece of wet linen in cold water so that it does not inflame again.
on circumcision
Circumcision is not a matter of continuous dissection like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this act intentionally and properly on infants, it is necessary for us to do the best and most gentle job for their well-being.
I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experimentation.
Because I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who made circumcisions all around, and on many occasions, and on a single newborn; the foreskin would then heal because there were two membranes, and sometimes one would be cut above and the other remained beneath.
Now they recover by covering, and the pain is doubled, and with the cleaning which is done on the penis is not secure the tip of the member; and in the cleaning of the nail sometimes the iron slips, and ruins the work, and many times are born so that they do not need to be cleaned and I have seen it.
From the cleaning that is done on the scrotum, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the testicles are cut justly above and below.
Because when you press your hand, you cut it evenly all around; but the thread must be tied tightly around the skin; and the manner of the first work is such that if you do it, you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the wand, and then you make him move in every way you can. then hold it straight between your hands, and tie the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then blow on the skin, and draw the wand up until the head of the wand is in; then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the place marked with a double thread, then tie it under one to another string; and hold it for two days by the second ligature at the wrist and the index finger, and press between the two ligatures, then lift the skin rapidly and draw out the head of the wand.
then hold it straight between your hands, and tie the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then blow on the skin, and draw the wand up until the head of the wand is in; then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the place marked with a double thread, then tie it under one to another string; and hold it for two days by the second ligature at the wrist and the index finger, and press between the two ligatures, then lift the skin rapidly and draw out the head of the wand. then let the blood run little by little, for it is the mucous membrane; and put powder on top of the powder a glue-soaked cloth from a hard-boiled egg, cooked in rose water, infused with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it until the next day, then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
The shape of the forces at the mouthing is as follows: both sides are to be thin and sharp, and the ears should be as big as the palm of the hand equally.
the error of the purification is when the pus within the incision has dried up; therefore you must extend it with your fingernail so that the wound forms an abscess; and scrape it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with tweezers and scrape it.
And if it persists for 3 days, and that which is under the foreskin is swollen, then let it be until the abscesses are calm and the skin is lightly scraped; then scrape it as much as you can, and beware of the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him in any way.
Therefore treat the area of the wound with powdered medicine, as we have said in the treatise on powders; and if one scrapes too much from the core, and it goes upward, it will not harm him; therefore cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
from the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to a stone, or congealed blood, or bowels, or dead fetus, or similar things that we have described in the previous section.
If the urine is not released and you see that it is being retained by a stone lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over at the knees with their feet placed on their back, pressing their stomach down from above the back, and holding their breath as hard as they can. This will cause the neck of the bladder to be compressed from above, forcing the stone out and allowing the urine to flow.
If the urine is still not released and the patient experiences great pain as we have described, then you must perform an extraction using a instrument called a 'syringe'. It should be made of thin, lightweight silver, with the shape of a bird's feather; the cannula should be about a palm and a half in length, and thin at the tip.
And the method of releasing the urine is to take a double thread and tie a small piece of wool or cotton at the end, then insert the tip of the thread into the syringe. Coat the excess wool with oil or butter and push it all the way into the syringe. Then anoint the patient's bladder and penis with moist oil or olive oil and warm water;
then gently put the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the scrotum; then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and the patient will feel the pain go all the way to the empty spot, and if this is not done according to this order, because the person who guides it to where it needs to go is wrong; then tie the thread to all the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow.
and use the syringe again until the bladder is emptied and the pain is relieved.
of diseases of the bladder
When scabs or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see it oozing out with water and medicine, then do everything using the instrument called "clepsydra", and that is its form:
It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see; the local hair should be shaved so that the medicine can take effect and stop the moisture, and pushed in when necessary;
and when you see your medicines enter the bladder, place the tip of the catheter in the moisture, and draw it out as it goes in; then push the catheter firmly in, and the moisture will enter the bladder, and the patient will feel it;
This is the form of the subtle enema used to cleanse the bladder: take a small gut and make a small noose at one end, and a larger one at the other;
And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher up; and below there is a knot or the string splits; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the medicine with which you want to cleanse the bladder; then tie it between the two knots formed from a length of thin double thread, and heat one end of the medicine over the fire; then insert the tip of the catheter into the urethra, and hold your hand over the bladder to gently push all the medicine in, until the patient feels that the medicine has reached the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make it into .i. circle, and pierce it evenly all around; then thread .i. strong wire through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles .i. cloak, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, squeezing by hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of stone
We have already spoken in the division of stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the testicles, and all the signs, and which type of stone one must work on in surgery; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is in the bladder occurs most often in children, and it is a sign that the urine flows from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it appears hairy, and causes pain to the patient, and they can urinate many times, and then they become constipated; and many of these have a hernia; and the healing is much easier in children until they are 4 years old, and it is much more serious in the elderly, and it is in between youth and old age, for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is much easier in those who have large stones than in those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema to draw out all the feces which is in the intestines. For it sometimes clogs up when seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and move him around so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above; then let him sit between your apparatus-clad hands, and his hands be underneath his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely tilted downward; then search for and touch the stone inside it;
if you feel the stone in the cavity, then quickly cut into the stone. And if it does not come out with just touching, then wet your left index finger with oil, if the patient is an adult, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young teenager; and insert it into their rectum, and search for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, push it up toward the neck of the bladder; then press with your finger and push it out to where you intend to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct the patient to extend his testicles upward with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum, which has a curved shape:
And they cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel; and it should be straight on top of the stone, and both fingers should be on the anus, and the incision should be diagonal so that it is wide at the top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too big.
Sometimes the press with the fingers on the anus will cause the stone to come out without any effort; and you will know that there is a stone with angles and edges when it is painful to urinate; and sometimes there is one below, resembling a grape or a round pebble, which is easier to pass.
For one with angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, you must squeeze with tweezers that are as sharp as a knife at the tip to squeeze the stone so that it does not escape; or you insert underneath a very thin instrument bent at the end; and if you cannot grab it like this, you widen the opening a little and if the blood comes out, you stop it with vitriol.
And if there is more than one stone, insert the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then push it up, then pull it out, and then the smaller ones afterwards. And if it is very large, you must split it and make a larger incision. For two things can happen to the patient: they may die, or the urine may come out through an opening where the skin cannot heal; but nevertheless, try to pull it out, or break it with tweezers, until you have pulled it out in pieces.
and when you have completed your work, then dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly, and place on top of it a damp cloth steeped in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then resound the patient's chest, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, wash the site well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses and scorchings and congealing of blood in the bladder occur, and as a result the urine is held back in such a way that it cannot pass out with the urine: then insert your finger into the wound and draw out that blood, for if any remains, it will corrupt the bladder and burst it;
then raise the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and assist it in every way you know how until it is healed; and you ought to bind the two thighs together with bandages, and apply remedies to the site every hour.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra, and fixed there, and the urine cannot pass; then the treatment of what I say above, that you should cut it many times, is an excuse for not cutting it. I have already experienced this myself.
Take a piece of iron according to this shape and let it be spiked at three angles on a poker:
Then take a thread and tie it around the urethra below the stone so that it cannot return to the bladder; then push the poker into the urethra gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the poker in your hand within the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then the urine will come at once, and press your hand on what is left of the stone inside the urethra. The stone will be broken at once and will come out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
and if you cannot do this for any reason, tie a thread under the stone and another above it, then cut the urethra between the two threads, then pull the stone out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; treat it until it is healed.
of women's stones
It sometimes happens that a stone becomes lodged in a woman's body, and if it does, the cure is difficult, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is that the woman might be a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who will submit to examination, especially if she is chaste.
And the third reason is that one cannot find a skilled woman who knows how to treat this disease with her hands; and the fourth reason is that a woman's stone is often deeper than a man's, which requires a deeper incision, and great fear is associated with it.
And if it is necessary to do so, one should take a wise midwife and cut it out with a knife, and if you cannot find such a midwife, then take a subtle and skilled male doctor who specializes in the treatment of women, and command him to do what you command regarding the inquiry into the stone.
and look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then she should press her thumb against her vagina and feel for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it there under her thumb, and he should tell her to press her left hand firmly against her bladder.
If she feels it, then she should move it slowly from the entrance of the bladder down to the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the anus, where it is most sensitive, and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move her thumb above or below the stone, and let the incision be very small at first;
then push the probe into the incision, if you feel the stone so as to widen the wound enough for the stone to come out; and know that there are many types of stones: some are small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and have different textures. You should know their likenesses in order to identify them.
And if the blood does not stop, then apply powdered vitriol and hold it in place for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your task, until the stone is removed, and have assistants who I told you about earlier to help you with your work.
and if the blood vessels burst and it is the artery that is cut, then put the powder on the spot and constrict with bandages and strips, and don't re-open it, and leave the stone and do not draw it out, lest the patient die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, return to your work until the stone is out.
of fleshy hernia
Aquous membrane is nothing else than an accumulation of moisture or white pus, which is found under the heart of the testicles, and which contains the egg; and it is called "pus", and sometimes it is properly located in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that it is another egg; and what happens is not known for certain.
And the generation of this disease is due to weakness that comes from the testicles, and this matter is spread out.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture takes many forms: sometimes it is a yellow colour, sometimes red, sometimes black, sometimes watery white, and there are many more variations.
And these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have described, there are red spots, .i. a little long like the shape of an egg, and it does not affect the testicles, because there is moisture all around them.
And if there is moisture in the scrotum itself, then it is a different type of abscess with part of an egg, and because of this one might think it is another kind of abscess;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sac, he feels it well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test it with all the instruments whose form has been described above. According to this, then, which comes after the instrument, judge what is inside.
According to this, then, which comes after the instrument, judge what is inside. And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then lie on his back, on something slightly raised, and place a lot of blankets under him;
then sit on his left, and instruct the minister to sit on his right, and extend the wand to one of the two sides of the heart of the testicles;
Take the spatulum of lead, and cut the skin of the testicles from above down to the scrotum, and let the incision be straight while cutting the skin of the testicles up to the white skin, and scrape gently according to your ability.
Then pierce the scrotum with a sharp instrument through a large opening, and draw out all the water, and then put in your fingers, and let the scrotum return to its place; and do not touch the testicles, but only the scrotum; cut gently all around it in pieces, for if you do not cut it well and bleeding ensues, the water will return.
And if the testicle has fallen out due to your action, then return it to its place when you have finished the work on the scrotum; then sew together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a single stitch, then treat it like any other wound until it is healed.
And if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the vessels that are suspended, fearing a rupture of blood; then cut open the scrotum all around the suspenders, extract the testicle, and treat it as we have said.
And if pus has gathered in two places together, know that these are two abscesses; then open the other part as you did the first, equally, then wash the blood away and put on soft poultice moistened with rose oil.
And put another poultice moistened with wine and oil, and place over the two abscesses, and put on top of these doubled linen cloths, and tie it around all the joint according to this form:
Then take two pieces of cloth and fill them with linen wadding according to this shape, and sew the pieces together along the crotch of the breeches, and let one end press against the anus up to the back, and the other at the perineum; and the other two ends on the two buttocks, and tie all the fastenings in the belt loop of the breeches.
And sometimes this method of cauterization is used instead of an iron brand, and you must press a thin knife gently against the skin of the abscesses, and it should be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing fluid is exposed;
if he takes the cautery according to this form, and pierces that sinus deeply, and burns it with this subtle hot cautery:
And the incision in every way that you can, until you reach the bottom; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and keep watch for blood flow, and diseases caused by surgery;
and if anything contrary happens, such as a hot abscess or blood flow, or anything else, then treat what is contrary to you according to what has already been said.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then perform a piercing, as I have told you, and when you are well certain through the signs that we have discussed that the liquid is ready,
if you make the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess at the lower part to the depth of a long spatula, and place the incision in the longest part of the body; and let the holes be wide enough so that all the pus can flow out.
then put cotton on the site, and tie it, and let the remaining pus drain out, then treat the wound until it is healed.
and if the white pus does not drain out of the mouth of the wound, then you must push a feather or the instrument used to treat the water of dropsy, of which the shape is described above; and enlarge the wound slightly, and know that the pus will return, and gather again after 6 months or so, and once it has gathered as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the testicles
Know that in the cutting of this branch there is fear in many dispositions, because of which it seems better to leave it.
and I will tell you the work and appearances of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the testes; and it is due to various causes.
It is known to be due to an excess of bitterness and fever, which are spread to the testes, or from a blow;
and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and it does not hurt, and the abscess is serious;
and sometimes there are grayish, hair-like abscesses that emerge from veins or swollen blood vessels.
When it is from a vein, it is recognized by the hot feeling of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
Those who are affected by inflammation of the veins are known by their appearance, through the sensation of touch with the fingers,
and anyone can accurately make a diagnosis based on this examination and on other characteristics. And you should examine the color of the yolk, then the whites should be on top, and the clear fluid surrounding the yolk, and free the suspensory ligament from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already broken with these colors, then you should break the egg and examine it.
and if it is in the lymph nodes, or within the blood vessels, then you must deliver all of that tissue and cut it out cleanly.
And if the tumor is in the back, then you must cut it out entirely and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is finished, then dress the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then apply other remedies until it is healed.Et quant tu as curé la plaie, si covient que li patient soit a l’ombrage et au repos, et qu’il s’alimente de boire et manger legier, et qu’il ait peu de dormance, si com il oult.
of the testicle abscess
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to a bulb, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans terribly when he sees it;
and the treatment for this disease is also as painful as the one mentioned earlier,
and nevertheless, we will tell you how to treat it according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary for you to make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then put the suspensory of testicles under your armpits. take all the vessels that are near the penis and tie them, and stretch the foreskin tightly.
Then cut through the skin with a sharp knife, cutting widely enough to expose the vessels.
Then cut away the skin on each side, as we have described in the extraction of the arteries in the temples.
then I insert a needle where there is .i. double thread, and tie it at the first place where the wire came out, and tie it directly to the other end; then cut the copes smoothly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture;
then treat the wound as in other places where there is inflammation, so that no blood vessels burst which might harm the eye;
for by doing this, no harm comes from it, and if blood vessels come to all the eyes, then one must draw out the eyes at all the blood vessels; so that the blood vessels do not lose their moisture due to the incision, and dry out and cannot help.
from the root of the eye socket The causes of this hernia are due to the incision that comes from the eye socket, or the extension over the abdomen in the region of the intestines, causing them to descend from that hernia to one of the testicles.
and this hernia is from the eye socket, or from the extension of it, and these two types of hernia come from many causes: from a blow, or a jump, or a laugh, or from lifting a heavy object, and from similar things;
and the signs when it is a dislocation of the shoulder, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not happen suddenly; and the abscesses are even all the way to the bottom, because the shoulder presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is a dissection of the shoulder, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses are diverse appearances under the skin near the surface, and this is due to the output of the intestine and the body being pushed by the shoulder.
And sometimes the nerves go with the intestine, and are retained inside, and cause great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these cures of iron, one must fear, for which one must avoid it.
And the manner of the operation is that you command the patient to pull the intestine back into his hand inside the wound, if he can reach it. Then lean over his neck between your hands and lift his hips.
Then they are turned over onto their back, and all the skin of the scrotum is cut away from the testicles. then insert hooks into the sides of the waist according to what you need to open the wound, and let them be such that the bile can come out.
then scrape the skin of the scrotum until the thick white skin is exposed all over;
then insert your index finger into the scrotum, between the white skin that is under the skin of the testicle and between the second skin;
and move your right hand inside the scrotum, and the white skin should be pulled up towards your left hand, and lift the testicle while keeping the skin stretched towards the waist; and instruct the assistant to raise the arm, and loosen what is tight behind the binding;
and feel with your hands if there is any hard, white, intestinal membrane wrapped around it, and if you find anything, push it back inside the belly below;
then take a needle with .i. thick thread made of .x. threads, and insert it into the back part of the syfac, which is under the skin of the testicles; after the scrotum, then pull on the shoulder, which will appear from the threads, until there are .iiij. threads; then tie them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the syfac, which we said is under the skin of the testicles, with a strong 2-part ligature; then wrap the head with thread, and tie it tightly in two parts, so that none of the blood vessels that nourish it can enter, lest an abscess develop. and put the thread in line with the first long line two fingers from it, and after these two lines leave the space of a finger nail between them, so that the pus can drain out from under the skin around the eye.
and then cut in the part that is under the skin around the eye, so that the blood flows, and the tear duct, as we have said before. Then, cut in the part that is under the skin of the eye, so that the pus can drain out from under the skin of the eye, and the tear duct, as we have said before.
then administer soft woolen cloth in oil, and apply it to the wounds, and then bring the thread that we have described. And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision out of fear of bloodletting.
For this happens many times, and leaves the wound open until it drains out through it; and if it is slow to drain, boil water and apply what we have said, until it drains.
Then dress the wound with another ointment until it is perfectly healed.
of flesh hernia
In this section, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is done in the same way as the section that is together with the vein, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting above and below lightly.
Then press gently, and cure the abscess of him who opens it, until the vessels leak; and cure it as we have said, until he is healed.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the veins, as we have said, and the place opens up; and none of the intestines come out into the rectum, and if any do, it is rare, and repair it every hour.
and yet if he stays too long in this position, the wound or ulcer will close up, so that the intestines descend.
and this happens because of the extension of the ulcer, which is in the intestines, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and swollen at its base and opened.
and the cure is by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this way:
and the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then apply the poultice of the wound according to its size, according to the quantity of 3 pounds;
and then extract the cyst which is under the skin, then take a thread and place it over the visible location of the cyst;
press it deeply into the belly, then tie the two ends of the thread appearing over the cyst on top of the thread, and tie one and the other;
then pull on the end of the thread, and do not cover the cyst or stretch it out with anything else, as I have told you in the treatment for a hernia of the intestines;
then treat it with a wound treatment. And when you tie off the threads, if it is cleansed and treated, until it is healed.
The ulcer is constrained and has no appearance in the roux, and cautery is more beneficial in this case and closer to healing.
softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men due to the organs within becoming softened, and it is milky white in appearance; and when one wishes to treat this, he must make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin above the natural membrane; then bring together the two edges of the wound at a single stitch, or at three or four stitches tightly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed, then remove the sutures.
of chastisement
You know that castration is condemned in our law, and because of this, I would rather not discuss it in this book. It is only necessary for two reasons: one is so that the owner knows how to respond when asked about it, and also knows how to treat it; the other is because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, and sheep. So I say that castration is done in two ways: by constriction or by cutting. For constriction, we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and hanging; then squeeze them in your hand until they are back in place and you can no longer feel them. For a cut castration: you must tie the animal down, press the skin of the testicles against your left hand, then make an incision, and cut each testicle open once as you have well-scalded them; leave some of the thinner sac and the fine membrane that is over the vessels; this method of castration is better than constriction, because with constriction something from the testicles may remain, causing the animal to desire sexual intercourse; then treat the wound until it heals.
Of Hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites are of two types in terms of their appearance: one resembles a man but has the genitals and physical characteristics of a woman, sometimes even having body hair and urinating standing up. The other type appears as a woman but has a penis and testicles. For both types, you treat them like any other wound; for the second type, if the urine leaks through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
of the testicles
Testicles are a pair of organs located below the natural part, and they appear very ugly to look at; some women have them as large as a hand, and this is called the scrotum. You should cut off the excess of the testicles with your hand or with tweezers, and pluck it gently; do not pull too hard, or bleeding will occur, then cure the scrotum of another disease until it is healed; and there is another lump that grows at the mouth of the penis, and you should use it, and sometimes it pops out, and it looks like a cow's udder, and that is why the ancients called it the "cow disease". So you should pluck the testicles, as we have said, and cure them until they are healed.
of the erratics
Erratic is when the opening of the woman's vagina is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or an accident due to illness that came to her; or it is due to a growth, or a subtle or dense tumor, and it occurs deeply in the vagina, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever it may be; and it hinders conception and childbirth, and sometimes flowers as well. The knowledge of this condition is through the examination of the vulva. If the growth is obvious, then you should examine it with your fingers or by sight. If it is a subtle tumor, and it is close to the two lips, then you should pull the lips together and hold them in place while the woman is lying on her back with her legs spread apart; then the lips will come together and cover the growth, and you should apply a poultice of wool soaked in oil over the area, and let the woman lie still for several days so that it does not heal. And if the tumor is hard and dense, then you should pluck it with tweezers similar to myrtle leaves. If the growth is due to a neonate, then you should pluck and apply a poultice; and use medicines that stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, and egg white; then apply a broad piece of linen so that the wound does not heal; and let it be for a long time, and apply a tent made of dry linen; then cure it with other cures until it is healed. And when a growth occurs in the vagina, you should treat it according to this method, if it is not an abscess. For in an abscess in the vagina, one should not touch it to treat it.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that normally bleed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thrombosed; and we have already discussed their appearances, signs, and treatment in a previous section. I stated that both hemorrhoids and thrombosed hemorrhoids, when they burst in the rectum, and do not bleed at all, cannot be cured by an iron cautery. Those that are near the edge of the anus can be felt and can be treated. Therefore, you should place the patient in a cool room, then cut off the blood supply to the hemorrhoids with ligatures, and burn their roots with a hot instrument; then powder the area with medicines that constrict blood vessels, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar substances; then she should soak her feet in cold water for an hour, then place her in a bath of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall nuts and similar ingredients; and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and make an ointment to be applied to her back. If the bleeding stops, that is good. If not, she should use leeches on her back and breasts without using any instruments; then take wool and soak it in plantain juice or dogwood juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the affected area. And when the abscess has drained, treat the wound with ointment until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a rough lump, so it should be cauterized as I have described for the thrombosed hemorrhoids; and then treat it until it heals.
of abscesses in the rectum
There are many types of abscesses that can occur in the rectum, such as ulcers, piercings, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, as well as several others that I have discussed earlier. Therefore, let me now describe the treatment for a hot abscess in the rectum, which is not among those that heal on their own; and if you want to know how to treat it with an instrument, observe whether the abscess is soft at the beginning of its appearance, and whether there is heat and fever, and if it turns red when you can see it. Then, do not rush to pierce it, but let it be lanced only after the pain has subsided; then have the patient sit on a seat with two small pillows to lean against, and support his back, and spread his legs apart, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them together with a good cord; then suck the anus towards the right side, and insert the instrument used to open the rectum, through which the abscess will drain; and you should insert the tip of the instrument first to determine the depth of the rectum so that the instrument does not go in too far or hurt the patient. If the instrument is larger, cover the opening of the rectum with cloth so that it does not cause discomfort to the patient; and you should hold the instrument in place with your thumb, and apply the instrument. When the abscess breaks open and the content is soft, then cover the wound at the opening of the rectum with a tent made of moist rosin or dried olive oil; and place the tent inside the rectum, pushing it deep into the rectum and against the wall of the rectum; then apply ointment after two days, as long as it is needed until the wound heals. Sometimes, raising the rectum and the wound with a syringe of water and honey helps; then use water in which roots of iris and aristolochia have been boiled; then return to using the ointment. If the wound has drained inside the rectum, then you should avoid cauterization with iron, but treat it as I have described earlier.
of childbirth
It is first necessary for the midwife to understand the natural shape of childbirth and its signs: when you see a woman pushing downward and desiring to smell an aroma, then hasten the baby's exit; then you know that this childbirth follows nature's course, and the birth canal opens beneath her head, and the afterbirth emerges with it. And when you see these signs, gently press her abdomen so that the child is born quickly; for when the infant descends upon its head, the afterbirth follows, and the mother is cleansed of her excess fluids through proper purification; and those who are delivered otherwise are not born naturally. For sometimes a child is delivered upon its feet, or emerges from the body through the arms or abdomen, or comes out upside down, or in other unnatural positions; thus the midwife must be wise and subtle in these matters, guarding against error and deception, and I will show you all the forms and how one should assist.
If the child is born naturally upon its head, and the woman gives birth with great difficulty and her strength wanes, then make her sit upon a stool or have women support her; and heat some olive oil or fried fenugreek, and then pour it between the midwife's fingers into the small opening of which there is now the shape: and split the afterbirth, and squeeze its nail until the fluids within flow out; and press upon the woman's abdomen so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then cleanse the woman's intestines with a poultice of fenugreek and olive oil; then make her sneeze and cough, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the child will be delivered. And if both hands emerge, then you must gently pull them back in little by little; and if they cannot enter, then have the woman sit upon a chair, and lift her feet upward; then raise the chair off the ground, and hold her so that she does not strain while standing; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then grip the hands at the knuckles as mentioned before, and extract the child, and reset the hands likewise.
of the birth of the child on his feet When the child is born standing up, it should be turned over; and then turn him slowly and gently until he is straight;
then grab one of his feet and stretch it gently.
Let him jump up to his waist, if he can, and make him sneeze by sniffing something. if he can jump, God willing.
And if he cannot jump as we have said, then turn him little by little until he is in his natural position. For then he is easily cured.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then take musk, and oil of vitriol, and melted gum, and grind them all together in a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and force this ointment, then have her sit in warm water up to below the ribs;
and when she is moistened underneath, make her a collar of myrrh and put it on her underneath, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and constrict her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will jump out now. for the child to come out over his knees When the child comes in this way, he puts his hands on the mother's belly gently.
of the issue of the child which comes out width a hand during The patient's hand must be brought back: if it cannot be brought back, have the woman stand up and walk;
if she cannot walk, have her lie on a bed and raise her legs straight;
then administer the medicine I mentioned earlier;
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, then study to bring the hand back; and turn the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to hold on until the baby comes out.
from the child's exit at its neck, and spread his hands, and turned his face towards his mother's back I must tie her hand, then turn it slowly little by little, and gently;
and when it is even, then place on the skin a poultice of alder and oil, as we have said, then instruct that it moves little by little.
and when you have done this, then make her sit on a chair, and instruct her to sneeze; and make her yawn. in the same way with all the afterbirth
in the same way with all the afterbirth When it comes out in this way at all the afterbirth, then catch the afterbirth with your nail, as long as the moisture is discharged;
and if the child puts its hands on its face and neck, and the mother slaps it, it should not be restrained, and the child will die.
then put the child inside, as you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman to grip several times:
of the exit of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely. Twins are a strange thing, and do not live long if they are born prematurely.
I know that they are multiples, and are separated by the placenta that divides them, which is attached to the womb.
And sometimes they issue naturally as one does, as we have said.
And if they grow quickly, then the treatment as we have said, and let the nurse be skilled, and do quickly and lightly what she does; and do thus as it is beneficial for healing. of many children
of many children Sometimes they are formed in the womb as one or two or three or four or five or more, up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the glorious Sage,
and it is necessary for the surgeon to know all this, because similar things might happen to him. then he should act accordingly.
of the dead child
When you are treating a woman of a stillborn child, as I have said in the section on obstetrics, and there is no labor, and you are forced to act manually: if you know that the woman is of sound health and has no fear of death.
it is necessary for the woman to lie on her back, with her hips tilted down and legs raised;
and the midwife should apply the unguent of ten parts where she lies in bed so that she is not treated with the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with myrrh and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and myrrh; then they beat it lightly, then they pick .I. the place where it beats the joints that are suitable for this,
and take care that the infant is equipped so that he descends onto his head; if he strikes the joints in his eyes or throat or mouth or palate or under the beard or near the sides,
and if the descent is on the feet, let him hit or pinch and middle sides;
and he should dye the thread with his right hand, and place the needle between the fingers of his left hand, and wind the thread lightly around his hand, and insert the needle into one of the places we have mentioned, so that it reaches the hollow space;
then insert another needle, or a third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;
and then they should be moved equally from one side to the other, so that they exit, and the needles should be bitten down to hold them in place, as shown in this illustration:
And if a part remains, then anoint the knuckles of one hand with oil, and rub it into that part, and draw out the other part;
and if nothing remains, then place this finger or a higher one in place, and do this until it all comes out.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the dislocation, then you must wrap it in .a. cloth, as much as it will go;
then cut at the joints of the fingers or toes, and thus you must do to the other hand, and on both feet.
And if the head of the child is big and it is stretched out at the exit, or has an acute headache, you should press on the spinous process between your fingers, and open the head and draw out the water; or you may use the instrument called "almidach," from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapters that follow this one;
and likewise, make the infant a large head naturally; and then pull out the bones with tongs,
and if the head pops out and is forced, it should be split open until the moisture that is inside comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it in pieces as much as you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture flows out.
And if the swelling is on their feet, the pull is light, and the movement towards the mouth of the wound is easy.
And if it is swollen in the belly or foot, you must stretch it with .i. bandage wrapped around the hand; and open the belly or foot, so that the moisture which is in it flows out;
and if other limbs are affected, but the feet remain if he also puts his hand into the wound and pulls it up to the mouth of the wound; then put in a needle or two, and pull them out;
and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed there, then one should not work on it, then one must apply moist and fatty things; and apply poultices, and use warm and softening water.
And if the child is on its side, and you can get it to lie still, then apply what we have said for a living child:
and if one cannot, then let it be carried in parts, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
And when you have done this, if he is given what we have said about abscesses that come in the sea;
and if there is bleeding, let it be stopped with astringents, and other remedies administered.
And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had died, then another was sewn over it, and the other died too. After a long time she got an abscess in her armpit, which swelled so much that it opened and began to ooze profusely.
I was called to the wound, and I thought for a long time, but could not heal it.
I applied a strong attracting plaster, and one bone came out, and after a few days, some others. I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Examine the wound, and with your hands pull out the bones until the woman is in a better state. and let the woman rest like this for a long time, and then slowly move her neck a little;
and I have not mentioned this chapter before because, when the masters encounter an unusual case, they will know how to provide assistance.
how to return the dislocated joint to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the press, with which one cuts into the books; and in .2 turns at .2 ears of .2 lines. Nevertheless, let the horns be more subtle of the constrictor, and be made of boxwood or of ebony;
and let the mouth of the pipe be one digit wide, and the edges of the trees one digit, and in length one palm and a half; and in the .2 sides are two adjustments of this same wood, which are fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two settings are put into the mouth of the wound to open when you turn the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter, is made of boxwood or box, according to the appearance of tweezers; and has two heads two settings, as you see, a palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you see the wound open to all the instrument, so let the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging and her legs spread, then put the two pieces of the instrument together in the socket, and hold the head of the instrument under between his thighs; then work your hand on the whole instrument, just as you did with the tongs, according to the amount that you see opening the mouth of the socket, until the patient does what he wants.
These instruments are all decorated, and their appearances are multiplied; and when the patient sees them prepared, his fear is increased, and he is more reluctant to undergo the procedure because of their quantity.
Do not despair about the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is unavoidable.
When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold in her breath, then make her sneeze with an herb, and squeeze her hands to her mouth and nose. And if she vomits, that's good.
If not, take a jug and put herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calendula, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury.
All of these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over the fire. Then put one end of the tube into the jug and the other end into the mouth of the womb,
and the dye until the vapor comes inside the marble; then let it sneeze, as we have said. Then let the secondine dry quickly. And if it remains after this treatment and is not better, command the bather to wet her left hand in oil of sesame or in a poultice of alder, and then let her put it back in its natural place,
and seek the secondine; and when she has found it, she should grip and gradually stretch it straight, so that the marble does not pop out. but it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled; thus it will come out and loosen.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, we have described the treatment of sneezing and the fume of herbs;
and if it is not one of those that we have described, then beware of pulling;
but it is necessary for the person at the mouth of the wound to tie it to the woman's thigh, then cleanse it with tetrafarmacon ointment;
if she vomits it up and expels it, but nonetheless, when she vomits it comes out with a bad smell from the stomach and head, and weakens the patient.
So then one should use appropriate fume: some of the ancients have tried smoke from watercress and dry figs.
The shape of the instrument used to smoke out the woman for the retention of flowers and afterbirth is as follows:
And it is made of glass like a tube, and one puts the narrow end into the woman's birth canal, and the wide end above the fire;
and let him use fomentation on the charcoal, and the dye until it is wasted, and begin another.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but instead have a thin, subtle membrane. Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce this membrane with her finger, and not cut it with a knife, and guard against tying it off so that she does not touch it.
then put on soft lamb's wool soaked in wine and oil, then dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that he will be cured, then put a plug of wool in the wound, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go to bed.
And sometimes a sudden stop to the bleeding occurs in a wound or an abscess; then it must be stopped suddenly: then it should be dressed as we have said with a plug of wool.
from the fistula of the fundament Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodular, and grow larger than those that come from within the anus, or in the space of the two parts.
if there is one fistula or several; and when the nodule is old, it opens, and usually white moisture or thin pus flows out,
and sometimes these fistulas are piercing; and they are caused by what comes out of the anus or through flatulence when the patient expels gas, and sometimes a small one pops out.
And there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the shaft of the penis; and they reach up to the hip joint, and to the scrotum.
And thus one knows the fistula that flows from the anus and does not flow: and put your index finger into the anus, and insert a thin needle of copper or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
And if it has a curve, insert a thin tent or horsehair until you feel the tent or hair at your finger;
and if you do not feel it and no pus, gas, or diarrhea comes out, as we have said: so that it does not pierce through; then hasten to treat it.
And when the fistula has reached the bladder or the urethra, then the urine flows out, and medicine cannot stop it.
If it has pierced through to the hip joint, then the tent will draw blood from that spot. If there is twisting and pain in the joint, and it remains swollen, then medicine and poultices are of no use.
and in these persian fistulas there is no cure for the labor, and vanity of the foolish mirrors that intervene.
In that which is not Persian and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
and the patient lies on his back; and he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs tilted towards his belly; then insert a tent made of iron or lead, if there is tortuosity, as far as you know the tent goes.
If the pain is felt around the anus, you must insert your finger.
and feel if the rectum has been perforated; and if it is uncovered where you feel between your finger and the anus, then know that it is perforated; if one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
One says nevertheless that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely;
and the help one does, then one scorches the delicate cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it is said before; and insert it hot into the fistula, as far as the anus; and do this .ii. or .iii. times, until you know that these charred materials are burned, which look like a bird's feather;
and then treat it with moist bandages smeared with butter, until the charred materials come out, and then treat it with ointment that softens and binds.
If he is thus healed, it is good. If not, then it cannot be healed any other way;
and if it enters the tent and does not pierce all the way through to the bottom, which is at the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula following the covering of the heart; if he cuts at the beginning of the fistula, and then blocks it off in front of the tent, and then cauterizes afterwards, until it reaches the top of the tent;
and the tent will be delivered, and fall down; then cut off those false pieces of flesh that look like a bird's feather, and nothing remains.
And if the pus runs out, and goes between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
For fire cautery gathers together two things: that is to say, the scorching of these heated bodies, and the stanching of blood and the drying up of moisture.
Then dress the tent with butter or pounded substance until the place weeps, and let the fire burn in the bow.
Then treat the wound with sudatory, hard, dry remedies.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes from the depth of the foundation, and is separated from the body, put your finger into it, and explore it.
If you feel the tent, and between them is the membrane or skin, or it is close to piercing, then do not have fears that show no hope or expectation through the administration of one of the three methods:
either you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it to the bottom, or if you can, put in tent and cure as first described;
and do not go too deep, so that you do not cut the membrane that holds the foundation, and let the discharge come out through there as it wants to; then treat, as we have said;
then treat, as we have said; by chance if it is cured, or you remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut away from the foundation, either by tenting or by another pointed instrument; then probe the wound, as much as you can;
then treat to close the wound and stop the fistula in the part above the foundation: if it is easier for the patient.
And sometimes there are fistulas according to this manner: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation below the skin above, take a tent pierced at the top according to this shape: And he inserts a twisted thread into it, and inserts the tent along the entire thread into the fistula as far as the top.
If it is piercing in the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that hole, just as you would put your finger on the foundation;
And draw the head of the thread, and bring together the two heads, and hold them firmly, and leave it for one or two days;
and then restrain it again, as long as the threads that are between the two, become tight and tense;
then heal the wound until it is healed and clean.
If the fistula does not drain, then have it drained in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
For it is not appropriate to cover with a bandage immediately after lancing, and then treat the wound, as we have said, until it has healed.
The form of the spiny spatulum, from which they make a fistula, is very sharp and pointed at one end; and at the other end it is not, so that one should not bandage it, as you will see below:
Hemorrhoids are of two types: they can be inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they ooze blood. There can be one or more of them, and they can be either inside the anus or at its opening; but those that are outside have less moisture.and their blood is darker in color. Si li sang est noir, il est cause de coler, et si li sang est rosi, il est cause de coler flegmatique, si li sang est sanguine, il est cause de coler sanguine, si li sang est verd, il est cause de coler melencolique.
If the blood is black, it is caused by a choleric temperament, and if it is reddish, it is caused by a phlegmatic temperament, and if it is bloody, it is caused by a sanguine temperament, and if it is green, it is caused by a melancholic temperament.and they have the color of the body;
And the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you instruct the patient to strain while going to the toilet until the hemorrhoids come out, and they will hang like threads; If you are in a hurry, grab it with tweezers or your fingernail, then pull out its roots.
And if the tweezers cannot hold it because of moisture, take it with a piece of cloth or cotton or a piece of chamois leather; And pluck them out with your fingers, then pull them out and powder some warm powders on top that act like a cautery; Or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauteries, then treat with other treatments until they are healed;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and if the fundament cannot emerge, then cleanse the patient with a sharp and rough enema to wash away what is in the fundament so that it can emerge openly;
then the patient defecates, and if the thread has come out from the anus, then the cure is easy; and you should grasp them with your nail or tweezers and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision by iron.
If you need to perform sutures in this way: take a twisted thread and thread it through a needle, then pull the thread so that the needle goes through from one side, and return the two ends of the thread under the needle, and if it is too large; tighten the thread tightly, then tie a knot in the thread, and remove the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one to stop the flow of blood;
then place on the wound a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerate, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave him until he defecates, and when he has defecated, then cleanse him with ointment and other remedies until he is healed.
from dryness of the anus or rectum Many times there is dryness of the bowels within the intestines, caused by natural constriction, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
You should cut it with a scalpel or your fingernail to break the skin, so that moisture does not get in. Then dry it until it is hard, as it should be.
And if it cannot harden, then restart the scraping more aggressively than before, until it heals and is scoured. then treat until healed.
when it trembles A flea is a small creature that creeps under the skin and goes very deeply.
And sometimes the flea bites, and one feels it like a trembling, and it comes all over the body, more so in the hands than anywhere else.
And the cure is that you take a candle made from goose fat, or the fat of a wild goose, and place this candle on the shins, so that the purple circle covers the shins all around. Then return your hand to the entire candle, so that you cup it all around the shins, and immerse it deeply, and draw out the shin from its roots.
And if you see fit to make a candle of bronze or iron according to this shape, let it be thin beneath and drawn out on top.
Do not pierce it, so that the candle can be held in the hand and pressed against the shin. And if you see fit, cauterize the shins as described in the chapter on cautery.
of the form of the enema Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or of melted or hammered copper; and sometimes they are made of small and large instruments, depending on those to whom they are administered.
Those who are administered for the treatment of children, and who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the small and large enema is above wide, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
and it has a protrusion where the belly is bound, as you can see, and the anus is pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other;
and the belly where one puts the medicine is made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes;
and it has between each hole a distance of one finger width, then tie into these holes a strong thread of twisted horse hair in a spiral, and assemble the belly so that it is like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then cauterize; and this is the shape of the circle:
Let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the syringe with oil or egg white, or similar substance, then insert it gently;
then the minister squeezes both ends of the syringe together so that it is empty, then removes the syringe and leaves the patient's legs exposed,
and if the medicine wants to come out, let him squeeze as much as he can; and if he sleeps for a night afterwards, it is of greater help.
And if you treat him with a syringe for dysentery, and the medicine rushes out quickly, then repeat it until he is healed.
And if hemorrhoids are in the anus or an abscess, then the enema should be as subtle as for a child;
and this is the form of the subtle enema that tightens the skin:
of wounds
We have already discussed in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will discuss manual and medicinal treatments according to their properties.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and according to what makes them.
The objects that cause wounds are by stone-throwing, and sword and knife cuts, or spear, staff, arrow, or similar things;
or according to the places on the body where they are made, like a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or leg, or belly, or liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, one should take care if it is from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still intact but the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess: then have the patient bleed from the cephalic vein immediately if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction to the wounded part;
and reduce the patient's intake of wine and rich foods.
And if he does not want to bleed, then his food should be reduced, and he should not drink wine nor eat meat;
and place a poultice on the wound, if hot abscesses arise, with cotton moistened only in rose oil or in styptic wine;
and if there is no hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it is fresh and bleeding, and has not been moved by the wind, a powder which I will describe shortly.
and if the wound has been moved by the wind, then place on it some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, such as from a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together with sutures, as I will describe for wounds of the abdomen, of the chest.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it can be covered, and holds only by a little, then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as meat, and similar things.
And if you find pus in the skin, and it is not near the bone, then scoop out all the pus and pour it out, then treat the wound.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, from which blood flows, and it cannot be staunched by medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it swollen, then cut into it; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy; you should apply this powder which causes sores to heal as soon as the fire has burned them.
And the method of making the powder is as follows: take incense one part, dragon's blood two parts, quicklime three parts, and grind them together finely. and apply it to the wound, pressing firmly until the wound heals and joins back together with its blood.
and then bind it well and leave it untied if it doesn't swell, for one does not remove the medicine until the wound is healed.
And sometimes one makes it only with chalk, when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but so long as the wound is moved by fire.
And if the wound has been moved by the fire, one should put this powder into it;
but apply some digestive ointments, or barley flour made with water and honey, until it becomes swollen; then treat other wounds until he is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine pincers;
and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
wounds to the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but to let it be and not put anything restraining on it, because it hurts the nerves and makes them retract. And do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuance is with the brain, which is the highest member.
But let there be medicine on it, such as a poultice of chamomile washed in warm water and mixed with rose oil, and a poultice of cucumber also washed in warm water. and other wet stones, according to this method.
And if the wound is large, then cut and ligate the vessels, then treat it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and she is pregnant and full of bowels, then pierce her or cut lower down.
and if the artery is cut and bleeding occurs, then ligate it, and if necessary, cauterize it.
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the carotid artery, and the windpipe is preserved, through which food passes, cut the artery above the adam's apple, but do not touch the throat; simply reset it to its natural position; then gently pull on it and leave it for several days, then treat the wound with purifying ointments until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then cut it; and if there are pieces of bone, you should draw them all out if you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave them until the wound can heal. and the joint should be freed and aligned to allow movement.
and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have described. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
of a wound from a spear or knife
If it is a spear or knife wound and the wound is deep, then examine if the wound is bleeding profusely: know therefore that the wound is lethal;
and it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder in at first or ligature it for the bleeding will stop on its own, and heal the patient; but I apply an attractive ointment, and bind it .ii. times a day;
and if you do not have ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to suck out moisture,
and let the patient sleep on the wound for 3 or 4, or more days; if there is no twitching, nor trembling of the heart, nor shaking chills; and when you see the bones in good alignment, then you know that the wound is healed. Treat it with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, and there is an opening, then you know that there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or on the front or back, then treat it as one would expect;
if it is large, with stitches; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken off pieces, then probe the wound, and pull out the foreign objects if they are dislodged. and if they are not dislodged, let the wound fester, so as to ease the extraction.
and for other wounds in other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
from rupturing of the belly
There are great, medium, and small ruptures of the belly;
from a great wound sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, by which the entrance of air;
and the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes the smaller wound is worse than the larger,
because one puts the intestines in more frequently when they are cold, if one does not warm them gradually; for the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, they contract more with pain,
and therefore it is necessary to massage the soft abdomen, so that the intestines return to their place and not to the others.
And know that the rupture of the belly occurs in four ways:
The two common sutures occur in the suture of the abdomen,
and the stitching of other wounds on the body, and two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
nevertheless they are more appropriate with the stitch of the belly, and I will say each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine has come out, and it is easy to fix, either by one of two methods:Quant li plaie est grande et que les intestins sont hors, ou qu’il se puet de leu remere, si doit on adonques faire costure en la plus fine peile qui soit dou corps, or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a way: moisten a sponge or soft cloth with tepid water only, where you cook in squint water and cypress and spike, and boil the intestines until they are swollen;
and sometimes makes this restraining wine, and is mud that soothes to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling departing, then boil the intestines in water or alt, and let them be cooked for this constricts the entrance to a small degree;
and if it cannot enter, they make a small wound with the instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is more painful than the incision, which one should not cut without great necessity;
and this is the instrument for splitting it open:
if you cut inside the curve and out again, and look at the shape here:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, if it is reset according to its natural shape in its proper place, if you have the power, because this is necessary.
When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs above his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly,
and also if the rupture in the belly is in one of the two parts, place it so that the ruptured part is higher than the other;
and thus one must treat those things which I say about large and small wounds.
For small wounds, put on what you have prepared,
then have at hand a minister who holds the wound open with one hand, and gathers the lips; and this is the common way of sewing.
and this is the common way of sewing. take a needle or several, depending on the width of the wound, then leave about an inch of space from the edge of the wound, and thread a needle with a strong thread; and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the wound,
then draw it through with a double thread around the needle in two parts, then join the two heads of the wound smoothly,
and then leave .I. space, and stick another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need of needles, until all the wound is restrained;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and let the needles be medium, between fine and thick, for the fine needles pierce through all the flesh, but the very thick ones cannot enter well. for this reason they should be medium-sized.
and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin,
so they do not cut and open the wound before the scabs form;
and then cuts the heads of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and puts tents or bandages on the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leaves them until the wound is healed;
and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because you only need one or two needles.
The second stitch is common, and it is to join the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the wound with one needle and a strong thread; and when you have cut all four of these nerves together,
and when you have cut all four of these nerves together, then remove the needle from the part where you began, in the manner that one sews clothes;
and place a distance between each stitch equal to the thickness of a thumb nail;
this stitch is for men,
and I sewed up a wound that a man had on his belly,
which he had received from a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in length, and the intestines protruded more than .ij. palms in length,
and the wound was in his belly. I returned his intestines to him then after he had been without them for 24 hours
and the wound was sewn up until the 15th day, and I healed it, and he recovered.
And they had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I didn't treat it with ointments because I was in a place where there were no such things as ointments or medicine to be found; and I placed clean cotton on the wound twice a day and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Now I will tell you about two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle and pierce it through from the outside just up to the inside;
when it has pierced the heart directly, then take out the needle and put in the tube where you have inserted the needle.
then pierce it from another angle to the other side of the body, until it reaches the outside.
and the technique for this stitching is that you sew as a tailor sews clothes, and leave the syringe on one side, and pull it from the other, until the stitching is complete.
The second method of stitching, which Galen describes properly,
if it is like when two pieces are joined together naturally, and the end of one piece to the other end, in such a way that:
they pierce through the nearest part of the skin with a needle, and only pierce through that layer, and leave the two heads of the sinus; then turn the needle and pierce it from the outside inwards to the inside, as the two heads of the sinus;
then pierce one and then the other from the outside inwards to the inside, in two other heads of the sinus that are on the other side;
and this is the mother of stitches and the most common.
Galen says these words, and some testify to it,
one must sew the belly with .2 needles, having thread in each;
and one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew腐;
and you know that when a hernia is in the abdomen, the incision should be made larger than other places in the abdomen.
The judgment of the wound is the same as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, as long as the flesh has not moved, if one replaces the intestines and sutures them; then place the charred powder on top,
if one replaces the intestines and sutures them; then place the charred powder on top, and if it burns, then put any ointment that is available on the wound until it heals; and tie the thread, and sew the intestines, and the membrane; then treat the wound as with the others until it is healed;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and if you have no medicine, place old cotton and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For in various wounds, you don't need any other medicine;
and if you doubt that the wound causes corruption in the principal members, if you should moisten a light woolen cloth with tepid oil, or rose oil, and place it around the anus, and beneath the testicles;
and if he feels pain or swelling in the groin, which often happens, if he is enemaed with warm red wine, especially when the swelling extends to the intestines;
and pierces it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "young" cannot heal when it is raw, and it's because of the thinness of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity to the nerves.
And if the zarba jumps out of the wound, it puts it back as far as the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has turned white or black, then you must tie the area that is black so that bleeding does not occur there, because there are veins and arteries there;
then cut what is between the ligature, and put the two heads hanging from the part below the wound until they are relieved by pulling when the threads are cut, and the wound is closed.
of the rot of boiling water
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, one can restore it in some ways,
because I saw a man who was pierced in the belly with a lance;he had a wound that was about a span long, and it was very deep. He was dead before he could be healed.
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became a fistula, and from it came the evacuations and the flatulence;
I treated it with salt according to what I could, and I did not cease to cauterize until it was healed and the wounds closed.
And when I saw it healing, I feared that the patient had discomfort in his abdomen;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. and there was no harm done, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking;
and some expérimentors say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it must be bound in such a way: take strong threads from testicles, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened the mouth, place it above the two lips,
then place another bandage on top in the same manner, until the wound is completely bound;
and close the wound. If they get stuck in the intestines and do not harm the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such a way: take the end of this intestinal thread and char it, and then tie to the head of this thread a thread of fine, twisted linen then put the thread through the needle, and sew up the intestines, and return it to its place;
and this way of sewing up a hernia is not successful except according to the path of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and broad, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no healing or improvement except through subtlety.
of a fistula, wherever it may be You should know that any wound or abscess, when it breaks open, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is deep and narrow.
A fistula is a hard, white, knotted swelling without pain, it has a head like the beak of a bird;
sometimes it is thin and clear, sometimes thick; sometimes little, sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed and there is no scar, it is caused by none of the .viiij. causes:
that is to say, by the little-ness of blood or body; or because of its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh within it and on the lips that does not let flesh grow; or where there is too much bowing; or the bones are porous and the material of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for the treatment; or because the infection is a form of pestilence; or because of the nature of the region is late digestion, and slow health, and swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicine in the division.
Now I should let you know about the treatment of fistula which is done by handiwork.
Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and from arteries, and from nerves, or in the sinus, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And all fistulas that are in this way are grievous to heal, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have described, and you are confident in its treatment, and you see it, take an iron or bronze tent, if the fistula is straight, so take it;
and if the fistula is crooked, then search for a subtle thread of pus because the pus bends around the crookedness;
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well search it with threads, if you cleanse it through one of the openings,
for moisture cuts from one pore to another, and cleanses.
then you should cut it bleeding to your power, that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and it is healed deeply.
and ask the patient about the pain he feels when pressing with your hand, and where he feels it most;
and when you know for certain the location, whether it is near a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you about, if the pain is according to what I have told you
or in any of the places that I have told you about, if the pain is according to what I have told you and remove the filth and rotten flesh within and then treat it until it is healed,
and if the fistula is quite deep in a straight line, then you should open it as much as you can, then I apply moist tenting to medicine the abscess, and I pack it up to the top of the fistula
then I apply moist tenting to medicine the abscess, and I pack it up to the top of the fistula until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
and then I apply warming ointments to the healthy flesh, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it off. If a vein or nerve causes you grief in your principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and darkness, then cut it until all the corruption is removed, then cleanse it with warm water until it is clean;
and if it is not healthy, and returns bent as before, know that you have not gone to the fountain:
if you uncover and desire as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, it is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach. if there is no other way than to let it heal naturally;
and if there is a small corrupt bone that you can pull out with tweezers, if he is extracted with an instrument suitable for this purpose,
and if there are many bones, pull them out one by one;
and if the moisture makes it worse, and there is no mistake or fear, cut and burn and scrape the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something on the wound to stop the bleeding. and let it remain until the swelling goes down around the bones,
and then they will have more ease with the bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, if you merely treat the corruption until all the darkness has been removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large amount of corruption, and it reaches the bone; one must scrape and cover it all the way to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take example and help from your work.
He was a young man of about 30 years old who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body,
until the fluids came to his leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason for it to open;
but they miraculously worked so much that the abscesses opened and a lot of matter came out and it became a fistula, and many holes opened up all over the body from which pus and moisture flowed;
and many were treated for more than two years, and no one in the art of medicine had any success,
until I was called to see him, and saw his leg and the remedies they were using to treat it, and that which ran through the holes of the body; and became red the bodies of the young men, and had yellow color.
I pitched a tent at one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes,
and found that one came against another from all parts of the leg.
I hurried therefore, and struck one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came right up to the bone inside;
I removed what appeared to be rotten bone, and believed that there was no other corruption except for that which I removed;
and began to heal the wound with strong medicines for a long time, but it would not heal;
and then begin again, and expose the bone as before,
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and removed it, and then I had to work hard to solder the area;
but I couldn't do anything until I copied around one palm of bone, and the trauma affected all his body; then I healed him with medicine; and he was cured and healed very quickly,
and it is not necessary to repeat the operation except for the weakness of the patient who cannot endure. and because of my fear of his death that I had. For despite the bloodletting, he often bled but was completely healed,
For despite the bloodletting, he often bled but was completely healed, and there grew up in the place of the bone hard flesh, and he was of good constitution and had no harm nor evil in any way, neither in going nor coming.
and are the head, so that you draw the corrupted flesh from below, and uncover the flesh above the place where you see it is sore, so that the thread does not cut the flesh; and put a hot iron or a table underneath the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and one must sew as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and sew again another time.
And if the bone is broken but does not open, and the fracture is in the middle or in a part of it, then uncover the flesh completely; then place a hot iron underneath,
and then sew up from one end of the fracture to the other, as we have said, and let the sewing be done from the length of the fracture with a needle,
and if the fracture is in the joint, then cut through the joint, and sew up the bone on the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other remedy but to cut it off;
and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the wrist of the foot, then that thing is very strong, but nevertheless you must examine this corrosion, how it appears to you; and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful not to damage the vein or nerve;
and you shall know that the incisions and sutures for covering these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the orifices. and their thickness and thinness, and their length and shortness, and their hardness. And for this reason one should prepare a different instrument for each kind of work.
And you shall know that the work will show you the instrument which you need according to your knowledge of this craft, and bear witness to the ways of sickness; prepare the instrument that you need according to what is appropriate for it.
of fire The shoulders may dislocate due to internal or external causes;
and when you have treated this corrosion with remedies, but they do not help, then cover the limb up to the site of the corrosion, so that the patient escapes through the air or through evil, which is greater, due to the fault of the limb;
so that the patient escapes through the air or through evil, which is greater, due to the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burnt by fire, and after darkness, then goes the corrosion of members from member to member, and takes over the whole body; so be quick about covering it up,
and if it's caused by the sting of some venomous creatures, like scorpions and vipers, or similar,
if the corrosion is on the head or neck, then cover it up and do not leave any gaps for the poison to reach the hand.
And if it comes to the hand, then apply the cautery to the joint so that the corrosion does not go up to the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, then apply the cautery to the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death. and there is no remedy for its strength except according to the quantity of its virtue;
And thus it is done when the cautery comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then apply the cautery after the other joint;
and if it occurs on the foot, cut off the entire foot; and if it climbs up the leg, cut off at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to kill the patient with a knife;
and the method of cutting on the leg or arm is that you tie it above and below, and one minister extends one of the strings downstream, and another minister extends the other string upstream, and you loosen the rope that is between the two strings to a width of one spatium, until the bone is exposed;
then the thread or silk, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the silk does not touch the healthy area, and cause another injury and abscess in the patient.
And if blood comes out when you operate, then cauterize the area gently. or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete,
then bind the dislocated member with an appropriate bandage and treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you what happened to a man with a similar injury:
he had a darkness which looked like a burn from fire,
and that corrosion came first in his toe of the foot, so that it affected all the foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he stopped bleeding and was healed;
and long after that, the corrosion returned to his finger on the hand, and he came to me,
and I applied impact poultices after cleansing the body, but could not stop the corrosion;
and he requested that I cup his hand, and I did not want to until I had hope of removing the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, that he would not die, because the strength of the man was weak; and he despaired completely, and returned to his land, and healed his hand.
And I have told you this tale only so that someone else may benefit from it if they need to.
Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it causes great swelling; and then they rupture and discharge, and the place remains hollow, just like vessels; and the skin above is as delicate as a loose napkin, and they do not reach to the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy",
but if it is so long that it reaches to the bone inside, then it is called   "fistula";
and the cure is to apply a cautery around it all, especially when it is subtle, just like a napkin. and do not worry about its destruction.
And if you are concerned that the skin will burn, and the destruction is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then the cure is thus:
look to see if the breasts are swollen, and the bowels within are of foul odor, therefore use an egyptian medicated clyster made thus: take asafoetida, and oil, and litharge, equally, and mix and cook in a vessel over fire, until the medicine is red, and as thick as honey;
and then take as much as you need, and mix it with water and honey, and insert it into the breast, and constrict the orifice; and leave the medication in for two hours, then remove it by squeezing it out;
do this as many times as necessary until the breast is relieved and the pore is removed;
and sometimes they are cauterized with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you burn vine wood ashes, and pour water on top,
then let it run, and cauterize with it as much as you know the wound is open;
and if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine, nor the water of ashes, if one enemas with water and honey, or a little litarge ground. or you can use enema of honey and wine, as honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine makes one sweat.
And when you have done this, and you are sure that the chest is well cleansed, if he enemas with what makes him defecate
and it is that you press the ointment of diafinit, and make it with rose oil and wine; or you enema with some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have discussed in the section on ointments;
and if the anus is small, and the rectum of the enema cannot enter, if one widens it with an iron a little, and puts in some of the Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is widened;
and if the wound is too wide, then cut and leave only enough room for the syringe to enter,
and if the opening that the bowels hang out of is at the top, then the cut should be made below where they are. For when the bow is fully drawn, do not allow the string to snap. and if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you wish, arrange it so that the bow runs to the lowest place it can reach,
and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish you should dress it in this way: let the bow run smoothly downward, and leave nothing of the bow; and take consolidating medicines to put on the breast,
and they are on a linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then press as hard as you can on the opening of the armpit; make the second hole larger than the first. then apply a soft ointment over another small piece of cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it over the armpit opening to ease the bowstring, and do not remove the large cloth for several days;
and the one who is above the armpit opening, remove often to remove the bowstring, and know what flows from the bowel, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digestive fluid, or indigestion;
take care if the patient feels pain or not, and see if there is an abscess or not,
and when the medicine has spread in such a way, and you see the nature that pops out of the opening of the breast, if you know that the breast is firm, and approach the saint;
and then loosen it in the morning, or at midday, and when you loosen the wound, change a different cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast milk flows low and indigestible after many days, know that the breast does not open. And if subtle venom flows after a long time, do not despair of health,
for health is nearby. For there are men who apply delayed treatments to their wounds, and others who do the opposite;
and if milk is not digested and rises from the breast after many days, know that the breasts will not open;
and if the breasts are delayed in opening and are distant, then apply dry medicines that are moist in substance but dry in effect, like diaphoretic ointment, for it contains a large amount of vitriol, and it is the best medicine;
Take a definite ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and rose wine of equal substance.
Then cook it and use it; and with the same honey cooked, thickened, when a definite ointment is not present,
or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and sprinkle the powder on the honey while it is over the fire; and then in glue a cloth, and they put it over the breast, and sometimes they administer a long aristolache. and roots of heavenly lily, which is like flour of wheat and centaury;
and roots of heavenly lily, which is like flour of wheat and centaury; and the use of simples or compounds: grind them to powder and place on the honey I mentioned earlier and use it; And if the wound is long and not healed by this treatment,
And if the wound is long and not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is complete, and it makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard members, or in the soft tissues; if there is an abscess under a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the nail
Panarice is an abscess that develops under the fingernail on the finger of the hand, or from the foot, or perhaps from other fingers;
and when it becomes infected and one takes no care, then an abscess forms, and they run and ooze pus as long as they run to the root of the nail, and perhaps they run all the way;
and the corrosion comes to the bone, as long as there is a foul-smelling pain, and the finger is swollen, and the colour is green.
When you treat it as we have described in the section, and the treatment does not help, you must cut away all the excess material that is underneath the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to push out and break the skin, then you should put a thread under the nail so that it doesn't cut into the flesh. and draw it out on top, and carefully and gently split the skin, and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and draw it out, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the tooth decaying, pull it out with a pair of tongs as previously described, then treat the inflammation until it is healed;
and if it is wild, and biting, and it feels great pain, then you must treat it first. then cut the nail of the big toe diagonally from above,
and be careful that the cutter does not go all the way to the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
And if it happens, put something on it that soothes.
You must adjust the two joints which sometimes grow in men's hands by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes there is bone, and sometimes only bone, and sometimes only nail,
and some grow at the root of the joint, where the growth is in some of us. He who is born with a hernia in any part of his body does not move, and he who is born at the junction of the neck, by chance moves;
the size of one who is fleshy is slight in such a way: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; if you hold it tightly.
In one who is born in the anus, you should first cut around the flesh roundly to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable depth, then cure it until it is healed.
The joints that come together come by birth, or by joint wound, or by burn from fire, or by similar things.
Then you must treat this wound so that it heals according to its natural shape. place between two pieces of damp cloth or gauze soaked in rose oil so that it does not seal. or you can place them between two pieces of thin linen, as long as the wound seals, as it should.
If sealing occurs on one of his hands with the palm, then treat that wound as it should be treated.
Of the base
Viles are large veins wrapped in a fullness of melancholy superfluities, which come to many parts of the body;
and more occurs in legs of those who go on foot and work and carry loads, than in others.
Therefore, you should administer to him a cleansing enema, and then the basilicon ointment.Et li amonestre et la maniere dou saine et dou cautere, et que il doit faire, si te veult dire.
The treatment with fire has two methods: one is to use cupping glasses, drawing out the black blood; and the other method is that you open a vein and draw it all out.
The treatment for lacerations is as follows: first, cut the leg with very hot water, until the large veins are made slender, then stretch the leg of the patient from above the thigh to the part below the knee; then open the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide incision,
and squeeze and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the nature of the disease can endure;
and then bandage it, and instruct him to use a poultice of black gall-nut;
and begin the bloodletting and purging again when the veins are empty, according to the disease.
The treatments for this condition are as follows: shave the leg of the patient if there is a lot of hair, then place it in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and swells the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, heat it with fire, and then press it from the top of the knee to the bottom of the ankle, or in the area below the ankle;
then open the skin at the ankle, and scorch the vein from each side, until it appears when one feels it;
and it appears red and black, and when it enters the skin it resembles a white cord;
then pierce the vein below, so that it is raised from the skin, and then it can be bound gently
then cut into the vein in another place above, twice; then scorch the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it up by the vein, as you did before, and bind it at another uncine, as you did before;
then cut another nail, or several if you need them, then lift it, and strike the bottom of the foot,
then pull and lift up to the second nail; then pull it out nail by nail, until it comes out completely, then strike it;
and if you cannot pull and lift it, then thread a strong double piece of wire through it, and tie it and pull it out, and put a needle under the nail, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; and be sure it does not pop, for if it pops, one cannot milk or lift it, and this causes harm to the patient.
and when you have finished milking it, place a pad soaked in wine and rosemary oil over the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the nerve is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, not straight as we have said, then you must split it torturedly, but do not pop it; and milk it as we have previously said.
then you must split it torturedly, but do not pop it; and milk it as we have previously said. The shape of the knife used to cut the vein is curved, and it does not cut unless it touches the vein.
It has a thick curve, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein; but it should be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
Of the civil vein:
This vein is found in the legs, in hot areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land where there is no moisture:
and sometimes it occurs elsewhere than on the legs, and this happens due to the pustules that form under the skin,
as happens with serpents and worms that live between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this illness are that there is a great swelling in the leg, then the colour changes, and the illness starts to come out, just as from the root of a plant.
When the head is open, you must wrap it with a piece of lead from one and a half to two inches, and the knot,
and let the lead hang down to the leg, and every time it is not in place, wrap it around the lead again, and the knot; and if it is too long, cut off a portion, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cover it at the root until it is fully dislocated; because if you cover it, it will go into the flesh, causing abscess and swelling in that place, and great illness;
this thing must be treated little by little until it reaches the head, and nothing is left in the body;
and sometimes this vein, when treated with five or ten palm-widths, and one man came to me, from whom it issued ten palm-widths long; and when you grab it, it pushes out a finger's width or an opening, and it penetrates to the bottom,
so that everything comes out; and after emptying the matter inside, bring medicine to the site in a gently oozing manner for several days, then treat it like an abscess.
And sometimes this vein is found to be raining, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself, and it comes out of a hole and rains down; therefore treat it as we have said before.
Of worms that grow between skin and flesh:
This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land, because it often affects oxen:
and there is a small worm that rises between skin and flesh, moving throughout the body, ascending and descending; and it moves from one member to another, until it finds an opening in the skin, and then it jumps out;
and it is caused by the putrefaction of some humours, like worms and serpents and roundworms in the belly;
And there is concern about its malice, for when it moves through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and milked, one cannot help but feel compassion when he sees it:
therefore, you must tie the area above and below with a strong string, tightly.
then press on it from above and milk it firmly, and if the pus is deep in the flesh and you do not bring it out, if you cauterize it with fire on top, as long as it dies;
and the greatest harm it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye, grip under the eyelid firmly, then pull upwards and out.
and one must use a cleansing ointment for the body made from digestive medicines to draw out the bad humours,
and if there is swelling from rotten flesh.
Of pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "vomiting" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, who uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of her arm;
and soon after, I saw it rise as high as a worm at her shoulder, quicker than anything else, just like quicksilver when it moves from one place to another;
the pain left that place and moved to her shoulder,The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and then soon spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
then he would tell me that she was turning around the body, just as I saw her.
I was very surprised how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease progress in this way before. Nevertheless, I had seen many who had pain moving from one place to another, but I did not want to, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought it was because women had dry bodies and exposed veins, and because of that they appear to have constricted wind.
But it does not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and relaxed veins.
And when you see to treat this disease, and the patient feels pain as we have said, if it appears to you [if] the fluid above and below is pus, and then press on [it] until that constrained pus comes out; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it with your own eyes,
if the treatment of those who draw out pus, like putrid pills and serapin pills, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the part of the body where they land.
The diversity of their tips is that there are some with large points, small points, threaded, and smooth. There are also arrows with two angles, those with heads, and those with pieces; and it is removed from any joint of its place, according to which it cannot move, and the limb is deformed, and suffers great pain and injury.
such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it therefore occurs in any of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you about appear: you should be careful about extracting this arrow, because death comes afterward in various ways; and when this bad sign does not disappear, and the arrow is not completely removed, then draw it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the blood flows from above the brain, is when there is a cutting and piercing of the head and brain, and blood flows from the wound and there is inflammation and redness in the face and tongue, and spasms and confusion in the mind, and vomiting of blood; and sometimes blood flows from the nose or ears; and sometimes they lose their speech and voice; and from the wound comes white moisture resembling pus, and it seeps out like a boil;
and if this sign appears, cease the treatment and remove the arrow if it is in there.
The signs of a wound when it is on the heart are that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were pierced into a hard object, not open. And by chance the wound also becomes mute like the pulse, and short black blood comes out, and there is chilliness and cold sweat, and fainting: you know without a doubt that death will come.
And the sign of an arrow wound that affects the lung is spitting foam from the wound, and a swollen throat, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow pierces the covering of the foot, it affects the small bones; and there is great pain and swelling and discomfort, and the patient feels pain throughout their shoulders.
And if the arrow pierces the stomach, by chance some undigested food may come out through the wound.
And if the arrow pierces the intestines in the abdomen, and no feces escape through the rear end, then there is no hope for a cure or for removing the arrow.
If the arrow pierces the bladder, and urine escapes and flows outward, and the patient feels intense pain, know that the wound is fatal.
The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, hip, thigh, and leg, and similar limbs, are safe according to various dispositions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
There once was a man who was shot with an arrow in the jaw at its root near the teeth: I probed it and extracted it from below the ear fat, and he was healed without pain.
And I extracted an arrow that shot him in the oil fat under the paper under, and the arrow was replanted, and he could not reach it except for the tip towards the forest, and the arrow was large, shot from a Turkish bow, entering just behind the ears; the boy remained unharmed and no bad accidents happened to him.
And he took an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow that had entered behind his ears:
I cut away the barbs, and extracted it carefully, and the Christian was healed.
And he took an arrow that had pierced a man's throat, and I thought he would die;
and then if he has not improved after .xxx. days, I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and experienced no ill effects.
And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow wound in his back, and the wound is closed over:
and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions do not change, one will not find harm in any of his natural works.
And I saw another man who had an arrow hit him in the face and the wound was sewn up;
and he remained like that without experiencing great pain; and many other similar things.
And I saw an arrow hit a noble man of the king's court, whom the arrow had entered the eye, and was somewhat declined to the right side; and the arrow was all drawn out
I was called to tend the wound after she had given birth .iiij. days later. I found the wound very tight.
I felt it everywhere with my fingers and could not feel it; and he felt stabbing and pain underneath his right ear. I thought it was the tip of an arrow
I put on the place a soothing and digestive plaster, so that the swelling would go down. and I saw the tip of the arrow.
and I saw the tip of the arrow. I applied the plaster for a longer time, and the wound healed quickly, and the patient suffered for a long time,
as long as he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me this. I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was healed
and I probed the wound and felt the tip of the arrowhead inside; then I applied the corrosive medicine to the wound until the head of the arrow became visible;
and transgress well the terms around 4 months,
then lacerate if the wound that I pricked with tweezers and probed from one side to another, but could not get out;
therefore I did not cease to subtilize and devise means of instruments, until I took it on the .i. day with well-made tweezers, according to what its shape will come in the end of this chapter, as far as I drew it and restored the wound.
And they who know this judge that cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I therefore restored it; and the wound was sewed up, and the patient entirely healed.
Now I will tell you about extracting certain arrows, so that you may apply your treatment to what I have not mentioned, for the books cannot encompass everything;
but the wise masters consider well very little, and what is present and lacking to them, find new works, and new instruments, and the descent of strange things that come in this art.
I say that arrows grow in the members where they are stuck according to .ij. ways: or through the place where they enter, or through another part;
and if it jumps out of its place, it is an arrow entering the flesh, and sometimes it will jump out.
And if it doesn't jump out now, leave it as long as the wound around it becomes pus-filled and the exit is cleared.
And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for a few days, and move it every day;
and then it will jump out, and if it doesn't, then pierce around it with a very thin needle to widen the exit, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged deep in the body so that it cannot be seen, then one should search for it throughout the entire body; and if you feel it, then pull it out with an appropriate instrument;
and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, then there is no bone or nerve or vein, as long as the wound is large; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it in,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it in, then cut away the flesh that is stuck to it in the .ii parts that you can reach, and then break or fold the ears of the arrow so that you can draw it out;
and then break or fold the ears of the arrow so that you can draw it out; and carefully so that you do not break the arrow as you pull it out more forcefully.
And if you cannot on one try, then leave it until the wound around it is swollen; then pull it out, for extraction is eased. And if the flow of blood makes you doubtful, then follow what we have said about the cure in its chapter;
and beware of cutting the nerve and opening a vein, and use whatever means you can to pull out the arrow without peril,
quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and adjust the patient according to how they were positioned when the arrow struck them, for that is the greatest aid you can provide; and if you cannot, then position them according to what the signs show you.
Arrows that come from another direction, where there is an opening or swelling on the skin, either visible or apparent to the touch:
Cut it off, then, as high up as the pincers can reach, and then pull it out; if not, jump now.
If it is stuck in the bone, rotate your hand rapidly, forcing it into the bone and widening the opening; then pull it out.
If it cannot be removed, leave it for now and try again later to extract it.
And if there is an arrow shaft, push it all the way through;
and if you see that it is swollen, and you want to apply a poultice, then you should apply .i. cold poultice, so that the point of the arrow enters into the flesh of the instrument; and then draw it out,
and if the arrow is lodged deeply, apply 1 pointed instrument to ease its extraction.
And if the arrow is poisoned, you must cut away all the flesh around it where the venom is, as much as you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrow hits the buttock, or the thigh, belly, bladder, or side, and it is superficial, and you can cover it with a bandage, then do so.
and be careful not to cover the vein and the nerve, then extract the arrow, and then sew up the wound if necessary; and treat it until it heals.
The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to an owl's beak; see the diagram.
There are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
of common body veins Of the veins from which one heals, there are 31, from which there are 16 in the head,
that is to say: 2 veins that are behind the ears, which are called the two "ear-veins"; and the two arteries which are visible in each temple; and two veins which are found in the eyelids, called "aspiring." and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two gullets which are in the neck; and the two veins which are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called 'augerich'. and two veins under the tongue.
The veins that are commonly used for bleeding are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, which comes from the left side, and the common people call it the 'vein of the head'. and the middle part is called the "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins; and common people call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is located on the right side, and common people call it the "vein of the belly", and it is above the pubic bone, and it is the one they use for bleeding, which clearly opens above the pocket.
And the pulse is the vein that is between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two movements.
and in the leg there are three pulses: one is under the curve of the pocket on the left side, and the second superficial pulse is located at the ankle of the right side; and the pulse called 'queen', which is located at the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three pulses below these.
The healing of veins that are behind the ears is helped by old catarrh and by migration. And the qualities of the sanitor, as I told you, and it is that you heal the head of the patient,
And the qualities of the sanitor, as I told you, and it is that you heal the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then squeeze the patient's neck with a wet towel, until the two veins appear behind the ears, coming down from the head: examine them with your fingers, and press down where you feel the pulse under your finger, then make an incision there.
Then take the lancelet and pierce under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards. and cut through both skin and vein well twice, and let blood flow until you see it.
Then bind it up tightly, until it is healed.
and I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
The bleeding from the two arteries that are in the two temples, it is worth bleeding from ancient times, and sudatory and ophthalmy that are used, and the body of tears agues as themselves;
and the qualities of bleeding as I said: and it is that the patient stretches his neck so that the two veins are clearly visible; and feel the pulse below your finger, and then sign inside;
then lightly press on the vein above at your index finger, and insert the lance beneath, and lightly press the vein above, and pinch it, just as you did in the other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then loosen the bandage, and put your hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
and then ligature it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their cause and extraction in the beginning of the book.
The bleeding of the vein on the forehead is just as effective for old diseases of the face, and for migraines and redness.
And its quality is such that the patient turns their neck while twisting, until the vein appears; take the instrument called "fosseur", which has this shape:
and put the tip on the vein and press with your hand or something else and let the blood flow according to the amount you want to see; then tie the vein so that it is healthy and sometimes the wound with a broad flame.
However, it is not appropriate for the flames to be too sharp; and heal across, because the bone is close by, and perhaps break the flames when they are fine.
The healing of the two veins that are in two layers, which help each other, and in the eye, and in facial diseases;
and the nature of their healing is that the patient twists his neck while pulling on a thread, as before;
then he heals, and the healing is through the tongue, a little from the long flame, a little wide, because there is no flesh.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they will break; then draw blood, as much as you need, and then bind it with cotton, and tie it well.
The bleeding of the vein in the nose is good for epilepsy, and sudden madness, and illnesses of the face, such as migraines and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient should squeeze his neck, then press his nose with his left hand, and take a thin flame, and insert it between the lip and the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open properly, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not let it flow too far, and let the blood run according to your need, then tie it up for a night, for it is quickly restored;
The juice of the .ij. windflowers helps with constriction of the liver, and at the beginning of menstruation, and with many illnesses, and with impetigo, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and with stomach aches;
and the qualities of the healing are such that the patient stretches his neck from side to side, as we have said; and let the master stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair,
then open the vein widely, then draw blood moderately, as needed;
then treat the other vein in the same way, then untie the bandage, and gently press on both veins, let the wound heal overnight, so that the patient does not strangle;
The bleeding of the gums Here is the translation: The bleeding of the veins in the lips above helps with sores in the mouth, and gum corruption, and splits in the lips, and the pain of teeth and gums.
And the quality of the bleeding is to have the patient sit before you, and stretch his neck as I have said; then return to the lip, and look at .ij. veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left; and you can identify them because they are black, and because around them there are small black veins: then cut both of them, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
then cut both of them, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then cut the vein that is between the two, and cut it into two or three parts. then cut the thickest of each part, and do the same with the .ij. veins above and below, because it is the same method.
Of bleeding underneath the tongue Bleeding of the veins that are underneath the tongue helps after bleeding from the head, and it aids in constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the larynx, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the bleeding are such that the patient should sit in front of the sun with his tongue out, and look down at each side to see a black vein;
then bleed both, but do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
Veins of the neck from which we commonly bleed are bled in two ways:
either by puncturing with a single flame of a candle, or with a thin olive wood stick, as is the custom, and it is called "anesil"; and are broad and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the candle flame is very important, and it should be as wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth and full of thick blood on top, and contain thick and troubled blood; and that is the shape of an olive-shaped flame;
and it is more pointed and suitable for bleeding the subtle veins where there is thin, yellow blood.
Bleeding from the basil vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are below the throat, in the neck, chest, and belly;
and the surgeon must heal it with bloodletting, and cauterize the artery underneath. And if he pierces the artery, and bleeding occurs, then he must stanch it, as I have said. and the fire cautery should not be applied to the wound, but rather a cutting cautery.
And if the basil does not open obviously, then you must cut it and change to another one; Or if you want to draw some blood from it, or you heal it in its place with a vein cut in the arm; it opens clearly. and stop the bleeding with flame, as we have said.
And if you want to find the place to bleed, you must also stretch out the arm and feel the pulse; then sign the spot with a touch of the finger, then tie up the arm, and stop the bleeding with flame.
And beware of piercing the artery when you see the spot pulsing, for that is the artery; therefore avoid it.
And if you see it bubbling up like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is arterial blood: then hurry and place your finger over it for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens.
Let the arm hang down, and leave it thus, and do not move it until he is healed. And let him be cautious, and not move it until he is healed.
And if the blood is not staunched and it flows, and you have no medicine, then compress the artery as it opens, for that is where the blood comes from; and stop the flow of blood.
Take a piece of white poplar bark, split it in half, and tie one half tightly over the wound until the next day.
If the blood is staunched, that is good; if not, then treat it as we have said before with powders that stop bleeding;
and the staunched blood is not dry in many positions due to the smallness of the wound and the power of the arm.
The bleeding from a vein is helped by drawing blood from the top of the head, and from the body below. This is because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
The bleeder must be careful not to pierce too deeply and to find the nerve underneath. And if it becomes swollen and the patient is distressed, then it may not be able to heal.
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must heal it with an instrument gently; and avoid the nerve as best you can.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they cut it deeply.
The healing of the cephalic nerve helps, as it draws blood from the head and helps the eyes.
and it is necessary to heal by pricking with an olive-shaped flam or a myrrh flam, for it is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Nevertheless, one must seek the easiest place, and not strain too much if it doesn't work the first time, and one must try again. and perhaps the area will swell in some people when it fails the first time, but one shouldn't be concerned. The quality of the bleeding is according to your thoughts.
The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is not done just to promote health,
and to prevent future illnesses; and the wound is made in one of the three veins: the cephalic, the fast, and the basilic; and one should bleed in the beginning of the day, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of digestion are apparent;
and one should bleed the first or third day, after two or three days.
The healing that is administered to illnesses does not have a determined time, but whenever there is a need, day or night, at all times and in all places.
and children should not be bled until they are 14 years old, nor women during pregnancy before the seventh month. Nor should the very old who have passed 60 years be bled.
And when someone wants to be bled in any manner, they should first cleanse the bowels with a gentle clyster, if he has retained a lot of feces so that the veins do not draw from the intestines the harmful excess fluids to the main limbs;
nor does one heal too much from meat, nor who is drunk, as long as he remains so, nor the sick;
and one should not heal quickly after colic, vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent sexual intercourse, and exertion, from waking and fasting, and everything that comes from the soul, or from something in the body;
then carefully purify the humors if they are gross, by meat and drink and medicine, if you have the power;
then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to sublimate the blood,
and heal the vein around the navel, as we have said;
and keep that day for work, and piercing, and lust, and similar things;
be tied and joyful, and let the healer be higher than those being healed, and rub the arm two or three times,
then loosen the bandage above gently, because if it is too tight or too loose, it will not stay on.
and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and you can feel them;
then wet the bandages with a little old oil, then put his finger from his left hand on the vein under the site he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not burst when cut. For there are veins that flow as strings to the heart, and also such as are filled with winds. so that when one puts it over the fire, it withdraws from the fire and cannot open the vein, and so is one of these.
And if he opens the vein, it is too tight for that, so the bloodletting must be done with caution in these cases.
And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; if not, one must try again a little lower on that place or above, if the area isn't swollen.
And if the arm is swollen, and the patient is in pain, let him be for one or two days, and do not bind the arm. by chance, there will be hot abscesses; do not enter into a bath, then begin bleeding again if she pleases;
and if the vein is small, open it near the wound and you doubt that not as much blood comes out as you want, then pierce that vein again directly with the needle;
and work a little quickly, so that the arm is swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, do not re-bandage it and put some linseed oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and the oil is changed in this place.
And thus, use linseed oil in every bandage that you bandage a vein, to stop the flow of blood.
And this same thing makes triacle and bowels, when one puts it on the place; so subtle is the blood and is split when it is too large.
And if there comes a large abscess, which happens many times, especially when it is not healed before, or the opening of the vein is small, if you have haste, place a damp sponge on the area and apply a warm compress for an hour.
and you should do this after the bloodletting from a vein, and if it remains in place for several days with no discoloration or green color, then it is not harmful. and if you see any swelling, apply a poultice of aloe or myrrh ground into rosewater, or something similar.
And many times there is an abscess and appearance of pus at the base of the thumb: therefore, put your hand on it, and if you feel softness with the pressure of your hand, then that appearance is bad. Therefore be sure not to place anything on the wound that we have mentioned, for it might enter the artery; but make a dry ointment to harden the area, then heal it with another healing remedy, until it is healed.
And treat each wound according to its blood flow and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if it appears thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for one who is full and swollen, and needs bloodletting, that they make a larger wound, and the flames be wider;
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed them a little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not piercing;
and this method of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and it is better than bleeding a lot or deeply.
And for those who need bleeding, one should give them wet bread in pomegranate juice; if they are overheated, then bleed them three or four times.
And if they have a cool complexion, then before bleeding give them wet bread in muzed syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
If he faints during bleeding, after losing a lot of blood, he should smell some aromatic broth and subtle syrup.
and use the other remedies we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope for opening a vein.
And if he wants to open his arm and bleed again, he should do so little by little according to the amount of his continuing strength.
And those who want to open their arms after the first bleeding, and they have a strong body, should bleed .7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, they should bleed on the second or third day.
For there is much blood within the body which has become heated and causes fever; therefore one must draw out a large quantity and widen the opening so that it flows out easily. Then, after you have checked all the signs of bleeding, and placed your hand on his pulse while he bleeds, so that death does not come from the site of bleeding, and this happens many times when the person bleeding is negligent;
and it is not necessary when you see to loosen the arm, and to let blood flow a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press directly on it; nor if it is crooked, that he extends his arm suddenly, for that would be bad;
but let it be until it heals the second time; then you put the tip of the flame to the vein, until the congealed blood at the opening melts away, and apply a little salt mixed with water, and press gently.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not bind it, until the abscess is soothed.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, let it be in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins in the arms are healthy in the area of the vein in the head because it is composite.
And the method of the healing is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the wound turns red;
then let it heal slowly, so that the vein appears well, then heal it now from the inside, not from the wide or long side;
and let the wound be wide, and heal it well near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough;
and if it is in winter, do not put the hand back in hot water, for it is put into it more in winter than in summer;
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, that there is neither artery nor nerve.
The salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and here is the method:
Strains the hand, and pour in hot water until the vein is swollen, as one can see it. And if the vein is crooked, and you press it from all sides, it will not hurt at all;
And do not go too deep, for the nerves are completely bare underneath the skin,
and then put the hand in hot water if the blood has congealed in the wound and cannot flow out.
And when you have finished treating the blood as necessary, put oil and silk on the vein to seal it temporarily, and do the same for each vein.
The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you about the right.
Bleeding from the vein in the throat is beneficial for all diseases that are below the body, as diseases of the eyes, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the kidneys, and the thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the nature of his healing is that the patient puts his foot in warm water, and rubs the vein until it bursts, and if it is at the ankle, and above the foot there are many veins;
then treat the largest vein, either at the ankle or above the foot, as you see fit.
And if you heal it on the foot, then guard against the nerves that are underneath, and heal it across as well as up-and-down; and let the flames be anaesthetized.
And if the blood cannot flow out, then immerse the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
And if the healing doesn't work the first time, then try again a second time higher up, because the part is salty. Do not worry about nerves, as we have said; and so do the same with the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its pulsation relates to the pain in the hip when there is hot blood.
And the qualities of its pulsation are such that the patient should bathe and twist above the ankle four times in alternation.
for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, then heal it in every way you can, by crossing over and and it is worth mashing that you cover it, because the place is safe and it is very vulnerable to many people.
and it is worth mashing that you cover it, because the place is safe and it is very vulnerable to many people. And if you do not cure it, it will affect a vein in the back of the foot, and go towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves;
and cause blood to flow until you see it, and then untie the ligature, and place cotton on top and press upon it; it is now healed.
Bleeding from cupping
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or bronze, or glass; and cupping is performed according to two methods: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
And this farting which is without pain occurs in two ways: either it is with fire, or without fire;
and two others are on either side of the neck; and the ventouse under the chin; and the cupping glasses on both shoulders; and the cupping glasses on the nape of the neck; and the cupping glasses on both arms; and the cupping glasses on both legs; and the cupping glasses on both ankles; and the bloodletting does not treat any major veins, except for the small veins that are scattered throughout the body,
and because of this, one is not weakened, as with bloodletting from a vein; and it must not be administered, neither with any fire nor sensation of heat, in any disease that arises from fullness, until the whole body has been purged.
And if by necessity of illness it is required to bleed, or due to habit, then we administer it every hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in between and at all times;
because there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
and others who experience fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and some who experience a drop of blood in their mouths, and have swollen tongues, and bleed. and if there are those who faint, and see nothing but blackness and darkness and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially if it is during the month, we command them to fast after the third hour of the day.
Bleeding from the nose helps with headaches ... that come from the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this venting if it is in the place of the bleeding of the cephalic
and those who are of a cold complexion or have catarrh should not use it because it does them great harm;
and for this reason the elderly should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
And those who heal themselves frequently, become oblate, and because of this, one should place the leech lower down for fear of oblate.
Ventilation in the neck is located at the junction of the head and basilic veins, and for this reason it is effective for constriction of the feet. It is also effective for fissures in the esophagus, for toothache, and for swelling.
It should not be used too vigorously, as it can cause injury to the throat, stomach, or heart.
Ventilation at the two collar bones of the neck is effective for headaches, eye pain, and toothache, and for constriction, and for pain in the roots of the teeth:
and it is in the sanctuary of the basilica; and you must command the surgeon to express his hand in putting it, so that he does not grasp the artery, and does not come blood flow.
The windings under the chin are good for mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar diseases which are in the mouth; and it is in the sanctuary of the two lips.
The windings on the shoulders are good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
The windings on the armpits are as good as three veins in the arm, for it draws blood from those large veins;
and instruct the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, for beneath the skin there are nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass placed on the nape of the neck is useful for hemorrhoids and diseases below, and it should be a large cup made of copper, which it needs to effectively draw out blood; and if it were thin, it might break and cause large wounds.
Cupping glasses on the legs heal very effectively, as they draw blood from the entire body, and are good for treating long-standing pains in the joints, the hips, and the bladder, and they relax the body in various conditions. They are placed at the .ij. sophenes, that is, the .ij. ankles, and yet they weaken the body after a long time, and bring on fainting in some people.
The way to apply the suction cup is that you first place it empty, and gently suck, and apply it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the area become red and swollen, and the redness of blood appears; then let go, and re-apply the suction cups, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have very thick skin and clear pores: one must strike only once, and one should make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to strike .ii times: the first time to open the path of the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw blood a little at a time, we only need to strike once.Car li sans espés ne se traist pas en un coup, si est il necessaire de ferir la tierce fois.
And if we want a lot of blood, we should strike repeatedly; and if the vein is thick, we strike deeply, and the endings are that the heart is pierced suddenly,And se nos voulons traire le sang par la costé del corps, si convint que la ventouse soit mise sus li coté del corps et li culot de la ventouse si soit mis sus li sans; et si covient que li culots de la ventouse soit si lonc que il cuide li sans, car il est plus espés ke les autrs sans.
And it befits those who have tough and hard skin, and those whose pores are narrow, to anoint the places for cupping glasses with an oil that is aperitive and dissolvent. If in the fall, use oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of squash seed.
And if it's in the winter, use oil of watercress, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take oil of amarant, or of balsam, or dill oil, and the like.
And if one whose skin is tender and has large pores, then no oil should be applied to it.
but it should be washed afterward with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar.
And those who have a lot of moisture, if they rise from parsley, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses should rise from old wine, or sorrel water, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things;
and it is not appropriate to bleed with a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and do not sleep after having been bled,
and it is appropriate that he washes himself when he should be bled and when he has been bled. And beware of those who are bleeding who are choleric, and if the blood is too aguish and inflamed; if it is necessary that he eats cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce with garlic, and similar things;
and eating little, and ash from a fireplace, and moist foods.
And for those with a cold complexion, let them drink honey syrup and mild aromatic wine that is in between old and new, and ash from a fireplace, and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day that he vomits, he should drink more than he eats;
and it is necessary to give some men a little triacle or musk before or after the vomiting, to strengthen the principal members; and temper the wine, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Leeching that is performed without bleeding are those placed on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the gout, and on the stomach and the groin and the hips, because these members cannot bear bleeding on their own.
and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we put leeches on the breasts when the nipples are sore; to reduce swelling in a member, as we put leeches on the stomach and groin to shrink the member;
and removes the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, it removes by its attractive power the obstruction, or drives away the stone from its place;
and so does this one when placed over the liver and the stomach when there is retained flatulence,
and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water,
as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way one fills the cupping glass with warm water, or water in which herbs suitable for this have been boiled.
The form of the fire cupping is as follows:
And it has two inches of width and a half palm of depth, and on the edge all around in the middle there is a small hole, as well as for pushing through a needle,
and it should be made of iron, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
and in the middle there is a crossbar of iron or steel, for holding a candle,
and they are both large and small according to the illnesses and age of those who take them;
because the cupping glasses for children are different from those for the elderly, and for the thin compared to the fat.
And it should thus be placed on the member:
take a candle of wax or .i. lining, and place it within the cupping glass through the rod which is within the cupping glass, so that the heat is at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and your fingers should be on the hole that we mentioned, so that when one wishes, the vapor escapes, and then remove the cupping glass;
and use the liniment as before, and repeat it frequently if necessary.
In the cupping glass which is administered for pleurisy, for all types of pain, there is no hole or opening, and it is not applied until the pain is full and placed on the limb only slightly;
and this is the form:
Leeches are not applied except in parts where cupping-glasses cannot be placed due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and on bare flesh, such as anus or nipples, and others like them;
and the quality of their use is that when you apply leeches which are in clean, clear water without any scent, they will attach themselves;
and puts them in fresh water, until they become familiar, and have no more wind in their bellies; then he should be bled from a vein and cupped, then the limb should be rubbed until it turns red, and leeches are placed on it;
and when they are swollen and start to bite, if there is a place where one can apply a cupping glass, then it should be applied, for this is much better.
If not, then the area around the eye should be raised, and then with water, very well, and then it is squeezed;
and if the wound is too close to the body of the snake, wet a linen cloth in cold water and place it over the wound until the swelling goes down;
and if the bites are multiple, apply powdered vitriol or similar substances over the bites until the swelling goes down;
or you can place half-boiled peas on the site, and leave them until they cool down, which will stop the bleeding immediately;
and if you need more, catch more snakes.
And if the leeches will not stick, then rub the area with fresh blood, or push a needle into it until the leech sucks out the blood, and then place them on the wound, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach themselves;
and when you see that they are excreting, then sprinkle some powdered aloe, or ashes, on them and they will stop bleeding immediately.
Here begins the book of fractures.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the foolish people are frightened of this chapter, which they have never seen in any ancient books or letters.
And for this reason, the knowledge is strange in our land, for I never found a good one.
And I don't know anything about it, except through the knowledge of ancient books, and I have studied it so much that I have gained expertise, and through experimentation, and by habituation in my lifetime;
I have described in this chapter what is contained within, and summarised it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in the previous two chapters.
Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book the sums of the matter and the chapters in which the sage places his understanding, and dwells upon their truth, so that those who have experience know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a break or dislocation or twisting or fracture occurs in someone, you must hurry to heal the patient from both sides, if there is nothing else preventing it, such as weakness of the body, or old age.
nor eat very cold foods, nor too cold; and eat chilled foods, that is to say chilled joints, and deer and hare meat, and drink no wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill himself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of a hot abscess or spreading of matter in the limb; then let the patient return to his first treatment.
When the broken bone begins to heal, the patient should be nourished with foods that promote swelling or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, pigs' feet, pig's belly, eggs, fresh fish, and full-bodied wine, and similar things. Because with such nourishing the swelling will subside and the break will heal more quickly.
And know that broken bones of the elderly and the frail cannot heal well or join back together according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of small children;
but do not worry, reset the broken bone. Take the large tendons that connect and join the limb together, forcing it as it was before; and do not stop its work, and for this, one must nourish it with rich foods, as we have said.
And you should know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different than the fracture of the foot, or of the leg; and in this chapter I will tell you about all types of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another that is only skin deep, like the cut of a quill pen for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another that is only skin deep, like the cut of a quill pen for writing. And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture that is just a small crack.
And for each manner there is its own method and proper instrument in restoration, according to what memory comes into place.
And it is known that the bone is broken because its location is twisted and becomes visible through displacement, and it sounds hollow when pressed by hand.
And when there is no twisting or sound when touched, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
But it may have twisting, or cracking, or a small fracture.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. It is not advisable to move it by hand, but apply remedies that come later, and then hold it firmly but gently now.
And know that the fracture which goes to the bone, and the two parts are disjoined, they should now be put back in place evenly, so that no abscesses form there.
And if abscesses form, let them remain for one day until the abscesses are soothed. Then reset it as gently and thoroughly as possible, for the restoration of this fracture is easier than that of a broken bone; then hold it firmly, as instructed below.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, it should be set with two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or one hand if it is a small member, or with two cords, or with one cord and one hand;
and place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are set right, you should then reset it with all your skill, and be careful that your treatment does not cause injury or pain;
and adjust the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel it with your hand if it doesn't seem right; then set it straight, but don't over-tighten or press too hard as those who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb by their treatment, as we have seen many times.
And when the member is at its worst, then treat the patient well so that he does not move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and be sure that the member is secure so that he feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, then it is not at its worst, and you should put him in such a position that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, then it is not at its worst, and you should put him in such a position that he feels no pain; and be sure that he is placed straight, so that no crookedness comes to him when he is restored;
and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I have told you.
Know that broken limbs vary in size, shape, and appearance.
Because there are small limbs, such as fingers and toes and similar parts: one should wrap them with soft, thin linen.
And for larger limbs, such as the thigh and leg: one should use a broad, sturdy bandage, because broad bandages embrace the entire large limb and constrict it evenly all around, so that no swelling remains.
then lightly wind bandages around it three or four times depending on the limb, and hold your hand tightly against all the joint, then go above the dislocation and hold less tightly, so that the dislocation is then slightly separated.
and gently loosen the joint a little at a time, until you grasp most of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wind it around the dislocated area again.
then go to the area below the dislocation and hold it gently, not too tightly or too loosely, as we have said above in the first bandage.
then place between the bandages of linen or cloth until they are all even, then bind it all together with a bandage, and then put your splints on well, if there is an abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something hot on the abscess that eases the swelling, and leave it like this for a few days.
Then stretch it out on a flat surface, and take half of a broad cane that bleeds, or of a wooden stick used for making wooden shoes, or of palm wood, and cut them according to this shape:
but the block that one places under the break should be a little larger and wider than the others;
and it should also be as long as necessary for the limb, either small or large;
then press on the stars as you did at first, then tie a thread over it properly, just as you did at first over the fracture.
the tighter it is tied, the better; and the thread must be medium thickness, not too thin or too thick, and it should be soft flax.
Because if the thread is thick, as I have seen foolish people make their knots with twisted flaxen cords, and that is a great error, because the knot cannot be even if it is too thin; and there should not be less than a finger's width between each star.
And if the patient is nervous because of the stars after the pressing in their healthy areas, then put under them flaxen lint or linen rags so that it does not hurt.
When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment below.
And you should know that it is not advisable to manipulate all broken bones on the first day. Because when a bone is large, it should not be set until after five or seven days, or more depending on the heat of the abscess;
and here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twistings: take flour from the walls of the mill, and mix it with egg white, and use this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and it is the common way of the plaster that restores fractures in many dispositions, and also in women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another method of plaster to heal fractures and dislocations and twists: take 3 parts of lard and ladani and elecampane and assafetida and gum arabic and mastic, each at 10 parts; myrrh and aloe, each at 5 parts; and aloes, at 8 parts. Grind them to powder and mix with egg white; if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition and heals broken bones quickly, and it benefits many people.
Another method of plaster that works for twists: take mastic and viscud, each at 10 parts; myrrh and aloe, each at 8 parts; and aconite at 6 parts; burn the Armenian bole and add it, grinding well and mixing with water or egg white, then apply.
Another method of plaster for joints and bones that have been dislocated from their place, which soothes the pain and reduces swelling: take new lamb's wool, moisten it in ass's milk and cooked oil, and apply to the affected area. This plaster does not heal, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and reducing pain.Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a brisure et dislocation: pren mugat et vismalve, ana  .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana  .viii. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.
Another method of plaster that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and ground ivy leaves and grind them together to make a plaster.Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut as dislocation, et restoure le leu: pren mugat et vismalve, ana  .x.   ; mirre et aloes, ana  .viii.  ; acaice vi.  ; bolic armenic x.  , et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.
Another method of plaster for the healing of broken bones and to reduce swelling from an abscess. Take one part each of marshmallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, and barley flour; grind and cook with wine. If the limb is hot, cook it with moist coriander water or water, then use it.
Another method of plaster, stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take one part each of marshmallow root, flax seed, borage, melilot, and sansel, and violet and chamomile flowers; grind and cook with salt water, or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the limb and its comfort.
Hyposurgeon writes in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to heal it except for a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be between soft and too hard.Et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs. Et s’il adveint qu’il soit trop sec, metez y oile; et s’il est trop moli, metez y cire; et si la brisure est grande, qu’on ne puet restorer, qu’on fasse cerote de cire et d’oile, et qu’on le broie tres fins, et qu’on y mette poudres d’armonie et de sante, et de violete, et qu’on le met sus la brisure, et qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.
And it seems that Galen says that one should put on the broken limb, for healing, dry things that are slightly warm, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have said.Et dist galien qu’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit. Et s’il adveint que la brisure soit granz et profont, dist galien qu’on doit mettre sus la brisure cerote de cire et d’oile, et qu’on le broie tres fins, et qu’on y mette poudres d’armonie et de sante, et de violete, et qu’on le met sus la brisure.
Another method of ointment that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair, or bird feathers, and tallow, and mix them together, and grind them, and make an ointment out of it and apply it.
And then loosen it a little after, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if not, loosen it by hand after several days.
And if pain comes to the area, or itching, feeling restless or swelling, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the ointment immediately; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea moisture, and dip it in water, and apply it to the area until the itching ceases, and the pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour, then place it on dry straw, moistened with water or rose oil, and lay it on a fire until you are sure of a hot abscess;
and the inflammation of the limb subsides, and the pain is relieved, then resume the subtle cautery, and apply a small amount of ointment, and do not pull as hard as before; and with subtlety until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is closed and red and painful and swollen all over, and you need ointment and bandages, then resume it, just as you did at first.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the member, do not remove it for more than 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and the bone approaches the flesh above.
then reduce it more than before, and increase the amount of food, as I have said before; and if you see the site drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come to it. arise from hot water, every time you loosen it, and this should be done every third day, and loosen a little the bandage;
through this work, the swelling in the limb decreases, and gently corrects what the fools do, who restore the limb crookedly: it is malicious, and there are no other results than laziness and doing it properly.
of the various methods of breaking There are many ways to break, and different shapes, and the causes are distinguished;
for it has fractures which are made by the impact of a sword, and the collar bone is broken all the way to the shoulder blade which is beneath the bone, just as with an axe or a pole; and because of this type of fracture, this manner of break is called "shoulder fracture."
Or the sword strikes the bone without penetrating, and is called this type of fracture  "absolute"; and there are great or small wounds from these two fractures.
And if there is a strike with the flat of the sword, or a cut, or from the collar bone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
And if there is a fracture that penetrates, which approaches the membrane beneath the bone, or is on top of the bone; this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound is lodged in the bone as subtly as a hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary";
and if the wound is made by stone or by falling, or by a similar object, and drives the bone piece inside, and the site is shaved as the blacksmiths do when they work on the boilers; then the stone enters inside.
And this happens more often in those with moist skull bones, such as an infant's skull;
and it happens in all these ways of fracturing that the small pieces are separated, just like tiles; and I will speak about them in their place.
And we know all kinds of fractures by their deformity, and by the inquiry into the tent, and by the corruption of the flesh that is above it.
The hairline fracture is known because when the bone is uncovered and rubbed on top, the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, pay attention to the accidents of the illness; and if you see no malicious accident, such as vomiting of phlegm, loss of consciousness, extension, paralysis, fever, eyes popping out and turning red, and other similar things in various dispositions, then it can heal without a doubt.
And if you see no shocking accident, and you expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the baby comes to you first, and it is in winter, you should remove the foreskin before the fourteenth day when you can.
And if it is in the summer, you should hasten to remove the foreskin before the seventh day, so that the skin under the foreskin does not become corrupted, and so that the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
And if the break in the bone reaches just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the wounded part thus: you should press on the head of the injured baby and expose above the bone in every way you can, and over the shape of the wound more gently than you can.
and if bleeding comes when exposing the bone, or a hot abscess, then aid with what it needs, and you must fill the place with wet rags in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the hot abscess is soothed and you are sure there is no more bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this can be done in two ways. One way is that you cut tightly in front, and the form is:
And then make another cut larger than the first.
And the second way is to have various cuts, some narrow and some wide, with points, made of iron. Work gently so you do not hurt the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, you must pierce around it, so that you use cuts with chisels, not so deep that they go through the bone into the brain; and you must have a margin or circle above the point to prevent the tip from going through the bone. You should have several of these, so that each one comes in its turn to the thickness of the bone, and you should have chisels for all parts of the skull. And there are three ways to make these chisels:
The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place .i. probe on the bone and move your hand back and forth until you feel the bone is pierced; then move the probe elsewhere a little later, and do the same all around. Then cut into the space between the perforations with an incision, doing this as subtly and lightly as you can, as we have said, until you draw out the bone by hand or with one of your instruments, such as tongs or tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, it is appropriate that you resect the sharpness that remains on the bone with any suitable instrument like an incision tool, but it should be more blunt and more subtle than other incision tools.
And if anything remains of the small bones or any shards, remove them gently with one of your instruments; then dress the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is much safer; and he highly praises it, and his word is final. First, you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is open and moving. Once you have uncovered that part, place under it the cutting edge of this lens-shaped instrument, which is its shape:
Do not cut from one side only, but the part is pointed in two directions so that the cutting edge is towards the bone. Then hit gently with a small mallet all around the bone, being careful not to cut into the membrane underneath;
if it sticks to the bone, gently loosen it, for the bone can be loosened without harm or fear.
And if the fracture does not penetrate through to the membrane, and the bone is cut only slightly from above, with small pieces, then one must remove this roughness, and take away the scales with a very fine rasp of which you should have various sizes, in order to smooth each part according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you use a large razor at first, and then a finer one afterwards, and do not stop doing this until it is done well.
In each of the other hair-cutting and subtlety techniques, you should apply it according to its purpose; and this is something that has not yet been answered for those who have dedicated their studies to this art.
And if the wound is exposed, you should spread a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another doubled cloth, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can so that you don't burden the wound, then administer another bandage over it, and don't tighten it more than necessary so that it only holds the wound;
and let it be thus for one or two days until the abscesses are suppurated, then loosen it, and administer remedies such as larkspur roots, and flour of beans, and incense powder, and aristology, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer remedies without biting;
and watch that the wound be clean, that you do not leave ointment in it, nor let any pus collect, for when pus collects on the brain membrane, it hardens and pierces, causing great harm to the patient; for when one applies something biting to the brain, it pierces through.
Take care therefore, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, that it is without doubt.
And if blackness does not come from the medicine that one has applied, as we have said, then take some honey and mix with it three parts of rose oil, and glue a cloth to it, and place it on the wound; then treat with suitable treatments until he is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose are broken, or one part alone, for they are two bones; and beneath is cartilage, which does not break but only bends or twists, then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should put your little finger or a probe into the nostril, and place the break inside your index finger, and hold it in place with your thumb, until the nose heals according to its natural shape; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
If the fracture is above the nose, and the bones cannot be aligned, then you must place it evenly at the end of a rather thick thread.
And if the fracture is in two parts, do the same, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses are healed, then attach to the end of the nose a tent made of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you attach one to another part, if the fracture is there; and the tents should be so thick that they fill the holes in the nose.
And some restorers say that one should wet the tents with butter and change them every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but they should be moistened in the preparation of egg white and flour; then leave the tent as long as the bone is soft, and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes they put in goose feathers instead of tents, and wrap around with a thin cloth, and keep the fracture still, and the patient breathes among them; now do what you wish.
And if hot abscesses come to the nose while you are working on it, then put cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a little diaquilon.
And if hot abscesses do not come, then apply a plaster by fire, of flour of saramond, and incense powder, confectioned with egg white, then put on light bandages, and do not ligature the nose.
and if the fracture of the bone is small and it is broken into small pieces, then extract with suitable instruments, then close the wound, and treat with warming things such as plasters and ointments.
and if there is no wound within the bone, then treat it with tenting and insert splinters of wood until it is healed.
of a broken jaw:
When the jaw is broken underneath and there is no open wound, and the break is only on the surface and not broken in two, one can know it easily.
It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right side, for you to put your right index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left jaw, then put your right index finger of the right hand, and put the fracture inside gently, and make it equal with the other hand by force.
And if the fracture of the jaw is displaced in .ii., then you must administer an extension of .i. parts, so that it is equalized.
And if there is movement of the teeth, or chipping, then they must be restrained with a wire of gold, silver, or silk; then put cerotum on the broken jaw, and place a .i. double drape on it; and place upon the drape a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather equal in size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it onto the mouth as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
And if you see that the jaw is changing shape, then loosen it on the third day and then reset it to its original state; and place cerotum upon it again, of the powder from the mill with egg white or flour of sisament, after you have removed the previous cerotum; and place over the cerotum a light lining, and if the linings become sore, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it takes to heal; many times it heals within 3 weeks.
And if a hot abscess comes, then administer what we have said many times before.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine to see if any piece of bone has been dislodged; then remove it skillfully with suitable instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, dilate it with flame according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then close the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing.
of the forceps The forceps breaks in several ways in front of the shoulder, and the break occurs in 3 ways: it can be broken and dislocated in two parts, which is the easiest to restore; or there can be a break with a wound.
And the operation is as follows when the break is without a wound: you need two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder where the forceps is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the affected part; then with your fingers, put the broken pieces back into alignment, so that the joint is in the correct position, with no misalignment or displacement.
And if you need to extend it further, place a round pillow of cloth or linen underneath the shoulder, and make it as thick as necessary; then raise the forceps and hold the pillow in your hand, so that you put the broken pieces back into alignment, as they should be.
And if you cannot pull out the head of the dislocated shoulder, because it comes up very tightly, then the patient should lie on his back, and put something under the shoulder, an ear, and the assistant pushes the shoulder down while pulling the arm upward, until the bone of the shoulder is dislodged.
Then you must feel for the fracture with your fingers, and if it is stuck, then you must split it open; and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined due to swelling, then apply this instrument under the shoulder to draw out the fluid.
It should be shaped like a spoon, not sharp, and as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the extent of the wound; it should have two prongs, one wide and the other narrow, according to the nature of the wound you made when pulling the bones.
And when you are sure of a hot abscess, close the wound, and if the opening is small, or if you doubt a hot abscess, dress the wound with bandages and tents according to its size.
And if hot abscesses appear, moisten a cloth in rose oil and garlic and wine, and place it on top.
The stretching of the bone, when it is without wounds and without incision, is that you place on the bone the plaster made from mill dust and egg white, and put light sponges on top, and place a sphere underneath the sore, if you need it; Then take a very wide band of about a palm's width, then place a double cloth on the sponges and plaster; then take a thin spatula about two digits wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down; and place the spatula on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the sick armpit; and adjust it from each end, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture in place satisfactorily, and you clearly see that the spatula is not moving above the broken bone, then release it gradually;
let the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, place a small pillow under his shoulder to raise the shoulder joint; thus the fracture of the collarbone will be relieved by the alignment of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless an accident happens, for up to 20 days.
then restart the poultice, if you see that he needs it, and keep him thus, until he is healed; and it is healed in most people in 28 days, and less in some.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
It can happen that the shoulder is broken or dislocated, and it does not hurt unless touched; then adjust it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can; then apply powdered flour with egg white, and light bandages, and place it on a double cloth; then put on a large and thin splint, slightly larger than the shoulder, and if there is swelling anywhere on the shoulder, then apply that swelling with linen bandages so that the splint sits evenly; then bind it tightly with a large bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the bandage every day; and each time it loosens, bind it again, and adjust the splint if it has moved out of place, and have the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is healed in 20 to 25 days. And when these numbers of days are completed, then unbind it, and be careful, for it is not a bone that sets easily.
And if a part of the bone protrudes forward, and not beneath the heart, they should push it up, and the bone, and do as we said in the breaking of the forceps to soothe the hot abscess.
of the breaking of the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but that rarely happens; but it often breaks at the tip. And when it is broken in the middle, it declines to the bottom, and causes great pain for the patient, and loss of skin, and swelling, and vomiting blood, and the wound opens in the broken bone, which feels painful to the touch.
And the treatment is that the patient lies on his back, and places a cushion between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders together, and joins the ribs with his hands, ensuring that the bone is set correctly in all ways; then applies plasters and bandages over the wound below, using a subtle mixture of salt or other light substance, and wraps it in a cloth, placing it over the broken bone so that it does not move; then he winds the bandage around the body, and tightens it gently, and checks every hour if it has loosened, and if it has, he tightens it; and if it needs to be removed due to corrosion or itching or pain or abscess, he should hurry and remove it, cleaning what has come from the wound in various ways of treatment; then he reapplies the plaster and tightens it until it is healed.
of the fracture of the ribs
Know that rib fractures only occur in the large ones near the back, and in the chest near the head, and they only bend because they are slippery; and one can tell [this] well through examination of the two sides.
And the treatment is that you set the fracture evenly, as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a cloth, if you need to.
And if the rib fracture is declining towards the interior, then the patient feels great pain and stabbing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and also has a cough, and coughs up a large quantity of blood, and it is a serious illness, and the ancients placed great importance on it.
And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, to push the fracture out.
We do not do this, unless hot abscesses come to it, if they have not come to it already. And if it has come to it, then heal it.
And some say that one should put cupping glasses on the area to draw out the excess fluids, and this is reasonable; however, there is a risk that the cupping glass will attract the excess fluids due to the weakness of the body.
And some say that one should cover the area with soft lamb's wool soaked in hot oil, and place a tent between the ribs to ensure even pressure all around, then it should be bandaged with bandages of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone which jabs at the tent, and there is doubt in the patient, then one should split above the broken rib, and one must put an instrument underneath to draw out the arrowhead; and then the bone should be cut and gently pulled out, and then the two lips of the wound sewn together if it is large, and bandaged with poultices until healed. And if a hot abscess forms, one should place soaked cloths in rose oil over the area, and while treating the area where the abscess should be, let the patient lie carefully on his side where the abscess is, until it is healed.
from the fracture of the neck:
Sometimes there is a fracture in the bones of the neck, and it can be bent; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if he will be cured or not, pay attention if his hands are soft, swollen, and dead-feeling, and he cannot move them or straighten them out; and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortally ill in many conditions, and if he feels nothing and experiences no pain when the joints are pressed and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and the illness will be cured if appropriate care is given to him.
And if a similar condition affects the spine, and you want to know if he will be cured or not, pay attention if his feet are swollen, and if the effects that occur in the hands also affect him; and on his back there is windiness and involuntary bowel movements; and when he is pressed on his stomach, there are involuntary bowel movements. And when he is pressed on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that this is deadly: do not exert yourself in treating him.
And if these effects do not occur, then the condition is less severe.
And if there is an abscess, apply warm rose oil or hen's egg oil to the spine until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bandage it with a linen cloth; and command the patient to rest, and not sleep on the painful side until he is cured. And if any bone is dislocated, you should cover it with the heart; and take out the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat the wound with ointment mixed with chalk, until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the 'head of the cow', fill your poultice-bag with your left hand, and place it equally in your other hand at your will, then apply the plaster and the bandage on top of it, if you need to; then tie it tightly, and if there is a bone dislocated, do the same, take it out, and treat the wound until it heals.
of the fracture of the hip bone
It sometimes happens that the hip bone is fractured, and if it does, there will be a slight depression at the head; and they feel long and inclined to one side, and the patient feels pain in the area, and there is tenderness and swelling where it is broken.
And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it, so that you are on the break; and know which is the upper and lower part of the fracture; and if the fracture is only at the head, then place that fracture evenly, so that it is in its natural shape.Et se ele est au bas, si doit estre sous, et se ele est a l’un costé, si doit estre sous, et ne doit pas estre sur le chief, tant qu’ele soit sanée; car celi qui sont desous doivent estrendre cele qui sont sus, et non pas contrer.
If the fracture is long, or if it slopes downward, have the patient lie on his stomach until the healing of that fracture is prepared for. And when you have set it straight, put on the poultice, then put on a splint of wood or of horn, and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and apply the bandage below the ribs, until the limb is set straight.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
And if painful bumps arise, do not touch them until the painful bumps are soothed, and apply what we have mentioned before; then return to the healing, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad occurrence; and that is the way.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The adjutoires is that which is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to either of two methods; one of which is to take a rod of medium thickness, in this shape:
Tie the two ends with cords and raise them up high, and have the patient sit on a seat; then let him hang his broken arm over the rod, until it comes to rest, and hold in place with a bend in the rod; then have him lie down on something heavy so that another person can stretch the arm downward; then have the helper place the dislocation back into alignment with their hands together, until it is as it should be.
And the other method is to have the patient lean on his elbow, and tie his hand to his neck; then have one minister hold what is above the dislocation in their hands, and the other minister hold beneath the dislocation, at each end of the rod, and stretch each end in opposite directions.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then compress .1 under the fracture, and over the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to his part. And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder, then you should put .1 string gently under the socket, and .1 other towards the neck, under the fracture; and likewise if the fracture is towards the neck, then it is necessary to put .1 string lightly, without labor, until the fracture is equal on the spot, and on the neck; then put the fracture equally, as it should be, and compress it, if warm abscesses do not come.
And if warm abscesses come, then do not compress it until the 7th day, and put soft lamb's wool in oil of roses on the warm abscesses, until they are relieved; then compress, and the way to compress is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm above the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the bandage, and compress on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in place of stars, if nothing deflects it, or if the bone is not displaced.
And if you doubt that the bone is displaced, then use stars, and put a larger and stronger star on the fracture, and have between each star 1 finger of space, and let each star be as large that it passes the fracture by 3 fingers on each side; then compress over the stars, thus as I said at the beginning of the chapter, over the fracture, more strongly and less by moving away.Et si li briseure est vers le coute, si covient que tu mettes la main sus l’espaule, et l’autre main sus lou col, et use d’esteles plus forts sus lou bras, et sus l’ajutoire, ou se li os est brisez; puis estrain sus les esteles, en alant devers le chief, et que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent.
And if you see the setting of the bones, and the stretching, as we have said, at the time that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, then leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the bandage every three days, so that itching or swelling does not come to the site, or the pus cannot reach the member because it is too tight. Then loosen it, as we have said.
And if no such accident occurs, then loosen the bandage after three days or more; and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and place underneath the shoulder a cushion of equal wool, and examine every hour during the day and night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or the bandage become soft; then loosen it through the power of medicine, and give him the food we have previously mentioned, so that the food is in the first subtleties; and when he begins to recover, make the food thicker. It is customary for the shoulder and arm to be reset within 40 days; then one must loosen it and administer baths and medicines of ointments to straighten the site. And if the stricture is ugly and swollen, let it remain loosened for 1 day or 2 months.
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the 'ulna', one of which is small, and it follows the armpit; and the other is large, and it is located under the little finger towards the hand; sometimes only the large ulna breaks, or the small one, and sometimes both.
When the small ulna is broken, its restoration and healing are easy; but when the large ulna is broken, healing is more difficult and painful than when both are broken together. If it's only the small ulna that is broken, one should gently straighten it and set it in alignment.
And if it's the large ulna that is broken, one should straighten it with more force; and extend his affected arm onto .i. cushion, and let his hand hang down lower than the other hands, and cross his affected leg over his other leg, and place .i. cushion in front of him so he doesn't have to labor too much; then extend his minister's arms up and down, or left and right, as needed. Then, the surgeon should set the bone straight according to its best shape.
And if the bone has broken into pieces, place each one in its proper position; and if any have become dislocated, and you cannot restore them to their places, then cut through the bone, as we have described earlier.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it specifically in this chapter; so take the cure.
And if in the beginning of the healing abscesses arise, apply a poultice of a cerate made of rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and lay a bandage over it gently, until the abscesses are soothed. Then remove the cerate, and apply the plaster of the mill-powder with an egg, then put on the splints, and let the splint for the fracture be a little stronger and wider than the others; and understand that there must be six splints on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one or both bones. And press harder upon the fracture than elsewhere, decreasing the pressure over time as I have said at the beginning of this chapter. Let the bandages over the fracture be soft and moist, neither hard nor rough; and let the thread used to tie them be made of linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said. Then examine the member and the binding after a few days. And if some bad accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you must wash the member with warm water until the itching is soothed; and let the member rest without binding. Then begin the binding again, and if the bindings are relaxed and the bones separated, or any other thing, then adjust it.
And if one must guard against the nutrients not being able to reach the member because it is too bound up, then one must loosen it a little and leave it thus for some days, until the nutrients flow to it, and then bind it again.
And if none of the things that we have said come to the patient, then do not loosen it until twenty days have passed, or until there is improvement around the site; then he may lay his hands on his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is healed in thirty days, or perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that in the back of the hand and on the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from many foldings.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or folded, then the patient should bend his hand, and keep it straight in front of him evenly; then he should put his hand on the stretched cloth, and stretch the broken bones, and put them together evenly, and then apply the plaster and poultices, if there are no abscesses, and then put on a splint according to the amount of the break; and let it be wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the fracture is in the peritoneum around the abdomen of the plant, make a sponge, and instruct the patient to squeeze it at the site of the broken plant; then squeeze it with a long strip of cloth, and let the mark of the burn be as large as the palm of the hand, and squeeze it as it should be.
And if the fracture is in the forearm, you must put a splint on top and another underneath the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
And if the fracture is in any of the fingers, if it is the thumb, put it in a cast, as it should be; and squeeze it with the palm, and see if you put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and do not move it; and if the fracture is in one of the other fingers, like the index finger or one of the others, put it in a cast, and bind it with the healthy finger that is next to it; either tie them all together while holding them, or put a splint on top, as in the thumb; take care with the healing and the preparation of a hot abscess, and treat any pus that comes out, as I have said.
of the broken thigh
The thighbone is often broken, and one can see it well when it turns forward and backward; its restoration is by binding with a ligature above the fracture, and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then each assistant stretches their band to their side equally; and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one band should be towards the buttock, and the other band below the fracture. And similarly, if it is near the knee, then the band should be towards the knee, and the extension should be downward; then the surgeon puts the bone back into its natural position with his two hands, and then he applies the ointment and the bandage, unless an abscess forms there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside first and then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is done in this way. You should wrap a bandage around the fracture—a tough, doubled bandage two or three times—and then tie off the excess, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and thread a long string between the thigh and the leg, just below the knee, and let the end of the string come out on top; then turn the bandage back over the leg and thigh, then place splints over the fracture, and put one splint over the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft strips of cloth to even out the pressure, then begin to bind the fracture firmly three or four times; and the higher up you go on the fracture, the looser the binding should be; then tie off the two ends of the string that you threaded between the leg and the thigh, and then bring the splints that are on top down to the bottom at the end of the string, so that the pressure is even and does not move from its place, then leave it thus until no swelling or abscess or anything similar comes.
And if anything happens to it, then loosen it and address whatever arises, as we have said many times before; and if there is a bone splinter that pokes out, it should be removed, if possible; and if not, then the area should be split open and the wound cleansed, as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in this way with splints, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, the malady is not cured by this method of restoration.
And you shall know that the neck is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the variety of complexions.
of the fold of the knee
You shall know that in the fold of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a slit, or a hole, and it happens with and without a wound, and it feels good to everyone.
And the restoration is to put something equal to what is torn from his fingers, as long as it can be reassembled; then put on the plaster, and if necessary, put a round bandage, and adjust it as needed; then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar things; then put on whatever is needed for each accident, until he is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is properly called the "mustelz", and the other is called the "foscile"; and all other fractures occur as they do in the arm, and therefore their treatment is similar to that of the arm, and the operations are the same.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns completely inside out.
And if only the small bones are broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly; and it turns underneath. Therefore administer extension, and make it equal, and bind the splints equally; but nonetheless, if the break is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust it according to your skill.
And when you have finished your work, take two wooden splints that prop up the leg on both sides, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wrap two bands around it above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this time the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and so it is well; and some administer a board as long as the leg, and they put the leg on it to prevent movement, and properly they apply it in the break where there is injury; and move the leg each day, to see if there is a hot abscess or any other accident; and treat it until it is healed.
of the break of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no break, but sometimes there is a break in the bones of the foot and in both feet, and there is only bruising in various ways.
If it happens that the bones of the foot are broken and you see the bones protruding, then put the sore foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are protruding, then press down until they return to their places; then apply the ointment and bandages on top, and under the belly of the foot place a small wooden board that is two fingers wide, then bind it to the foot in the proper way, then wrap it with clothes and other things as needed.
And after three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find that the bones are healed, whether broken or dislocated.
And if one or both of the toes are broken, set them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint on the broken toe according to its length, and let it be slightly wider, then place under the foot that wooden board which I mentioned earlier, and bind it in place; and if there are one or two, or more, broken toes, place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the board underneath the foot; and let the top of the board press firmly against the belly of the foot.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from which we have spoken; and treat each case as it should be treated.
of the fracture of the bone of the finger
When a woman's bone is broken, make her sit with her back bent, and hold her from behind; then fill the vagina with cotton, and put in as many beans as will fit; then make the woman stand up, and gently lift her back little by little, and the beans and cotton will come out with the bone; and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, replace it, and do this for seven days. Then the fracture will be healed. Or take a goat's bladder, attach a tube to the opening, fill the bladder with air by blowing into the tube, and the bone will return to its place; then fill it with cotton, and leave it for several days until it heals.
And when the finger bone of a man or woman is broken, it is healed in the same way as we have said for the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their knowledge and understanding to them, and who study my book. For the fractures have many possible dispositions, and the right way to heal them is described herein. Listen therefore:
When the penis is broken, take a goose's gullet and insert it into the penis; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh or shoulder bone or similar, that he be bled immediately, in accordance with the bleeding we have described earlier.
And if the wound bleeds, then add vitriol again, if you have nothing else; then reset the fracture in that same hour or day, if no abscesses form.
And if abscesses form, then wait until the third day to reset the fracture, as long as the abscesses are subsiding; do not touch them on the second or fourth day, for you would cause a dangerous accident.
And if the broken bone is visible beneath the uncovered chest, you should gently place it in its proper position with your hands, with a slight extension.
And if the extension is not apparent to you in placing it evenly by hand, then reset it with this instrument made of iron which is seven or eight inches long, and its width depends on the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary that the surgeon has three or four, depending on how many he needs for each treatment of a fracture; and let it be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure during your work on the limb, and let it be thin at the end, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called a «palainche», because the curved head of the bone should be placed under the visible end of the bone; and press it down once, so that it springs back, and is even with the other. And if the fracture is small, and the instrument cannot grip the bone well, then you must cut the end of the bone so that the instrument can hold it.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, either an incision or a saw, to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone of sharp points and small splinters.
And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do this until it is in its place, then wet a cloth with black, acidic wine, and apply it neatly to the area; and do not put any ointment or other substance on the wound which would cause pus and corruption. Then administer these remedies once you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the surrounding area according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted by the binding; and many fools have done this, causing death or corrosion in some cases. And the compression should be softer and looser than for other fractures.
And if the wound is large and deep, and you fear that a bad accident might occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then do not apply remedies to it; but wrap hard cloths around the wound tightly, and tie them. And when you see after one or two days pus forming on the wound, remove what you have placed over it entirely, and apply healing ointment such as tetrafarmaçon and similar remedies.
And you should loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and closed.
And it is necessary for the limb to be prepared in such a way that the bowstring runs downhill easily.
And if they remain for many days, and it cannot be souded but keeps returning apart, know that there are small pieces of bone causing this, so you should probe the wound with a probe and remove all these displaced pieces that cause the pain.
And if a fistula occurs in the location, or another form of corruption, then you should treat it according to what he says in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as with the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not touch it at all, for many die from it; but let it be until it can be healed; perhaps it will heal after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
of bruises that come after healing:
We often come across dislocation after a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, and the sight of the limb's deformed shape is unpleasant; and sometimes the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Take heed, therefore, that the physician gives him styptic medicines such as aloe, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, and similar others; or you can powder any of these things, or all together, and confit them with wine, egg white, or garlic; and apply it to the joint in a poultice, pressing it on well and not removing it for several days. Then remove it and start again, repeating this until the nodule is removed. Or you can apply a piece of plaster, well-prepared so that it removes all inflammation from the limb. If the nodule has turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut it away and expose the superfluity; or have it cut away by a surgeon, once it is removed, treat the wound until it heals.
When the bone fracture is healed and the limb remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one is because it was bound too tightly and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and the nutrients could not reach the limb; or due to excessive swelling; or due to too much movement, and not at the right time; or because there is a lack of blood in his body, and he is weak.
And the cure is that you feed the patient and make the body tender so that the blood multiplies in him; and administer a bath to him, and give him joy and amusement; then apply pitch to the limb so that the pitch attracts the great swelling, and wash it often with warm water until the swelling goes down into the limb; and restore it to its natural shape.
until the limb is straightened after recovery
When the limb is crooked after recovery and the bone is broken open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew, and many fools have indeed done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm and even death may come from them; nevertheless, if the dislocations and torture are fresh, they should be washed with hot water, or herbs that soften should be boiled, such as leaves of marsh-mallow, and roots, and mallows, and similar medicines that soften the swelling. You also make a softening ointment, such as well-prepared diaquilon, and you take the mucilage of marsh-mallow and mix it with lamb’s fat or olive oil, and apply it to the area; or you take fattened figs and grind them with cow manure, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And sometimes the dislocation is pushed back into place by continuously and thoroughly rubbing with moist hands; and movement of the limb should be encouraged every hour.
And if the tortuosity is awake and hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, then one must cut it up to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and apply poultice and study in the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in someone, one should immediately bring it back into alignment without delay.
For if one delays, the place swells and perhaps one puts it back in place with pins; therefore one should not move it when it is swollen, for this often brings on inflammation and other pains.
However, when this happens, let the patient bleed and then leave it until the abscesses are soothed; then warm the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as it comes into its proper place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocation from the head to the feet.
of the mandibles
Then it happens that the jaws are dislocated sideways and the dislocations of both are according to two methods: either they are a little moved from their place and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the feet, and saliva flows from his mouth which he cannot hold back nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in various ways.
And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly without delay.
and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient and puts his finger of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and let the other two fingers be relaxed, in order to apply pressure evenly; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them from all parts.
And he holds the mirror steady, until it returns to its place.
And if they are stuck, especially if both jaws are together, then apply hot water and oil, until they reset gently; do not try to force the reset as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then place a damp cloth over it in a bandage made from rose oil and wax, then tie it gently with soft ties.
and the patient sleeps on his back, and his head is propped up between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor try to speak, but takes light food, until the pains are relieved and the jaws are relaxed.
and then let him eat what he wants easily, and do not worry about opening his mouth to eat and drink, as long as the jaw is well bandaged and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be put back into place within an hour, and are not converted to their place, then fever and usual sodden come, and sometimes stomach problems, and sometimes vomiting of clear fluid.
And when you see this, then know that it is disastrous; and often the person to whom this happens dies within eight days.
of the fork
The shoulder joint cannot be dislocated from within the chest or armpit; it is sometimes dislocated by force, and one feels it strongly.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the joint firmly with your palm, and it will return to place. Then apply the ointment and bandage, and bind it tightly.
And the shoulder joint near the neck cannot be dislocated; if it can be dislocated, and if it sometimes returns to place, then reset it as we have said. Then apply the ointment, bandage, and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
And in the same way, the shoulder of the spine is reset when it has moved out of place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
You know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one where it dislocates at the part of the shoulder blade below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and by chance it dislocates above, and this happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates below towards the shoulder blade, especially in those who have little flesh, because in those it is very painful; in those who have enough flesh, it dislocates at the points, and goes back in at the points.
And by chance it happens to some men that they get a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of that.
Then you must test it until you are certain, and then begin the treatment.
And one knows of a dislocation when it is below the shoulder, and there is a difference between the sick and healthy shoulders, and you will find a clear difference between them: and you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and under the armpit the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way;
and also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you can clearly see it at the touch;
and this type of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or if the child is ill.
And the method is that the minister lifts the affected hand up high, then places his fingers under the shoulder, and lifts the joint with force upward to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, and extends it upward, then brings it down; this will work quickly.
And if it does not work as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the minister should apply softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of aniseed and fenugreek and sweet marjoram in water, and the patient should be massaged.
Then the minister should have the patient lie on his back, and place a strip of woolen cloth, not too soft nor too hard, under the shoulder joint, then the minister puts his heel on the cloth and lifts the head of the shoulder firmly and pulls the affected hand;
and other ministers dye the head of the patient, so that it does not move down; the shoulder will return immediately, and if you see to reset it according to this manner:
and you should have present a man who is taller than the patient; and he should stand straight towards the shoulder, and push his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the arm of the patient downward towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, they can hold something heavy with them, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And it is reset in another way: one should stick a long wooden stake into the ground, whose head is as round as a finger, and neither too big nor too small; then it should be placed under the patient, but with a soft cloth on top, and the patient should be standing straight; then his hand should be extended downward on the other side, and the joint will return to its place gradually.
and if it does not want to return due to all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: take a stick two yards long and four fingers wide, which has a hooked tip to pierce through the skin under the joint, according to this shape:
then tie it to the top of the stick with soft cloth so that the stick does not strike the patient; then place the stick under the joint of the patient; and extend his arm over the stick, and tie the shoulder to the stick, and the arm to the head of the hand; then place the arm on a small log, and extend the hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in place, however it may be, you should place under the joint a round pillow of wool, then apply the plaster prepared from flour with incense and egg white over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the joint gradually, and tie the string over the plaster, and embrace the hand to his neck, and let the hand remain thus.
And it is necessary that he eats little, as long as the member is conforted, because it will heal faster; and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has accumulated, or for any other reason, then you should administer cauterization at three openings, as it is described in the chapter on cauterization.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upstream, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint was never set in its place.
The dislocation which is towards the feet, and the breasts, or behind, is made by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one administers it elsewhere; and treat it until it is healed.Li dislocation qui est devers lou chief, ou en haut, si est faite par traction; et li dislocation qui est entre le col et la tete, si est faite par impulsion.
And if after healing the limb becomes swollen and tender to the touch, and with movement, then the patient should use the bath many times until the swelling goes down and the limb returns to its original state.
on the dislocation of the shoulder
You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated when it becomes loose and moves easily; and if it is dislocated all around, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reset, for one can see and feel it clearly; and it becomes dislocated according to its shape. And when you join the sick shoulder with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is loose and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
And you must reset it as soon as any abscess forms, for if an abscess forms, then it will be painful to reset; and by chance it cannot be fully reset all the way, especially when it is at the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and it causes more pain, and by chance death can come.
And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands bent according to the joint, around, and behind, and push the joint to his shoulders together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it will return when he bends his hand to his hand, and he stretches from the root of the palm the joint which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then apply strong extension; and one minister extends the arm, and two ministers hold it, so that it does not move with the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then wrap a long, wide cloth around it.
and when he examines the joint of his hand, he should apply some oil to soften the joint, then press it firmly together until it heals.
and when it is back in place, he should apply a dry plaster with egg white, and press it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for a few days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not healing well, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for a few days until it is firmly healed; then release it.
And if he feels stiffness after the joint is put back in place, and it moves, then bathe and massage it thoroughly, and press it until it is eased; then apply a poultice of fat mutton to the joint, leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath. and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then replace the bandage, and then enter the bath; and do this .ij. or .iij. times until he is healed; and if you see that, place warm cow manure with butter on it, and hold it in place; then it will return to its natural state.
dislocations of the hand
Healings of the hand are light, more than other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to put it back into place gently, in the same hour that it was dislocated, so that the joint becomes swollen or an abscess forms.
And the healing is that you place the affected hand on a table, and extend the fingers, and the healer places his hand so that it is even with the appearance of the joint, and pushes it until it is healed.
Nevertheless, you should check that it is in the right place; then have the patient lie on his back on a table, extending and bending his arm. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, have the patient lie on his back on the table, and the examiner place his hand over that appearance at the joint. If it now goes back into place, that is good.
If not, then strain with soothing poultices, hot compresses, and leave it thus without re-encompassing.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after several days, then the joint will remain crooked;
and does not harm the patient as long as the hand is weak and cannot extract anything at all: then you know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other remedy except to cauterize below the case, and by chance nothing else works.
And when the hand is in place, then apply the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it for .v. days, then loosen it and leave it like that.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then moisten it with warm water, and rub it until it heals.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes it is the thumbs on each side which are dislocated, sometimes the back of the palm or the inside;
then pull on the thumb, and put it back in its socket as far as it will go, then hold the top of the thumb and push it towards the part where it is dislocated;
and leave it for 10 days, and then put it back in its socket the next day; and do not ligature it as we have said, and loosen it during the day, and make it move, and tie it up at night; and do this often, until it is healed,
and do the same if it is dislocated on the inside of the palm, and do as you did before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is dislocated in any other way.
from the dislocation of the sciatic nerve from the back
When the sciatic nerve in the back or neck is dislocated, there is no cure, for death hastens the ailment.
And the signs are that the bowels move without voluntariness, and one cannot hold it in, and many times some member becomes paralyzed, or both legs, or one arm, or one hand.
And often the sciatic nerve is affected in four parts; that which is affected in the back is called "gout":
the treatment if you determine that the dislocation occurred in childhood; there is no treatment or healing from it at all.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancients described many ways of treating it with great words, but there was not much benefit in them at all.
But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the dislocation that comes at the front foot, there is no healing or health;
and also those which go straight to both sides, and cannot be cured without the one that comes directly from the back, as I said;
and the patient should be stretched out on his face in one place evenly, and he should not bend under him so that he does not get hurt;
then insert a brand in the earth at the head, and another at the feet, and tie one string under the armpits of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two assistants hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two brands;
and let them be well bound, the fire brand as we have said, and the patient put his palms on the spine, until he wakes up.
And if it does not work with this treatment, take a board three yards long, and dig under the wall, and let the patient lie on his side, and put the end of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and let the patient put his feet on the other end of the board, and press hard until he wakes up; and if you see that it happens in the turn which turns to the hand.
And you should insert two fire brands at the head of the patient's arm, and two more towards his feet, with a palm's width between each brand, both above and below.
and has in each stake .1. hole, through which the thread runs, and the stakes are firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between each .2. stakes has .1. turning stake, over which the threads turn, and has in .2. turning .2. small stakes of a palm long, to turn the thread;
and then tie the thread which is among the stakes to the head at one turn, and the other thread to the feet at the other turn, and each of the ministers turns their turn all the way through the thread, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
And when it is equalized, then put on a drying ointment with plenty of egg, and then the cotton, and then the cast of a tablet .3. inches long, which purples the place of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a thread, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle medicine until he is healed;Et s’il est de la jointe, si fai le mesme et le lie avec liien, si com nos avons dit, et use l’espinee subtilement, si tant qu’elle soit guariee, car elle ne doit point demourer en cel leu;
and if it is of the joint, do the same and bind it with a thread, as we have said, and use the spine subtly, until it is healed, for it must not remain in that place; and if nothing comes of it, then one should administer softening and soothing medicines, with the cast that we have mentioned earlier; and sometimes they administer a piece of plaster
and sometimes the appearance occurs in the last spine of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that protrudes, so one must not be presumptuous about it, for it could bring about death.
of dislocations of the hip
You should know that dislocations of the hip and shoulder joints only occur due to dislocations, and not as with other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inner and outer, front and back; and more internally, and less dislocated in the front and back.
And the knowledge of its inner dislocation is that when the affected leg is joined with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the affected knee opens more than the healthy one, and the affected person cannot bend their knee over the fire; and is the place which is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes from disuse, is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of him who has it in front, are that his leg is well according to the accomplishment; nevertheless, he does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot, and he retains his urine, and the veins swell, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
And the signs of him who has it behind, are that he cannot bend or double his knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
The remedies for this type of dislocation are that you examine whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its nature, then there is no treatment; and one must not be presumptuous about it.
And for the one whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocation, you should quickly turn the joint, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and will not need further treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong bandage, and stretch the leg hard with two hands, or tie it to the knee; and another bandage extends his hand above in such a way that he pushes his hands under his armpits, then twist a strong band around the thigh; and another band around the head;
and stretch them both ways at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This method of stretching is common to all four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then treatment should be applied according to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, one should lift the patient up onto their sound side, then place the ligature at the base of the neck, and at the root of the armpit, then stretch the ligature upward toward the armpit and the shoulder blade;
then have another assistant grab his arms and squeeze the large part of the affected hip, and stretch it forcefully: then it will return to its place immediately; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot bind it in this way that we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong silk thread above the two heels and above the two knees, and the leg of the patient should be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then let him be hung from the top of a pole, and be one and a half arms above the ground; then instruct one assistant to hold the head of the thigh firmly, and another assistant hanging with the patient, who holds the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
And when the dislocation is healed, let the patient lie as we have said in the one who has gout, and stretch one bandage tightly over the leg and another over the foot;
then put two charcoals, one on the head and one at the feet, then push one charcoal between the thighs of the patient; and has wet bandages wrapped around it so that the patient does not feel the pain, then extend each minister towards him, and the surgeons put their hands evenly on the dislocation.
If it goes back into place, that is good. If not, put it on a table and press it as we have said in the dislocation of the elbow, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is forward, you should extend the affected leg slowly, and according to what I have said; and the surgeons should put their weight on the painful angle, then press with the other hand, and they should lean towards the knee.Si li mires ne puet pas le ramerier, qu’il le mette sus la table, et li mires estendent les deux mainz et li deux pids, et l’un des mires met sa main sus li sain costeit et gise li malaides, et li auter met sa main sus la legre malaide et tire vers le bas, et li mires tirent li membres vers lor.
And if the dislocation is backward, then the affected leg should not be extended downward or lifted up, but it should be positioned as if the hip were dislocated backward, as we have said about sleeping on the two hips; and is on his face, and the bandage stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint on the table;
and will be at the right time when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the thighs, apply the ointment, and constrain with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
and let him rest for 3 or 4 days, then remove the bandage and apply the ointment again; if you see that they are even, then constrain them as before and leave it for 3 days; then remove the bandage and let him walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is, inside and outside, and behind; but it should not be dislocated in front.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, then you know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet;
Then take his knee in your palms, and pull back between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee gently; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg at the thigh lightly;
and apply the plaster, and keep the leg stretched out at the thigh, and hold it together tightly for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it; and do not let the patient move around until the limb is healed.
And if there is no cast, then provide strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of dislocation of the heel
Heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes fully dislocated, both internally and externally.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it hurts when touched at the place where it is dislocated.
The treatment if it is mild, and one should gently extend it with their hands when it is only sprained.
And when it is dislocated from everywhere, then you must have the patient sit upright, and hold with one hand below the knee, above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then stretch it up, and push the foot upwards firmly;
and do this two times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, then repeat the operation, for it will return.
and if it cannot return thus, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and drive a stake firmly into the ground between his thighs, and wind cloth around it so that he does not slip;
then have one assistant hold his thigh, and another assistant stretch the foot out to their hands or to a strap, which they tie around the ankle of the foot; then each assistant should stretch equally, and the stake should be held firmly between the patient's thighs to restrain him when he is stretched.
then place the mirror on top of the dislocation with his hand, and have another assistant hold the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return in a moment.
And when it is back in place, then apply the plaster and gauze on top, and bind it tightly but not too tight, and tie the foot to the leg, being careful of the nerves that run behind the ankle so that the ligatures are not too tight.
Then leave it for 1 or 2 days, and if the bandages loosen, then tighten them again. Then remove the bandages on the third or fourth day, and the patient should be able to walk within 4 days. And if he walks before that time, it is not certain that he will not relapse.
And if a deep abscess occurs, you must calm it down as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
you must
When the arms are dislocated, they should be stretched gently without force, and this is a minor matter.
And if the dislocation is in the neck or foot, the patient should sit upright on a flat surface or table, and place their foot on something that puts pressure on the joint, then press firmly on the foot until it pops back into place;
and when it is even and there is no opening, then place a board under the sole of the foot with two chisels, then stretch it firmly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it, and let him rest until he is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to heal it, many times the patient dies.
if you are not confident in the treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and cautious, do not be bold.
and at the beginning of things apply a hot compress to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand if you do not see hope of recovery; and when you see hope, then put the limb back in place, as long as the hot abscesses last;
and when the limb is in place, then administer hot compresses to the abscess, and treat the wound as it should be done, with drying ointments;
and if there is a fracture with the dislocation, and small bones are displaced, then set the bones, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and beware of entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it will benefit you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your soul and body. Amen.
