O thou, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the last in the science of medicine together with its completion, and have made an end through its expositions and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, that is to say, 'surgery'.
And because the work of the hands is scorned in our region and is considered strange everywhere, the knowledge has been lost and discarded, and nothing remains but brief descriptions in books by the ancients that our hands have moved. And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are hidden and knowledge is kept at a distance.
I think it is necessary to animate this treatise together with the order of this text according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of other tools of the work, with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected. And one who undertakes this must be proficient in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of bones, and the movement and of the blood vessels that are moving and at rest, and their points of exit.
And therefore Hypocras says that what is done with the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of medicine.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned, beware that he does not stumble into error and harm people; just as I have many times seen several of those who interfere in this science and so abandon themselves without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and cut the arteries in the neck; so much blood poured out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in a man's testicle, and the stone was large; he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.Et vis un autre qui traït une piere de la teste d’un home, et li home cheit mort au lit li miex en iesme jor.
And I saw another who treated a stone in a man's head, and the man died in bed the same day.
And I saw another case which involved the treatment of a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the ignorant surgeons bound the break over the wound with a tight bandage, and left nothing to drain the wound, but tied it up like that, and commanded that he should not untie it; and thus he stayed until the leg became swollen all the way to his foot and came to ruin.
I was called to him, and hurried to untie the leg; and when I had untied it he felt no pain and was at ease.
However, the corruption had already set in in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until it was entirely destroyed.
And I saw another surgeon who lanced a large abscess, and then inflamed it through the wickedness of his lord.
For when a ulcer is free of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove all that which is corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of the hands is divided into two parts: that is, in work where there is danger in various situations; and I will show in each section of this book where there is doubt and danger.
And so it is necessary that you be careful, so that the foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
So take up your arms in confidence, and undertake your diseases lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you may come to health and be praised; and leave off the terrible diseases of grief, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world into the other with glory.
Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not take ill disease lightly lest you be called a fool."
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medicinal water cauteries, and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and about cautery tools, and all that is necessary in the work.
And the third chapter is about dislocations that come from accidents in various limbs, and about burns from fire or medicinal water, and from thorns and arrows, and about mortality that comes from one limb to another.The second chapter is also about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and it includes the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisting, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest speech and most subtle science, and the secret responses; and most of the sages spoke about this and agreed upon it. I am content with a little of their words, for I am reducing the length.
I say that cautery aids universally in all complexions where there is matter, for there are two complexions: namely, hot without matter, and dry without matter.
In hot and dry complexions when the matter is together, some people say that cautery is very helpful; while others say the opposite: cautery is not useful for diseases that arise from heat and dryness.
Because the nature of fire is hot, it should not be treated with heat for hot diseases, nor for dryness; and those who say otherwise claim that cautery provides great relief for hot and dry diseases that affect the human body. Because when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body is cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
And yet, one should not meddle with this treatment unless they have experience with cautery and a long understanding of different complexions, diseases, their causes, prognoses, and the seasons; we fear not for those of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all agreed on the use of cautery.
And know, my son, that cautery with fire is one of the secrets of cures and a more excellent remedy than burning cautery.
For fire is simple, and it only affects the cooked member and does not harm any other member if it is not named.
Burning medicines spread from one member to another by separation, and bring the illness of great healing to the member; and by chance they kill the disease.
Fire, because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance, does not do this if there is no excess.
And I have found this through experimentation and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and I was above the truth of things; and because of this, I excuse myself for the length of my speech, because I do not want to take away from you the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures illnesses of the body, as the philosopher says in his demonstration; so receive it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on which times cauteries should be performed, and chose certain days for them.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harmfulness underneath is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially if the cauteries are for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait until a later time when greater harm may come to the member.
And never think, dear son, as the foolish do; for a disease that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say so, but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not medicines that change the complexion, but dry up the humors that cause pain, and are better than medicines in their effectiveness, and because of their virtue and significance.
And it is possible that the disease may come again according to the complexion of the ailment and its location and its strength; and are gathered in it the excesses through the digestion of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little of these excesses and moisture, such as dental cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine; but it is true, for when we administer methods of cure in any illness and they fail, then we administer the cautery and it succeeds. Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are indeed the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancients said that a cautery instrument of gold is more effective than one of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold or the height of its substance; but they said that the heat of the cautery does not cause blisters, but that is not true, for I have experimented with it and found that it is true in some people; and a gold cautery is more effective than one of iron, just as they said.
And yet when you heat the gold instrument, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down very quickly; and if it is heated too much, it will melt in the fire; and so there is great danger with this method.
And because of this, we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Now I have arranged this chapter from head to foot, so that the way is easier to find.
of the olive-oil cautery
This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness in the head, and there are two reasons for it being used because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that flow from the head to the eyes and ears, and because of many pains in the teeth and throat, and especially for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient is purged with a cleansing, dissolving medicine for 3 or 4 nights, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the disease can endure; and then have the head of the sick person washed.
Then have him sit cross-legged in your hands and put his hands on your legs; then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes, where your two middle fingers meet, so it bleeds underneath. Then heat up the cautery, which is called "olivare", with which this is done:
And place it on the area marked with ink, moving your hand up and down and twisting it gently; then lift your hand gently and check the spot to see if you can see a small bone; if not, repeat the cautery as I have told you until you do. Then take a little salt and put it in a piece of soft cloth, and place it on the area; leave it for three days, then apply a poultice of moistened cloth in butter; leave it until the blister is healed; then treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
And if the ancients say that the more time passes with the wound open, the more it purges itself; and for this reason, it helps to use leeches.
And some said that one should let the cautery burn so long that part of the bone is burnt, and then one should scrape away what is burnt from the bone, and it will be cured.
And others said that one should let the cautery burn so high and stab so deeply that it cuts away as much bone as a needle that women put in their fuses to let the humors flow out; then one should leave the wound open for a long time; after, one should cure and close it.
And I do not think that either of these two cautery methods is good at all, except in some people where there is fear; and I think that I should leave it, for the shoulder is weakened by continuous dislocations, as we witness in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more safe and mild, then I use this method.
from the old pain in the head
When throughout the head there is chronic pain that lasts a long time, one must use the sick person's herbs and pills which are called 'cochie', and purges for the head, and oils and poultices; and if they apply to him the cautery we mentioned earlier and it does not help.
Take care that the head of the sick person is of a robust nature and not too cold; then cauterize it under that fire cautery a little bit as we said above.
After that, cauterize each horn of the head just to the bone as we said before, and do one cautery in the place called 'vessel'; and there is a place where one applies leeches; and lighten your hand so that you do not go all the way to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak of it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be more subtle than those used for cauterizing the middle of the head, and that is the shape:
of the cautery on the head When sudden pain arises in the head and the illness extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and one has done the other remedies that I have said in the division of illnesses, and all this does not help: then one should make cauteries according to 2 methods, that is to say, with hot water and with fire.
The cautery with hot water is that you take an egg, remove the shell and cover it with a piece of cloth as big as two fingers, then make a poultice where the pain is in such a way that you can put the egg under the skin; and when it is applied, tie it well and leave it for 12 hours; then untie it and take away the egg, and leave the poultice for 2-3 days; then place a linen cloth soaked in butter on top until the abscess drains.
After the poultice, treat with an ointment until it is healed; and if you see that it is not healing, do one of the burning remedies that I have written about in the 12th chapter on burning remedies.
The fire cautery is done according to this method. Heat the cautery so that it is hot and shaped like this:
And it is called "cauterization" because the tip is formed into a small cup shape with a slight curve, and when placed over the painful area, your hand and the instrument are turned slightly so that half of the thickness of the skin is burned; then lift your hand so that the artery does not blaze and abundant blood flows.
Afterwards, put cotton wool in wine, and hold it over the area for three days; then moisten cotton with butter, and use ointment to treat the area until it heals; and if you want to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called  "spoon-shaped", which is pointed at the tip, be careful not to touch the artery in this hemorrhoid, which is not old.
of hemorrhoid
When you treat hemorrhoids as we have previously discussed in the sections on diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries we have previously mentioned with medicine or fire do not work, then you should heat the cautery called  "spoon-shaped" until it is white; and draw a line about half an inch long over the painful area, holding your hand once, and be careful not to touch the artery and cause it to bleed all the way to the bone; and be cautious of the jaw so that it does not move when chewing, and the nerve should not spasm and cause pain. Be wary of blood flow from the artery when it is cut, as it can be dangerous, especially for those who are unfamiliar with it and are not experienced or knowledgeable. Leave the wound open; however, I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where this occurs in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the wound in the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have spoken of in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than the other and more effective.
from pain in the ears due to cold
When pain in the ear persists despite the application of solutive medicines and other remedies mentioned earlier in this section, and the pain still does not subside, then heat this cautery, known as the "point," which has this form:
After piercing around the ear on the affected side, or on both sides if the pain is in both ears, move slightly upward from the root of the ear where you have marked the site; and make .x. piercings around each ear; then treat the area until it is healed.
of mouth torture
There is no cautery for torments that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not use cautery on appearan
When you treat this kind of torture that comes from phlegm through cleansing the head and gargling, and if this does not work, then you must cauterize the patient with . three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, another a little above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and also cauterize the top of the ear just below the horn of the head, and another one in the temple about the length of a thumb; and leave the cautery on until half of the brain is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
And the shape of the blade we mentioned earlier, but it should be a little more flexible and the knife should be a little thicker; after that, treat the area as I have described before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one where it is called 'vasselz' as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be treated as we have said before.
of litharge
For this disease, give the patient large and cleansing pills for the brain; then wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and apply to his neck the poultice of mustard which is written about in the treatise on poultices; and here is the manner of the cautery: perform it as I have said.
If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries in the middle of the head going down to the neck, and have a distance of one finger between each cautery; and heal him as the others, and if you see fit to adjust, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if need be, two more on the two horns, and heal him as before. And let it be the cautery which is called 'olivare', as I have said before.
of coldness from the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and other things as we have said before; then wash the head of the patient, next cauterize inside the head and on each temple, one behind the ears, and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then cauterize four times on the spine of the back; and let it be until the heart is burnt, and then lift your hand; then cure it until it is healed, and use the cautery called "olive" that we mentioned earlier.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cauterization except for those who are phlegmatic; it is necessary to first cleanse the brain of hair and other things as we have said in the division when the patient is suffering greatly and needs medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meat; after the king, place the head in the middle, and do to him .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is strong and painful, do to him cauteries as I have said for paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be of olive according to the manner that I have said.
If the disease is in a child, do to him 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupted humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with cauteries as we have said for paralysis.
And if through the cause of melancholy the superfluities decline towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink that will purify the brain, according to what is before in the division.
After dressing the wound, make a well-fitting linen bandage, like a ring, and place it around the head; cross the ends of the bandage and tie them securely all around; then apply the poultice and use old mutton suet; heat gently so that the patient can bear it; remove the bandage from within the circle and let it cool; do this for the wound once a week with good care, until it heals.
Or, if you wish to cauterize it, make several small holes in the cautery tool. This cautery method moistens the brain significantly; then place wet cotton in suet and chicken fat on top.
of the eyes When eye disease first appears with the signs that I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient a cleansing drink for the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
After he commands the patient to look up, and cauterizes in the scalp, and makes .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the descent of the eye is together in both, or if it is just one; and cauterize all the veins and arteries that are under the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with as much power as you can.
And I will teach you the extraction of arteries and incision the cautery, how you should stop it; and sometimes a cauterization or incision is done under the .ij. bones in the back.
where the body weeps
When the tears are old and accustomed to being in the veins, or among the arteries that are on the appearance of the forehead outside; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I said at the beginning of the descent of the eye: .i. cauterization in the scalp, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or hatereil under the .ij. bones; and if there is a need for more, he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery all over.
tears flow from within them
When you treat them according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of leeches; after that, bleed the head, and make him a cautery with olive oil in the middle of the cautery; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two joints, one just below the hairline; and be careful of the artery, that you do not cover it. And this is the shape of the cautery called  "clavilis":
When the skin around the eye is soft due to illness or moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called   "olivare". This is how you make it::
And if you see to do so .i. cautery on the .ii. warts as long as the sorcerers are; and don't leave your hand unless the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner I said.
the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes the hair of the eyes becomes converted into warts, and prick the eye, and they do cauterizations according to .ii. manners: that is to say, with fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state; afterwards draw on the paper a figure that is as long as the furrow of the myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs; then moisten cotton with egg white and plantain pulp on the eye, then heat the cautery from which the shape comes:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked little by little many times until the skin is burned in that place; and the sign of healing is when you see the paper drawn up, and the hairs standing at an angle from the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then moisten cotton with butter until the scorch is healed; afterwards dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if afterwards the hairs come again, and the paper becomes soft, then begin the cautery in the same place again as you did before; and if the hairs are pulling it, then cauterize until the paper returns to its natural state, and is even, and do not pull at the eye.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are long and even, then make parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live coals, of each one part, and grind them together well; and make it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape that you made like the myrtle leaf, and put it on the paper among the hairs; and if the disease is in only one eye, do this once, and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened with egg white; and let the patient's hand remain so, and press a little and move it every time the patient feels burning from the medicine, for he will feel burning just as from fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger. And when the bite is passed, lift the area of the bite, and examine if you see the skin lifted as it was by constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, all is well. If not, then apply more medicine to the site, until your work is equalized and your eyes are set aright; then place wet cotton in butter on the burned area, after which clean the site of the ointment, which is called 'dyafenis' and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not get into your eyes, and if the skin becomes soft after and the hair grows in the eye, then reapply the medicine to the site which is softened by the skin properly, just as you did before; then clean it once it is healed; and this is the form of the mirtle twig:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, your constraints should be adjusted; and do not deviate from the right path for one who has studied this art.
on the treatment of a fistula by cautery
When you are treating a fistula as we have discussed in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you must use cautery according to the following method.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap; and have an assistant hold their head steady between their hands so that it does not move or drop; then dip cotton into vinegar or juice of nettles and apply it to the eye; next, heat the cautery which should be shaped like a tent with a point on one end, and if you can, let it be curved like the roof of a tent; but a straight one will also work for your purpose.
Afterward, press the fistula if it is open and clean it, and if it is closed, open it and draw out any pus; then heat the cautery and hold it firmly in place at the edge of the eye socket, taking care not to burn yourself; place the cautery in the grease around the eye and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of cauterization just to the bone, it would be good. If not, then restart the cautery again once more, and another if you need it, and let it rest for three days; after that, place moistened cotton in the burrows, and treat with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass without healing, apply an corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king according to what he experiences in his kingdom.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that some ancient ones said. Go to the fistula, and cut the site; after that, place in the slit a very subtle needle with which the form is: and they make the quantity of an egg; and hold your hand or needle firmly, and do not move the patient at all so that the melting wax does not run into his eye; and one should put on the eye of the patient moistened cotton in olive oil or in a mixture of wine: the wax will fill the fistula, and heal miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have described, it is good. If not, then one must administer an incision with a knife and bring the fistula back into the body of the knuckle according to what is appropriate in its own place.
cracks in the lips Many times cracks occur in the lips which are called "warts," and especially on the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections, and the treatment is ineffective, then heat a small metal spatula according to this form:
And place it gently in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess forms at the root of the throat, or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, causing pus and swelling and becoming a fistula; and you treat it as we have described in the section on incisions, but it does not heal: then you must use a cautery depending on the size of the fistula; after cleaning out the fistula, hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches the bottom and the back of the fistula; do this once or twice after cleaning as described above, until it is healed; and if it is healed in this way, that is good; but if not, then you must expose the site and remove any corrupted bone, according to what you find in your examination.
from the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it does not help, then put the patient's head in your lap; after heat the cautery which will be described below in such a way that you place a candle on the tooth; and place the hot cautery inside until the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; then lift your hand and reapply the cautery according to your judgment; after fill the patient's mouth with salted water, and let it sit for an hour and take away the forces.
And in this way, a tooth that was loose is now firm, and the gums softened are restrained, and corrupted moisture is dried up.
from toothache
When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies do not help, then there is need for cautery in two ways: butter cautery and fire cautery.
Butter cautery: take butter from a cow and the end in an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, moisten it in the butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it cools down; do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the cotton and butter cool, heat the iron again until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
The cautery together with fire, if it is such that you take a rod of iron or bronze, and it is thick enough so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, whose form will come afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be relieved the same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in preparation for this cautery, and then rinse it out; and this is the form of the cautery:
When scrofula is due to cold and moist humours, and is not obedient to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery so that afterwards its form comes, and have two openings for the fumes to exit from the cautery on the other side; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, as far down into the abscess as possible; and if the abscess is small, apply cauterization according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it thus for 3 days. Then dress the wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When moisture overwhelms the channels of the diaphragm, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, the patient should first be treated with solubilizing medicines; then make a cautery at the root of the throat, being careful not to go all the way to the throat, and do not burn the heart but only a little. Then make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, using the cautery called "clavicle" which we have described earlier; then treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
of the toast When all diseases of the diaphragm are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, make two cauteries on the sternum in the affected areas; and another cautery between the breasts, using the cautery called  "clavicle" as described earlier.
And if you see fit, make a cautery with the point of the cautery called   "point," for which the form is given above in the treatment of ear diseases; and make the points up to 30, or as many as needed. Then cure the area as described before, and make three cauteries according to this form:
And for this reason cauteries are gentler when you do them three times.
of shoulder dislocation When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, have the patient lean on his back and his side; then lift the heart which is inside the armpit with both hands; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two hairs of oak until it glows red:
and cauterize the skin until it pierces all the way through, and the figure of the cautery will appear with four cauteries; and this is why there is a cautery made with the three-nerved cautery, so that there are six cauteries; and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the three-nerved cautery:
And sometimes it is adjusted over that one nerve so that there are eight cauteries.
Afterwards, put crushed pepper on the cautery; afterwards, let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until he is well healed.
And if it is dislocated above, whatever happens little, then make cautery on the thickness of the clavicle cautery, or many cauteries in piercing. For the joints are closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
of the cautery for pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make cauteries on pleurisy with roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your finger; moisten it in oil, and heat it in the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the throat and the collarbone, and two small cauteries slightly lower down on the part which is under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, bending a little backwards; and one cautery in the armpit, and another over the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the two sides of the foot below the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand at all, but do it gently as if you were using a perfume.
And some ancients said that some people use a cautery made like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and if it jumps away from the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear of death for the patient, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouth with what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help, then there are three ways of cauterizing that are all good.
The first way is to make three or four cauteries, cutting according to the length of the ulcer, and according to the shape of the cautery of the liver that we mentioned before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, but let the patient lie on his back.
And another way of cauterizing is to heat the cautery that has two prongs, as we demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift up the meat that is at the corner of the mouth, where the vein comes towards the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the meat be according to the meat, along the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the breadth of the body.
Afterwards, push the two prongs into the flame until they are heated on the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and in this way there will be four of them. And if you wish, you can cauterize all the cautery with three prongs. After the treatment, when pus has been discharged for a long time, it is better than any of the other treatments mentioned before.
of dropsy
Cautery is of no use for dropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes." When you treat it according to the methods we have described in sections, and your treatment does not help, then you should make .iiij cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the anus; and let the cautery be close to the chest.
Afterwards, let the cautery remain open to ooze pus for a long time, and do not stop the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the key that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown here before.
of swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in a patient with dropsy, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep, thus you will dry up the yellow water, and the cautery should be according to this shape:
Afterwards, make 2 cauteries on each leg at the base of the toe nail; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries uncovered for a long time without curing, until the water comes out; after that, cure the others that we have mentioned.
of menstruation
When an abdominal hernia comes from coldness and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great strength, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before regarding the cautery on the stomach, using the circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the abdomen with a subtle cautery needle throughout, one cautery needle subtle, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then make cautery on the shoulder, and one cautery on each hip, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
on the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is all beneath the alimentary canal, little by little in a triangular shape, and one cautery beneath the abdomen. Two days;
and if you think his stomach is chilled and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face swelling, then on the face place a large cautery on the stomach as previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and another on the gallbladder with all cauterization of the clave; let the cautery remain open for a long time. After that, cure the area until it is healed.
of the fleshiness which is called "thelul."
When you cut the "thelul," heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and then place it completely ablaze on the cut "thelul"; hold your hand so that the cautery reaches the base of the vein, causing the blood to clot; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of "thelul," cauterize each one as we have described. After that, cure them with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will provide greater relief.
of poorly cured wounds
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
When a fistula appears, and it is open and flowing with pus and corrupt moisture, then you should probe it with a thin rod, and be careful to know how deep the fistula is. Then heat the cautery iron like a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the probe entered, and repeat the cautery until the swollen and corrupted flesh is burned, once or twice or thrice, according to its need; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and the large blood vessels. If the fistula goes towards the bladder and intestines, then be careful of those places, and do not apply the cautery too deeply, and think that it is not sensible; afterwards, clean the wound until it is healed, and if the wound is suppurating and the matter has been discharged for a long time, then know that the wound is entirely healed. And if the matter has not been discharged, know that the wound is pierced and corrupted at its base. And thus, as one of those which we will discuss in their place.
of kidney disease When cold pain comes to the kidneys, and there are strong windings, and it does not take a woman's breath, then you should apply cautery to the kidneys on one side and the other with the claw-like cautery that we mentioned earlier. And if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater relief.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then he should be cauterized in the area above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hairline begin, one on each side, and each cautery should be as long as the tip of a finger. And he should also have a cautery below the back, two if necessary; and the cauteries should be curved as described before.
of the marrow When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then one should do three cauteries around the womb, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries below the back; and the cauteries should be curved, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous humors descend to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and if the site of the dislocation is found to be hollow, then you should cauterize the joint on the socket of the hip with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and the cautery should be such as that used for cauterizing the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, make three large cauteries from the olive, and let the cautery be as deep as all the others; and treat it until it is healed.
of the pain in the hip When pain comes in the hip joint, it is caused by cold and moisture, and the disease is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the disease of the gross humors with stinking pills, or other good-smelling pills.
Afterwards, let him have a cautery; and the manner of cautery is according to two ways: one is with burning medicines, and the other is with fire cautery. Fire cautery is done in many ways, among which one is such that you cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a good depth and a large one, and let there be between each cautery the thickness of a thumb, and the cauteries should be olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on the head of the hip, so that there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, let him be cauterized with the circular cautery which we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire hip, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
And this is how sciatica is done when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it reaches the thigh and leg, let there be two cauteries where the pain is felt, and one cautery above the ankle bone on the inside of the little toe, and let the cautery be cut into the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the big toe or near it, let him be cauterized where he feels the pain in three places or four with the cautery called "points".
And if necessary, do more; and if he feels the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, do cauterization with a blade or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you don't leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you don't cause the patient more harm and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have had cauterization on the ankle, and they left it on so long that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. After a belly-ache from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, do cauterization in one and the other according to this method. // And they told the sage about the cautery of the hip, from which comes the manner: make a piece of iron as large as a little finger at the head, or a little less, and have it between the tines, and from one tine to the other in space the quantity of the thickness of a fingernail; and let the tines be an inch apart, and also like nuts, and have a handle well made; and this is its form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and dripping hot, and then place it on the box of the ill hip, and let it be turned to the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery and leave it for three days; and then make an ointment of butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after the cure of anointing until it is healed.
Albucasis says that we use this cautery sparingly due to the fear of its appearance, and see few who use it; yet it is one of the good cauteries that can be endured by him who receives it, and where it is applied.
from the pain in the back
When pain comes in the back, from falling or from impact or from excessive evacuation, or from similar appearances of cold matter, none of these appearances are helped by cauterization except that which comes from diffusion of cold matter.
It is necessary, after the patient has been purged of foul pills or other similar substances, that one make upon his back, where the pain resides, three lines marked with ink, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed according to the cautery which is called "point"; and if you see fit, make .iiij. cauteries or .viij. with the medio-calid cautery according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they wake up at night in a panic and fear; you will also find it in the lower spine, and on us it appears above the other vertebrae.
When you see it, treat it with a cautery of celandine according to this method:
The purple cautery should treat each part of the spine evenly. And if you see any swelling around the spine, cauterize it with a pointed cautery tool .ij or .iij lines wide, and place the cautery marks close to each other. Then treat the area until it is healed as we have described, and be careful not to apply cautery to any areas that are swollen with nerve spasms.
And if you see the pain in the lower spine between the vertebrae and the ribs, as long as it is in the lower spine, treat it with a cautery of celandine according to the method we have described; because this vertebra is weaker than the others.
When joint pain is caused by moistors that are expanded in each member of the body, and when pain comes from the feet, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicine, then it can be cured by cautery in this way: make the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this formula:
And if there is a need to prick on the face of the foot, you should use all the cautery that is called "point". And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then you should use cautery on each knee with 3 or 4 cauteries on each part, all with olive oil cautery; and if you need more, do more, but don't hold your hand against it longer than until the skin of the joint is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and the back, then administer the cautery that we have described in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, prick around the wrist 2 lines; and if there remains no pain in the arms, then prick each joint and the hair on the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good treatment for the patient and take medicines. For if you make good treatment for him and purge the flux, he will be healed with God's help.
of the rut of the syphilis
When rut comes in the armpits, and the testicles descend into the scrotum, which is new, then when you see it being cured, he should not eat that day; and he should use things that loosen the belly so that the farts come out of his belly; after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his armpit until the testicles are repaired, and bring them up to your fingers, and sign underneath the rut on the bone of the arm, and all over a mark that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery with which this form is made:
until it is white and it feels hot. Then bring the testicles back to their place; and the minister holds his hand so that they do not return; and work well on the armpits of the patient, and put underneath him 1 cushion and 1 servant on the armpits, and another one under the penis which holds his hands; then put the cautery over the mark with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the testicles do not come out when you are doing the cautery; so that he does not burn himself; and so that through this the patient does not die, or suffer other harm.
And you should know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless. And the cauteries of children should be smaller according to their ears, and those of large people also large according to them; after 3 days cure the place of the cautery with butter until the scorch is removed; then cure it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well sewn up; and it is necessary that their testicles be tied for a long time, so that the testicles do not come out when they start to move around in bed.
And after .40 days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and wear it for another .40 days; and let him have good rest, move little, and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and of too much loud speaking; and when he does this instruction, he is completely healed. And I will say hereafter about the cure of cutting in his shoulder. of the rupture in the belly
When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing any more, do to him .1 cautery of the fire cautery according to its quantity, and burn it at the third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that one must cauterize it with a cautery at .3 angles according to this form:
but first sign the place of entry and draw a line along the width above the rupture, and another across, and hold your hand in the middle of the cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or wounding, and the pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help, then cauterization is needed with a cautery called "point," and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its condition of twisting and pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; if not, do another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that it must change in the limb nearest to it, so you should do cauteries until the patient is healed.
of mixing
The head is sometimes cauterized for great aid, and so are diseases that come from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it cauterized, take care if the disease is in its early stages, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not lessen or remain, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the body, then do 5 cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the corners, and one behind on the nape; and let your hand be so that the cautery comes to the bone, and as long as the skin issues forth so that the vapors of the gross humors can issue out; and cauterize it according to how it is before.
And if the infection is scattered everywhere; and it is obviously losing ground, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned on the head, and one cautery in the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large cautery on the croup and another smaller one, and two cauteries on the two shoulders; and two cauteries on the elbows, and two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, and one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the heel so that you do not burn them; and sometimes a cautery is done on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and one more on the liver.
And you should know that the more cauteries you do, the more help you provide, and it benefits; and you should know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already entirely corrupted. And the cauteries should be large or small depending on the members and joints, according to how you find them in the methods of the irons. After this, treat the wound with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
of swelling
When swelling occurs in a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it does not heal, then cauterize the limb according to its size; and let the cautery be slightly penetrating into the depth of the skin. Then treat it with ointments until it heals. Sometimes cautery is performed on the hand, foot, or back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; but no one should undertake this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the paths of the nerves that move the body.
of albaria
When the disease called "albaria" appears, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a moderately deep cautery, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color changed; then treat it with an ointment made from equal parts of linseed and lentil flour, rose oil, and plantain leaves, plus blood from a black hen and blood from an almond tree. Mix everything together and apply it to the affected area, keeping it in place until it heals.
the treatment of cancer by cautery
When a chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the chancre. And yet wise men say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the chancre; and yet I do not think this is good, because I fear it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen this happen sometimes; and a more direct thing is to cauterize it all around, with a cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the swelling that cannot heal
When someone has a disease that is called  "adubelati", and it takes a long time to heal, either due to the excess fluid it produces or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, very old) and have little blood, or due to the season; and you see it needs to heal quickly: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries by pricking; after that, leave it as it is. For it will heal more quickly.
And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery from which its form comes:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the skin, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it throughout his body in such a way that the course of the pustule is alleviated. After the cautery, let him heal perfectly.
the fire cautery with iron
There is another type of disease called "corrodens", which is simply a corruption of the limb, for it corrodes the limbs just as fire dries up withered branches. If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cauterization with fire, then heat the cautery tools, both small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location of the disease; then cauterize all over until you have reached all the corruption, and none of it remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed. And then leave it for three days, and apply a poultice made with oil on the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is removed. After that, treat it with ointments that generate flesh. And if you see after three days that no new flesh has grown, then restart the cautery process on any part that still shows signs of corruption. This type of disease can sometimes be treated with medicine instead of fire cauterization; however, fire cauterization is generally more effective. I have already described how to treat the disease with medicine in the corresponding section. Administer it whenever needed.
of sores that appear on the feet
Many times it happens that in the feet, because of a defect, there arises a disease which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large growth that disfigures the foot. And the cautery for this disease is according to two methods: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is that you heat an iron needle as big as a quill pen, made of good steel to the size that it can pierce the nail on all sides, and which has thin edges; then you place it hot on the nail and move your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it starts to produce pus. Then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will drop off and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the place with ointment, gradually hardening it until it is healed.
And if they appear on the body and many times in the hands and feet, then you should treat them with hot water cautery; and it is done in this way: take a brass or iron needle, or a quill pen, and place it on the nail and the wart, that is, the hard skin; then put the needle on so that it bleeds all around, then apply a little hot water, and hold your hand steady and press your hand as you turn it so that the edge of the needle reaches the root of the nail, and thus find the hot water a deep path to the root. Let the patient endure the pain of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted at all its roots. Do this one after another, until you extract all those on the body, then cure them with ointments that promote hardening.
the cure for trembling
When someone is shaking from the coldness of their nerves, or from quartan fever or other [illness], you should make 4 or 5 cauteries on the spine in the back, one cautery between each spinous process; and one cautery on the penis, and one over the stomach with an olive-oil cautery; it will stop the shaking and hasten the healing from the cold disease.
of foul pustules
Sometimes pustules appear all over the body, or foul pustules, which come from thick corrupted matter. One should cauterize each head of the pustule at first sight: with a thin fir twig, whose tip has been taken to the fire, or with a long root of aristologus, or with a lentil-shaped cautery. And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this way, and they cannot grow from thereforth, but the superfluity from which they come is disrupted, and they are healed; but this should be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut There are many times great flowings of blood from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery on the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stanch.
And nonetheless, when this happens to someone, you must hurry to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly so that the blood is quietened beneath your finger and no drop issues forth; then prepare several olive-wood cauteries, small and large according to the wound and the location where the artery is severed, and place the cautery upon that vein where you are holding your finger, and keep it there until the bleeding is staunched.
And if it bleeds afresh when you lift your finger from the wound and the cautery goes out, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
And do not cease to apply these one after the other until the bleeding is staunched; and be careful not to harm the nerve which lies nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well-staunched by itself when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods we have described: by cautery, or by extraction if it is not treated, or by strong ligature with thread, or by medicines placed upon it which have the power to staunch blood; and it should be bound and pressed firmly.
Whoever administers a tightening of bandages or placing hot things on it, or similar things, will not help much if at all.
And if this happens to someone and there is no medicine or surgeon present, then one should put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tighten it well above the wound and above the vein; and move it not, but moisten it with cold water often so that the blood may become congealed and thickened and tightened; and make inquiries meanwhile about what he needs for cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all the diseases that require cauterization with fire, or with burning medicines, and the wounds and causes, and the instruments and forms of cauteries; and I went through that chapter from head to toe, and I will go through this one in the same way so that one can more easily find what they are looking for.
And so that I begin this, my dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of this it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to be foolish. Because people come to cures in many different ways: some are so distressed by their illness that they would easily be cured if it were not for their stubbornness, and because of the seriousness of their illness; and one must fear these people. And among these there are some who give you their trust and say, "Wait, I am healed"; but their illness is stubborn. You should not listen to those who approach you in this way, but instead place more importance on your honor than on your desire, and do not act foolishly but wisely in what you know for certain, and in what you can learn and experience; and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of illnesses from which salvation is sought. This will help you achieve a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to be inspired by the holy breath of his hand, amen.
Now I have instructed you in this chapter by speaking about chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have described to you from the head to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
the head full of water
Do you know that this disease often comes to infants when they are born, and when the birth canal is too narrow for the child; and sometimes it comes from a cause that we do not know.
I have never seen this disease in adults, and in all cases I have observed, death has resulted; therefore, it seems best to me to leave the treatment for another day.
I saw a child whose head was swollen with fluid, and the swelling increased every day until it could no longer support itself; and the fluid was so abundant that it reached up to the brain, between the brain and bone, and the treatment for this is such that if the fluid is between the brain and bone and the abscess is small, you should make a large incision in the head, as wide as two fingers, until all the fluid has drained; and here is how you will identify spatulum:
If the swelling is deeper and the abscess larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, like this:
And if the fluid is under the bone and you see the creases of the scalp opening in all directions, and the fluid drains out when you press on it with your hand, and this does not alleviate the condition, then you must make three incisions in the head in this manner:
And after the incision, draw out all moisture firmly. After that, squeeze out the fissures with rags and powders, and apply wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then loosen it, and treat the wound by tenting and poultices, and let the head be extracted equally, and give the patient dry meat to eat, as much as the moisture can bear, until the limb is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at where the size of the abscess opens, and the gathering of the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Cut therefore where the abscess opens, and where the pus gathers, and open it according to what you can; and beware that you do not cut the artery, and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from bleeding and the evacuation of moisture.
of gout
When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and the medicine does not help, then the final treatment is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them cut, the patient should face away from you; then rub the area around the eyes with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then squeeze the neck of the patient with all your might using a 1-inch cloth; then look where the vein bleeds, and the places are just below the ears, and are very close to each other; then mark the spots, then cut both with a sharp spatulum two parts deep so that the vein reaches the bone, and this should be done from the side of the head.
And if you see, push the spatulum under the artery and cut it from above, slicing as deep as two beans across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood will jump out continuously upwards.
If the artery does not open to the touch, then you must measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then cut down and slice to the bone; and that which it is necessary to let blood out is six parts, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery; then examine the wound: if any pus remains on the bone, so that the hot abscess does not come there, then drain the wound and ligature it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
of emetics
When old-age dementia comes, and there is catarrh, due to moisture from tears, and heat in the temples, and old-age forgetfulness, and similar things, and it is not helped by remedies through methods of medicine, then we must cut into the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the manner of its extraction is that the patient pulls back the hair from his temples, and feels for the artery in the temple, which pulses strongly, especially in those who are too cold; and if it is not pulsing strongly, the patient should hold a warm water-soaked cloth to the area until it does. Then take the spatulum, of which there is a description below:
then scorch the skin slightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with tweezers, and separate it well from the tissues that are beneath it in each part; and if the artery is thin, return it to the tip of the fingernail, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two fingers. For if it is not cut, the blood will not flow throughout.
And draw out the blood from 1/4 to 3/8 of an inch; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound heals, and that blood comes out freely; then cut off the excess between the two ligatures in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot-iron knife up to the bone until the shoulders are cut; and this is the main course of treatment if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
For cautery helps to dry up moisture, that is why it is of greater help for moistures. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the site with old cotton and places it on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, they should be healed with dry medicines that cause scabs to form, and with bandages until they are healed; and if without cutting through the artery as much as you operate, you hasten to cover it by cauterizing, or you employ vitriol and strain it in your hand so that the blood is stained; and if you do not have that present, you place your finger on the site so that the blood congeals, and wet the site with cold water until the bleeding stops, and bind it as it should be; and what is better and easier for the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of two parts, but the cutter should be quite thick in order to retain its heat longer. For when the body is too weak, it holds less heat. And there should be between the two knives a distance of one finger's width, and then when you have cut through both sides, you place the hot iron over it until it reaches the bone, and you close the vein in two places; and the two heads should be separated because they are not fused by this cautery from top to bottom; and this is the form of the cautery:
of tears
When tears are flowing from the veins that are above the testes in the head, and it does not help to use medicine on it, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and he feels heat or burning in his forehead, and his eyes are weak and moist so that the hair of his eyelashes has fallen out, and the eyelids are scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed.
And the ancient ones called it "curing contusions," and you should do to the patient who has this disease that he has hairs on his forehead, then make three cuts on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the cuts be as two fingers all across the forehead from above, and the other two at two sides over the temples, and be careful not to cut into the arteries which are at the two sides over the temples; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the width of three fingers across.
From the incision which is towards the temple all the way to the second incision; and burn all the skin which is between the two cuts up to the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spatumile.
If you pour into the first cut the instrument which is called  "culter", and is very sharp on one side, and not sharp at all on the other, and this is its form: And cut the incision towards the chest and the armpit to the heart, and the other one towards the bone, and open it until it reaches the middle incision. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to the one that opens into the heart, and then make another incision in the middle up to the other defiant; then extract equally of blood and express the site for the blood taken; then place a tent of old cotton in each incision, and place moistened sheets in wine and oil and garlic, and guard against hot abscesses coming; and on the third day loosen the ligature, and administer a large amount of warm water, then treat with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
from the eyes
When someone has a constant runny nose, and you see the eyes are pale and sunken, and the vision is weak, and the eyelids are burned, and the hair falls out, and in the head there is pain, and the patient sneezes; then know from these symptoms that these materials and this catarrh come from many veins, and the medicine that cures it is this.
And you should command the patient to bend his forehead, then make a large slit in the middle of the forehead, and another one from the left temple to the right, cutting down to the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that control swallowing; when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then separate the two lips of the slit and insert old cotton, and apply tenting with linen; then bind moistened rags in wine and oil over it, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is removed, you should rub the bone until new skin begins to grow, then treat it with astringent substances that promote the formation of new skin.
In the same way: take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds to promote the formation of new skin throughout.
on the treatment of ear infections:
All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, or animals, or stone, or similar objects like iron; or seeds, such as peas, beans, and peas; or flowing substances, such as water and garlic, and similar things.
When a stone falls into the ear or another object that does not adhere to the ear nor grow in it, hold the ear towards the sun. If you see the stone, apply a few drops of violet oil or oil of assafety, and then administer extraction; and make the patient sneeze with snuff, and stop the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and hold the ear upwards. Often it comes out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, administer extraction with fine tweezers, which have this shape:
If it comes out with tweezers, that is good; if not, administer extraction with a fine needle of small diameter; and if it does not come out through this, make an iron hook and insert the tip of the hook into the ear canal firmly, and stop the space around the hook with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out directly, for often it comes out in this manner as we have said; and if it does not come out in such a way, take some glue and place it on something pointed suitable for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out. And if it does not come out with all the things we have mentioned, then be quick to split the ear so that the abscess and pain subside, and the method of splitting is that you first bleed the patient's head and extract blood according to its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small split in the root of the ear at the fatty tissue where it depends; and the split should be like a crescent moon, so that you can reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it energetically with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed. And if there are grains within it and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot issue out, then administer a .i. spatumile tenve subtle according to this form:
and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with subtle tweezers and a suction cup, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In the acute condition that affects the ear, the patient should use a nose-pack made of suitable materials, and fill the ear with soft cotton. And he should lie down on the affected side. If the water comes out through the nose, that is good. If not, he should take several thin stones according to the size of his nostrils, heat them, and place one nostril in the ear, and press down on it with another stone; and keep doing this with different stones until all the water comes out, as we have said for the stones. And if you see that, take a straw and insert one end into the ear, and hold the other end to his nose; and squeeze his nostril until all the water comes out, as we have said about the stones.
In the extraction of an object from the ear, if it is a small object, such as a louse or something similar, treat it as we have said in the previous section. But if it is a large object that can be felt, administer extraction with tweezers; and it is the easiest thing to remove what is in the ear.
When extracting worms from the ears, if you treat it as we have described in the section on distilleries, and the treatment does not help, then you should examine the ear in the sun; if any worms appear, you should pluck them out with a pair of delicate tweezers. If none appear, take a piece of wool from where they are formed.
And it is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top. And insert its most delicate end into the ear according to the amount of suffering caused by the disease; then suck firmly on the entire wool. Repeat this frequently until all the worms come out. If they do not obey and emerge, stop up around the cotton as I have said about stones; if they do not come out as we have described, administer distillation remedies which the ancients have experimented with for worm removal, and you will find them in the section on distillations; distil your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, from where the worms are formed.
And it is made of silver or brass with a narrow end having one small hole and a wider top for distillation; to press the distillation into this instrument, use a well-crafted brass tool, and if you see fit, take a razor and wrap the tip with cotton; then pour in your oil or juice, and what remedies you wish from your medicines into the wool, and let the wool be in the ear; then insert the razor over all the cotton, and gently press your hand so that the oil is distilled into the ear; and the patient will feel it inside, and the distillation should be slightly warmed by fire so that it is not too cold when distilled into the ear.
of earache
No child is born without an opening in their ears; and this same thing happens to men due to earache, or an injury inside the ear. Sometimes these openings occur in the ear itself, so that one cannot see them; and sometimes there is a small wound at the opening of the ear, which can be seen clearly.
Therefore, when the opening occurs and is not visible, it is due to a grievous wound in various parts, and in such cases one should hold the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane exposed, then examine it closely to understand its shape.
And it should be sharp and pointy at the front and back, so that it does not cut or injure the ear; if the membrane is due to a wound in the body of the ear, then grasp it with fine tweezers and gently peel away this wound.
If the infection is deep in the ear, take a thin, lightweight razor, heat it slightly in the fire, and then place it on the body of the ear. If you feel the infection that the patient feels when listening, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then insert a tent into the ear according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this for several days until the wound is closed; then take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it; and if you see swelling in the ear, it is appropriate to pull out the tent and move another tent moistened with cerot made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding that are in the remedies for distillations.
from the char of papers
This herb when it comes in papers of itself when they are moist and are dry, you must extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the root of a spatula; then put ground vitriol on the spot.
And if without peeling, then cauterize it with a thin lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision heals scabs; and many times they return, as long as something remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of hail
Many times they come in papers of things that look like hail in shape and hardness, and this is why the disease is called "hailstone", and it is an assembly of thick moisture on top and bottom; the work is as follows: take care if the hailstone breaks from one side to another, and it is a minor thing to know; they then open it with tweezers, and peel it. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, it will not harm the patient; and if the crack is large, there is a seam, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not force it, for the ointment will restore it immediately and heal the wound.
And if the hailstone is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then invert the paper, and grip the hailstone with pincers, and squeeze it from both sides; and if the paper is removed by the incision, that does not matter; and when the hailstone is crushed, apply a poultice of salted water, and clean the wound of any foreign matter until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a fat which is woven into the paper above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and it causes great harm to their eyes, and they experience catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at sunlight because the tears rush to their eyes; and because of this, they lie down on their faces and sleep, and their eyelids become moist which inflames and covers the appearance of the exinach. And when you press the area with your fingers, it seeps out between them.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient places his head on the operator's lap; and then take 1 linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that the exinach occupies in each part, and then place it over the eye; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exinach gathers within the circle; then cut through the moist skin with a spatula, making an incision no larger than the wound made when opening a vein; and in various cases, the exinach comes out of the incision in the shape of a piece of white fat.
Take therefore a piece of cloth and hold it between your fingers and thumb, and twist your hand from right to left until it is taut; and be careful not to push into the fissure so that you do not go all the way to the eye, lest you blister it.
And if the skin opens at the beginning of the fissure, gently spread the fissure slightly so that it appears; then extract as we have said, then moisten cloth in vinegar and water, and place on the area, and draw out with a bandage.
And if there are such people who bruise it and put something on it to corrupt that moisture which remains. Then treat the wound until it is healed. And if a hot abscess comes in the area, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.Et s’il vient aposteme froid, si le cure d’emplaustres chautes qui sont assouajans, tant qu’il soit sanez.
of hair of parchment
When hairs grow from papers other than their natural place, and they are enveillit, they harm themselves and bring on various diseases, just as tears, softening of the paper, and albugine, until it leads to their destruction; and there are four ways to treat this: through cauterization with fire, or with a medicine water according to what is mentioned before the chapter on cauterization, and either through incision and stitching or through splints, as I will explain.
You should place the head of the patient in your lap, then hold the paper of the eye in your left hand; if it turns, that is good; if not, then thread a needle with .i. thread; and this should be done from the edge of the paper where the hairs are growing, and draw .i. thread over the entire paper, and return to the razor; then cut into the part under the paper, under the awkward hairs, to the spatumile, copant, from the large larmier to the small one; then remove the thread and place a small tent of cotton and cloth underneath the paper, then sign over the paper a figure of an inch, like a fuelle of mirte, and still it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you see rising up in every part.
And if there is a need to cut out a large quantity of paper according to how soft the paper has become, then cut into the spatumile over the two lines you have marked and begin from the large larmier to the small one; and let one of the cuts be close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert an awl into one of the angles of the eye socket, then scrape it all off; then bring together the two lips with a stitch using an needle and thread made of fine wool, and draw out the blood, and allow any excess thread to hang over the two eyelids, if you wish to do so; and if not, then leave the stitch and threads for 3 or 4 days, then treat the wound without a stitch using dry and constricting things, because the paper lifts up around the wound and by bringing it together, but the stitch is harmful (as the ancients say), and this work is done without fear;
and if in another way: and that you draw the paper with a figure that is also like the leaf of the myrtle, as we have told, to .I. inches wide according to the form which is here:
then cut what is above with small scissors evenly according to the form that is here:
And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and the object is not even, then take a needle with which you have .I. thread, and pierce it through the figure; and take another thread from the large vein, and the second thread from the small one, and bring together the threads evenly between your fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have signed, as we have told, then bring together the .ij. lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointment;
and sometimes the hair of the paper is inverted: so you should use what we have said about the incision; but the sewing in one and another is more artificial.
The treatment of the cane is as follows: you must first turn the paper and place it inside according to what I have said, then make two canes by art, and two thin threads as long as the paper and the width of the spathomyle; then tie two pairs of threads where you hold the threads; then join one and the other subtly above what is on top of the paper of the eye, and pull out the two canes from the two formed parts; and let it be thus for some days, and the skin that was stretched will die and harden and fall off, as long as it falls through itself.
If it is slow, if the cope exerts some force, then treat it until it is healed; and when the wound is sutured, and if the paper is raised, the hairs will no longer grow there; and this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
the operations are such that you pierce a needle and insert a fine and subtle silk thread; then join the heads and tie them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then arrange another fine silk thread in the eye, and tie the end of the thread; then put the patient's head in your hand; and let it be exposed to sunlight so that the operations are declared, for this is a subtle and fine operation, then insert the needle into the root of the hair near the skin, and pierce the paper obliquely until you draw it above the natural hair; then pull out the thread and insert it into the eye of the needle with the natural hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand back so that the hairs come out straight through the paper with the natural hair.
And if the wound is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you shall treat the wound underneath to the very end that you have prepared for it, until the wound comes out through the opening above and you see it with your eye; then you shall treat the wound and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 1 or 2 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, then accompany it with a long hair from the horse's mane, and let it grow with that one which you leave, until it is elongated and then you remove it.
of the eyelash
When this disease called "alacrity" or the eyelash comes in the eye, it has two causes: natural and unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar things.
And the method of treatment for this is that you split the wound open, and separate the eyelids, and put in it tents of linen, and bind it up until it heals; and one should not use in its treatment anything that dries and restricts. For if you do, then the disease will return worse than before; but one should use things that soften, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altered water and linseed are cooked, and diaquilon is melted in some of the oils, and it is wrapped up in a tent, and cured like this.
And the goal of your treatment is that you take care that it does not heal according to the form that it was before; and these works which we have said are not remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
of the flesh that comes in the eye
This disease which is under the eye is truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental. The accident comes from a wound and from a cut and cautery and similar things; and the way of doing the operation on it is that you take a needle, with which there is a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct so that the threads come out on both sides of the eye, then the flesh above is cut all the way to the needle, and the skin is pulled back about one spathum wide.
And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the slit, and turn the paper, and make two slits along the side within the paper; and let the edges of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision which you have cut, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has the number "J" in Greek; then remove this flesh, according to the amount that its sides are bent down below, following along with the paper; then join together the two separated parts, and sew it up with a thread of wool; then cure it as we have said with softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a split or stitch or cautery, then you should make a plain split underneath the hair of the scalp, and according to what is mentioned above; then unsheathe between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and the operation should be performed according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares an instrument with all his power, how he makes the figure return to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of operation and instruments in various dispositions.
suddenly from the scalp
When this splitting occurs in the hands of men in such a way that the scalp above is separated from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you should therefore insert the point of a razor underneath the scalp, and lift it up; and stretch it with tweezers, until you grip what is open to the subtile spatula, which is neither too round nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot bear that the too-sharp spatula pierces the eye; and make your incision, by which you peel away this union, lightly, so that the scalp returns according to its natural shape; and all of this union is healed, and they sometimes create an ulcer in the eye, and raise it with warm water, and with a bandage; then place a tent of linen between the scalp and the eye, and place wet wool on the eye; and after the third day, use the bandage and soothing things until it is healed.
of the nail of the eye
You should know that the nail comes in two forms: one is nerveous and resembles a hard cyst; the other is not nerveous but resembles congealed white moisture, which, when touched with iron and pinched, cannot be pierced by any means; both kinds begin at the inner corner of the eye, grow little by little, and cover the entire sight, light, and movement of the eye.
And the method of incision is that the patient places his head over yours, then he opens his eyes; you hold the piece of paper in your hand, then grip the nail with tweezers at the cuticle and lift it up; next, take a needle, thread a horsehair, or cow's hair, or ox hair through it, double the tip of the needle over, insert it into the nail, tie the nail with a thread, and lift it up; then scrape along the side of the nail that follows the eyelid all the way to the tear gland, being careful to not pierce the tear duct; sometimes, only the cuticle and thread are needed, as mentioned; then scrape along the soft tissue around the tear gland, taking care not to damage the tear duct with the incision.
And be careful not to touch the fleshy membrane and rupture it, nor pierce the tear gland; after the incision, apply a little powdered quicklime to the eye, and a collar made of linseed oil, and leave it on until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot push in the needle, and the hooked pins cannot enter, many times this kind of nail has been cured by medicines; and it heals as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the malady, and take the spatula gently with a small hook according to this form:
And lift the nail gently, and if you see that it does not lessen and the pus continues to come out, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red collar, and if it is ground, and stop the eye until the next day; then resume the other work according to this same action, until it is completely removed.
If there is no contrary thing in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then treat it with milk, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.Se li ungle est vairons ou si grant, et ne puet gueres estre curé, adonques le tranche selonc la forme de l’ungle, et le traie hors dou pie; puis tache l’ungle s’il est chaut, et met sus dou baume de colofonia et d’uncina de vairons et de pluyer, et le retrempe en l’oil dou mal.
And if the nail is very large and cannot be cured easily, then cut it according to the shape of the nail, and pull it out from the toe; then burn the nail if it is hot, and put on balsam of colophony and of the nail and of vitriol, and re-drip into the eye of the malady.
of the flesh that grows above the eyeball
In some men sometimes grows red flesh above the eyeball, covering it and pressing against the eyelids, and they turn their eyes upwards, resembling a rose in its bud; and if one puts pressure on the eye of the patient, then he can operate on them, pulling out all the flesh with tweezers as far as possible, and then he cuts through to the bone at the joint where this happens, as described in this chapter, using gentle force to remove the growth; then he cuts away the first piece of flesh, and continues cutting down to the eyeball, being careful not to damage it; and the incision is made as we described for the nail, with small movements so that one can remove the growth, as shown in this chapter.
And when the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then treat the eye with egg white mixed with red vitriol and other corrosive medicines, and cover it with cotton soaked in egg white to protect against hot abscesses; and if anything remains, and the eye becomes sore, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with remedies for hot abscesses; then return to your treatment once the eye is healed, and do this for as long as necessary.
However, you should always use the natural method for curing weak eyes, and the accidental method for strong eyes; and do not use your hand in either treatment until you see that this member is suffering from the other treatment.
of the eyes
They are red veins that lie over the eye, and they hinder vision and weaken the eye every day. Therefore, first, you must examine the eye, for if there is nothing wrong with it other than the redness, then treat it thus: instruct the patient to tilt their head back so that it lies flat, then gently massage those veins all around the socket according to your wisdom, and make the massage strokes short and quick according to this form.
And massage in circles going downward on one side of the eye according to this form:
Then press those veins gently, and draw out the blood little by little, hour after hour, until you see the veins drawn away from the eye; but be careful not to hurt the eye with the points of your fingers, and do this work at noon in the sunlight, and be very diligent in your task so that you do not leave any of the veins untouched. And when you have finished, instil a mixture of green and red collyrium into the eye to purify what remains of the redness.
And if you do not have the power to pull out all of this in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and let it be for several days until the pain is appeased and assured of a hot abscess; then begin again according to the manner set forth above until he is healed; and that is the form of strength:
of the eye fistula
Look carefully at the "arissati" fistula: when you heal it with cautery and medicine with a hot fire according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, there is an issue in it that you split open over the abscess, where it should remain, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you will see the corruption and blackness, then you will use the instrument again, of which there is the form; and it is called a  "aspre chief", and it should be made to be sharp at one end, and punctured like a file as it is in the present form:
And place it over the site of the corrupt bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly until you feel that the corruption has been removed; do this a few times, then restore the site with drying medicines.
if the fistula is not healed and there is no improvement after 40 days, and nothing bad happens, then you can be sure that it has healed; if not, there is only one other thing to do, which is to open the fistula at its opening with a knife according to this form: first, expose the bone again using iron and sharp medicines, then take a small piece of iron according to this form, and make the shaft thin up to the tip as you see here, and make the head into three prongs.
then place it on the bone at the fistula, and move your hand away slightly, then push the entire instrument in until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through their windpipe; then restore the site with dry medicines as I have instructed you before. Once the wound heals and hardens over the site, examine the material at the opening of the fistula; this is a gentler method for the patient.
from the opening of the eye:
When the eyes are fully open all around and there is no disturbance to the eye or diminution, then you should ligature the patient; then heal, then place leeches or suckers without piercing to draw out, then apply a poultice on top made from aconite and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then bind the eye, using bandages and linen; the manner of the linen is that you fold linen very softly, and double each one into four, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eye needs; then bind it tightly from above with a firm bandage, and then restart the leeches to draw out without piercing; then remove the leeches and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the ligature softens, then you should tighten it greatly; then remove the ligature after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, then restart the poultice and the linen and the ligature and the leeches until it is healed.
from the rupture of woven fabric
When disruptions occur in woven fabric, then it opens and appears like a grain of resin, and is frightening to see; therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part below up to the part above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread of the part of the armhole; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the place of the double thread and tie one part of the fabric around, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and apply a poultice made from a soft egg yolk on top of the eye; and leave it until the thread breaks with the fabric, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restricted by the fabric in a circle of linen, until it is healed.
And if the eyes give great pain, then pierce them with a sharp needle which comes from the back of the eye, and dry out the moist white part and lower the eyes, and put them in as far as they will go; then pull on them until they are healthy.
from the back of the eye
This disease called "alcunnati" is only in the eye, which is assembled in the eye, looking like water, but it is not; and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you have the patient sit on a prepared seat and straight, then hold his head with both hands and move it until you see the bow coming to your eyes; then it must be pierced, and the light must not descend and be obscured, and the patient should see things as he usually does. If the bow does not descend under, know that it is water, and if the bow does not appear as we have said, hold the patient between your hands, then take the sharp needle and pierce through the white part of the eye, through the conjunctiva, into the cornea, until the bow comes out; and when it is issued, distill into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek boiled with honey, and let it be cured with another cure until it is healthy.
of the eye waters
We have the appearances of the diseases in the division, and what is needed to pierce; then act according to health. You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light so that the sun does not hurt his eyes, and hold his healthy eye very tightly; then put the paper on your left hand if his eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if they are on the right; then take in your right hand, if his eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if his eyes are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument along the crown by the thickness of a thread in that part of the eyeball where the tear duct is located, then insert the instrument called "almagda" gently, and turn your hand so that it pierces the eyeball, and you will feel that almagda comes to the empty space; and the measure of the path of almagda should reach the bottom of the space between the pupil and the edge of the iris; this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the horny membrane, and then insert the instrument where the ailment is, then express it from one path to another. If the ailment is flowing now, the patient sees the instrument in his eye.
After a short rest, if the ailment flows back up the second path, push it down with the instrument; and when it is stuck and does not flow, gently withdraw almagda by turning your hand a little bit; then put in the eye a little more sealed silk, and remove it from that eye. Then place on the affected eye, as a poultice, comfrey crushed with plenty of egg, and bind it with the healthy eye. We, and those of our time, also put on comfrey bruised with plenty of egg.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called  "alberit", which has this shape:
And so pierce the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep, but make a small slit, then insert alum, as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare for the patient a dark chamber in which he can sleep on his back in a dimly lit place; and he must be free from all movement, and eat light foods, and not move his head to the right or left, and he must be bound according to his condition for three days; then release him in that same dark room, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then release the bandage by the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but you should alleviate it so that the water can flow gently.
if there are hot abscesses, you should release the eye before the seventh day, and use a remedy that soothes abscesses; and when it is calm, remove the sight and place an eye patch over one eye to cover it, and he should remain in that dark room. Then leave the house little by little, and return to his normal state; and know that no student should intervene in this case.
And one came to us from the Land of Iraq, who told us that in his country they pierce with alum, and suck out the water, but I have never seen anyone doing this in our land, nor have I read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the similitudes of the forms of almagest, because those who do not know them may see them; and they are properly made of brass.
And let the heads of these be of the same subtlety, and the points in three angles.
of the heart over the nose
Sometimes there arise on the nose warts which are diverse, from which it happens that some appear like scorpions with many feet; and also there are those where the wart is indented of a dark color, and others which are protuberant of a fair color. When this occurs in one of these warts which is protuberant and not indented, you should cause the patient to sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, pour the oil upon them, and draw it out with force; then press it as much as you can endure by means of the spatumile which is slender at one end.
If something remains which cannot be removed, then open it with a sharp instrument lightly so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or an abscess forms, then lanced as appropriate; and if malignant abscesses form, then hasten to cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the corruption is removed, then apply cold water, or wine.
If the ear is affected, and moisture extends to the palate, know that it is healed; and if the moisture does not drain as it should, know that there is corruption in the bone above, therefore do not use an instrument to cut: instead, take a thread of linen, about the thickness of a finger, and tie it with a knot at one end, and make intervals between each knot, a digit or less; and let the patient place the thread in his nostril as far as he can bear it, and draw it through until it comes out through the mouth; and many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wishes to do it. Then hold the end that comes from the nostril with one hand, and the other end that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and pull them gently apart in opposite directions until you know that the thread has dislodged the corruption, then remove the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the nostril as before. Repeat this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the corruption; and then insert a plug made of cotton wool in the ear for several days until it is healed, and if medicine is needed to dry the ear, then use it. This is the instrument used to cleanse the ears, with which one can draw out oils and medicines through the nostril:
It should be made of silver or brass, in the shape of an open lamp, like a tube, and with a handle to control it; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and fill it with medicine to cleanse the ears; and there should be a small handle at the end for holding it while heating the oil or any other liquid.
through the nose
many times a disease called "telul" arises at the top of the nose; it grows and becomes large, so that it is visible to the eye. Therefore, you should treat it at first, and remove all of it, then place upon it a cautery or burning medicine. If one delays in treating it until it has become large, then be wary if it is hard, dark in color, and insensate: do not touch it with iron, for it is an abscess. For when one treats it, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is due to a superficial touch, not from deep color, and you see that one can completely cover it, then evacuates the patient and treat the site with dry and constricting substances.
when the nose is cut and sewn
Know that when a break occurs in one of the cartilage-like bones, it benefits only a few people. Therefore, whenever this happens to someone, examine whether the wound is fresh and full of blood; then split both lips with one stitch, then cure it until it heals. If the lips are separated on either side, then you should scrape all parts of their edges until they heal, then sew the two lips together with a stitch, and tighten them, and powder them with powdered dragon's blood and incense; and place a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster over the powders, and let it stay in place until it falls off by itself, then cure it with ointment until it heals.
The manner of sewing is that you assemble the needle: either by needle, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or by thread, as I have made you aware.
of lip abscesses
At home on the lips there are hard abscesses, resembling grains of wheat, small and large; therefore you should cut into the lip, and pierce each pustule with pincers, and scrape out each one; then apply powdered vitriol after making an incision, until the blood is stopped; then use a poultice of garlic, and treat the area with dry remedies until it is healed.
of gum pain
Many times a growth arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albus"; you should hold it with tweezers, cut at its root, and let the blood or pus flow out; then place ground vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders, over the site; if the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cautery, that is the form for treating an abscess.
of the ears, and of the eyes, and of the nose, and of the throat, and of the mouth, and of the gums, and of the teeth, and of the tongue, and of the palates, and of the head, and of the brain, and of the neck, and of the collar bones, and of the shoulders, and of the armpits, and of the arms, and of the elbows, and of the wrists, and of the hands, and of the fingers.
Sometimes they are gathered at the roots of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, scabs that are unsightly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and wormy, when corruption comes to the gum, and they stink; so you should make the patient hold his head in your hands, and press his gums with your thumb, and pull the teeth or the scabs until nothing remains; and thus do the same for blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other discoloration, until they are cleaned; and if one pulls out what is at the first cause, that is good; if not, then repeat it again on the second day and the third, until you have pulled everything out; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments for pulling, according to what the work demonstrates, so that the instrument used to pull out teeth have different forms from those used to pull between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
When you treat a toothache and draw it out, take as long as you can, for this must not be done quickly; for the tooth is a very sensitive substance until there is no more excuse for drawing it. Therefore, when the patient is forced to draw it out, you must be certain which tooth it is that hurts. Often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks that the tooth that hurts is a healthy one, so he draws out the good tooth; yet the pain is not relieved because of this, as long as the bad tooth remains, for we have already seen this happen to some patients; and when you are certain which tooth it is, you must cut around the tooth all the way to the gum; then press hard with your fingers or with small pincers all around the tooth until it is well loosened, then grip it firmly with the pincers; and let the patient's head be between your knees, and hold him so that he does not move.
After drawing out the tooth carefully without breaking it, if it will not come out, take one of those instruments and insert it into each side of the tooth gently and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced or decayed, you must fill its holes with wax, and then grip it firmly with the pincers so that it does not break when you pull; and you must work gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful not to break it and leave a part of it behind, and bring back greater pain to the patient through the malice of its root, for sometimes ignorant surgeons, in their haste and arrogance, break teeth, and do not use what we have instructed; but they sometimes bring on great illness because of this, either through the roots that remain, or by breaking the tooth, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is drawn, wash the place with wine, or garlic and salt; and if there is bleeding, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the site; and if that does not help, cauterize it.
The forms of instruments with which the teeth are pulled first should have long points and thick handles so they do not break when you pull on the tooth. And these are the forms:
And they should be made of strong metal so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should have teeth to hold the gums.
of the roots of the teeth When the root remains in while pulling, you should put moist cotton on the spot for one or two days until the gums are softened. Then, use tweezers called "algefri", which make the gums look like a bird's beak; and they should be made inside like a file, and this is their shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and insert the instrument called "althali", that is to say, a spatula, of which this is the shape:
It should be strong and wide so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, of which the forms come below:
And if one uses this instrument which has two branches, of which this is the shape:
and other tools that are in the reason of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, of which this is the shape:
And let this instrument be outside so that it does not break, and know that there are many instruments of teeth; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise subtle masters find their own instrument by themselves according to what their works and the disease show them, because there are many diseases in which the ancients did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of others; and if it does not break in the cart or other bones, but protrudes, then he looks for the instruments that he needs, that I have told you about, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form: And let them be large and well-fitting to hold the bone so that it does not slip, but he can hold and remove it; and then restore the site with appropriate medicines, and if there is protuberance in the bone, and it is small, then treat it with this instrument.
When the tooth appears not according to the natural structure of the body, and its shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you should know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down; then cut it off; and if there is an air bubble with the tooth, then take this instrument of which the form is like a small beak, and let it be made of iron sharpened at the tip:
And the gum shrinks a little bit each day because of the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that one can file it, then file it with an ivory file like this is the shape:
and is also like the file with which we make needles; and file the tooth a little bit each day lightly, so that it does not move until it fits; then smooth it at the end with any rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file the sharpness so that it is even and does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
when the tooth is loose
When the front teeth loosen, by удар or by falling, and the patient cannot press on what he eats without them coming out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, but it does not work; then they must be restrained with a gold wire, because silver wires turn green and rot, but gold never moves; and let the wire be medium or thin, according to the amount of space between the teeth. And if you want to direct the teeth, take the wire and wrap it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the head between the loose teeth, whether there is one or more, as long as you come to the bleeding part on the other side; then start again at the point where you applied pressure, and hold your hand firmly and gently so that it does not move. Then wrap the wire around the teeth with a pair of tweezers, and assemble them, and tie them between the healthy tooth and the loose one, so that it does not cut the tongue; and then leave it tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone or the wire breaks, then tie it with another wire. It will remain like this and serve for all time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of how to direct the two healthy teeth and the two loose ones, as you see:
And when a tooth falls out, it is replaced in its place, little by little, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and careful should attempt this, and sometimes the shape of a tooth from a cow's bone is made, and placed in the place where there is a defect, and bound as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
to cover the line on the tongue
Sometimes this line comes from under the tongue as a natural birth defect, and sometimes it is caused by an injury; and the treatment is to open the mouth of the patient, and press their head towards your hand, and lift their tongue; then cover the nerve line from the side, so that the tongue is loosened from its socket. And if there is hardening due to injury, cut it from the side as well, and make sure the incision isn't too deep so as not to cut the artery underneath. Once you're done, apply a mixture of rosewater and garlic, or just cold water, and then place a linen tent under the tongue; and every night, treat the wound with an ointment made from lard and honey, so that the wound does not heal closed. If bleeding occurs, apply crushed vitriol; and if the bleeding continues, cauterize it with a lentigo cautery, which is suitable for this purpose. Then clean the wound further until it heals.
And if you see it is dark colored or black and hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it, as it is a ulcer; and if it is inclined towards gangrene, and there is moisture, cut it from the side with a sharp spatula, and loosen it from both sides; and if bleeding occurs due to your action, apply crushed vitriol until it stops, then return to your treatment, pulling out all the way, then apply a mixture of garlic and vinegar, and clean the wound further until it heals. Then apply a poultice of garlic and vinegar to the affected area, and clean the wound further until it is completely healed.
of abscesses in the throat
There are sometimes swellings inside the throat called "godath," and they are properly called tonsils. And when you treat them as described in the previous section, if they do not heal, pay attention to the following: If the abscesses are hard, small, and of a purplish color, do not touch them with iron. If they are red and the root is swollen, do not use iron either, so as not to cause bleeding; let it be until it bursts on its own. And if they are white in appearance and the roots are thin, prepare an instrument for cauterization, but first make sure that the abscesses have cooled down and are calm. Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with his head tilted back, his mouth open, and his tongue pressed down by a servant's hand, and apply the cautery instrument, which can be made of silver or thin bronze, like a knife:
As you press the tongue with this instrument, you will see the abscess; then take a pair of forceps and insert it into the tonsil, pulling it out as far as possible. Remove any threads from the wound with the forceps, then cover the wound with the cautery instrument again, which has a pointed shape, resembling a needle; the instrument should be curved on one side and straight on the other, and very sharp, made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument available, you can use tweezers, which have a similar shape:
And it is pointed on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have lanced one of the glands, lance the other according to the same method, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and water and garlic, and if there is a discharge of blood, gargle the patient with water or cooked pomegranate peels, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses besides the two glands form in the throat, so lance them thus as the two glands were lanced.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely, one abscess of small size; and she had almost closed her entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained like that for one or two days. And the abscesses were already so swollen that they had pushed out two openings from the nose. I hastened, therefore, and inserted an incision into one of them, then drew out a large amount of pus; then I made another incision in the other nostril, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I inserted the incision into the abscesses and cut out a portion, and only a little blood came out; thus the passageway of the throat was unblocked for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to cut this abscess for a long time; and it would grow again and fill up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; therefore, I lanced it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it stopped growing; and I left these parts, and I do not know what happened to her after me.
of the grape
When the eye descends into the socket, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round beneath, it is called an "uve". When it has been incised as we have said in the division, and the incision does not help, and you see that the surrounding abscesses are pacified, and it is delicate, then you should cope with it; and if it is rounded and not long, and is blood-red or the color of pus or black, then you should avoid incising it. For there is great danger in doing so. Therefore, when you see it, according to its whiteness and length, you should have the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the probe into the eye, and draw it out from beneath, and cope with it using one of the two instruments I mentioned for the incision of the two almond-shaped eyes. And you should not cope beyond the superfluity that is beyond the natural limit, for if you do, it will harm the voice and speech. After the incision, use what we said about the incision of the two almond-shaped eyes, and treat it until it heals. And if the patient fears having it incised, then you should use a cautery on his tongue without fear. The manner of the cautery is as follows: the patient puts his head against your healthy eye, then presses his tongue against the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and breathes against a live coal so that it is not too dense or too clear; and with this instrument, which has this shape,
and has a handle at the top where one puts the medication, like the handle of a spoon, and places the instrument with all the medication on it over the eye; and the patient should lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth due to the medication inside, so that it does not descend into the throat and choke him; then hold your hand over the medication and press it onto the eye for the duration of half an hour, until you see it become numb and the bites of the medication calm down. And if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the eye all the way to the cotton, so that the cotton adheres to the eye; and do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry and fall off after four or five days. And if you need to re-administer the cautery of the medication, then do so, and after the cautery, wash around the eye with cold water, and treat it with gargles until it heals.
This treatment is safer than incision or cautery; if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamine and hyssop and marjoram and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and add garlic, and let it boil. And the pot should be well glazed with strong clay, and in the pot there should be one instrument shaped according to this method: And it may be made of silver or brass, and the end of one is placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is mortified; then he is treated again frequently, until the eye dries up; and beware of doing this at the beginning of the occurrence of a hot abscess, for many things happen there; and do not do this except at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put an egg shell inside it, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the egg shell will not allow the vapor to burden the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with salvation.
Many times a fish bone or spine, or some object, becomes stuck in the throat; so you must pull out what you can see and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can move the object; and what does not appear to you and is lodged in the throat, you should make the patient vomit as long as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry piece of bread; and attach a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the spot, it will stick, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out through what we have said, take an instrument of lead according to this form:
And let the instrument be bent at the end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the end lifted up high; and beware of touching the epiglottis, so that it does not choke him, nor push the bone inside; and move as long as the patient swallows the instrument, so that he can move the object; then he swallows it down, or pulls it out with the instrument equally, until it is out.
of the blood of the throat
Sometimes the blood is healed with medicine, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when that does not help, then look at the throat of the patient towards the sun, and then press his tongue with the instrument that I told you. And if you see the blood, draw it out with a small hook, or with тонкими щипцами, which are suitable for this. And if that doesn't work, take a long needle, insert it into the throat of the patient, and then heat the needle, and do this often. And if the disease is caused by water, fill a glass with cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, it will retract.
And if it does not withdraw as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida, using the instrument that I described for fumigation of the throat; do this many times, because it will withdraw without bleeding. And the way to fumigate is to place burning charcoal in a pot, and cover the pot with a perforated lid, and insert the end of the instrument into the hole; then blow your smoke into the instrument, and the patient should put the needle into his mouth, close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but go to the blood; and the blood will withdraw immediately, and if it does not withdraw, then repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient endure thirst, and eat salty and dry things, and do not drink water; and then he will need to urinate.
The shape of the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids resembles, when it can be seen, bent tongs designed to enter the throat; it also resembles a doctor's beak and has the roughness of a file so that it cannot let go of what it grasps. And here is its form:
for abscesses
There are many kinds of abscesses, as the following account from various sources in this book shows, and they differ according to their location and size; and there are two main types, those which are in the flesh and those which appear at the joints. Abscesses on the head are different from those on the body's foundations, and those that appear on fleshy parts are different from those found at the joints, each with its own treatment.
And for abscesses one must not pierce them until the pus has formed and it is ready to drain; but there are some which should be pierced when they are still forming, like those that appear at the joints. For if an abscess appears at a joint, and you leave it until it forms a hard mass, then often the ligament and nerve of the joint will be damaged, causing contraction in the limb. If the abscess is near the main limb, and you delay piercing it until it is fully formed, it will harm the main limb; but if it is near the body's foundation, one should pierce it when it is ready to burst and not let it form a deep pus pocket, which can cause lasting damage. One must not pierce an abscess that has not yet formed pus and is still digesting, except for those that appear at the joints, as these should be drained before they fully form.
And you must know the time of the piercing of the abscess which is dead according to its maturity, and that is when the pain is appeased, and the departing of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you must make the piercing at the most dependent part of the abscess, and where it appears soft; and the piercing should be made deep in the body, and if the abscesses are on the hands or feet, or in joints, and on nerves, and arteries, and in all places alike where there is no fold.
In places that fold, according to the member. And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the piercing until it is confirmed by completed digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this, then the poison will spread throughout the body from it, and it will be filled with much filth; and perhaps the lips and the depths of it will harden. And for small abscesses, make small holes; and for large abscesses, large holes, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where one should draw out the pus, and cover up; when it has become like a shirt, and is deadened, then one must do as one does with blisters: and there are some that are split in three angles, and some which one covers like the leaf of a myrtle, as with abscesses on the bones; and there are some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions, and similar coverings.
Those who do not have a head, as with a superficial abscess, you should pierce it plainly; and when the abscess is large, and has drawn much pus, and you do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but some part; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more; do this several times until all the pus is out; likewise if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying a child, or a small child, or an elderly person. For sometimes the wound twitches with the issue of the pus, and perhaps kills the patient, and you do not realize it. Therefore be very cautious about this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, wash the wound, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; if it is a plain incision, then dress it with tents made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many holes in it, then put a tent in each one so that they come up against each other; and if you have cut into the skin of the abscess, and drawn it out all around, then fill it with old cotton or rags of linen without moisture, and let it lie for three days; then remove it, and dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
If blood flow occurs due to your work, bring cold water and a wet cloth, and place it over the bleeding area multiple times. If the blood flow persists, apply pressure and treatment, and use the powders I have described earlier in this book. If it is winter, and the area is very nervous, then you should place warm tents and clothes moistened with wine and oil over the site; if it is summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should place moistened clothes with water and oil, or with cold wine and oil, for a third of the day, as we have said. Then cut into the abscess, wash and treat it, as appropriate, until it heals.
Now you should understand, in general, the treatment of abscesses. I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and you can find this chapter now.
of sores
Or let us discuss the sores that come from the head, which are like those of mice, and there are many variations. Some are fatty and some are hard and bony in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause contrary effects. The operation of this type is such that you must try every instrument called an 'entromissoire', by which the form comes later, showing what it contains. For if it contains moisture, then it is opened from above. And when the moisture is discharged, then it is peeled without leaving any skin that contains the moisture, for it returns as soon as something is left; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and repeat this process every day until you are sure that nothing remains overnight. Then treat the wound with appropriate ointment, until it heals. And if the abscess contains a fat-like substance, then cut it according to its shape, from above; and squeeze out your fingers, and peel it all over, and put all your treatment into drawing out the pus or fluid; and if the artery causes contrary effects, then do as I have told you after. And also do this for an abscess that is hard and bony in texture, cutting and treating it as I have said before.
And the incision on a stony and moist abscess is lighter, because they contain little blood. And in some of these abscesses on the head or where there is no moisture, I had an abscess on the head of an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not be crushed; and if anyone had broken it, it would have made a wound like a stone. In other abscesses coming to the head, those that come to the heads of children and to the roots of the ears, the opening should be all day in the most dependent place, for the pus to issue; and treat them as appropriate.
of scrofula
Many times these abscesses come to the neck and under the armpits, and sometimes in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere in the body; and they are numerous, and are connected with each other. And each scrofula is properly within its coat, as the boil and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and there are many kinds of these scrofulae. There are some which contain moisture, and some which are malignant and do not respond to treatment. So when you see one with a good disposition for lancing, and it is similar in color to the rest of the body, and is not swollen anywhere, nor adherent to the nerves of the neck or the artery or the duct, and is not deep; then you should lance it from above, and scrape each part, and the two lips of the wound should be at an angle, as needed, as we have said for abscesses on the head; and drain it little by little, and be careful not to cut into the nerve or vein, and do not go too deep, so that you do not cut anything you should not.
And if you cauterize the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put into the wound vitriol ground, or any powders that stanch blood, and bind up the wound; and leave it until the abscess is pacified, and the wound is softened, and begins to fester. And when the blood is stanched, return to your task, until you have finished it; then examine with your finger if there remains any small scrofula, and scrape them off and clean them. And if in the root of the scrofula there is a large vein, then you should not cauterize that scrofula in its root, but ligature it with a strong double thread, and let it drop through it without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
And if you cauterize the whole scrofula, then it is necessary to bring together the two lips of the wound and stitch them now, so that there remains no superfluity due to the size of the scrofula. Then you should proceed to cauterize its root and draw it out, and stitch it as we have said before. Those scrofulae that retain superfluity, pierce where the vein appears; and pierce it in the same way as the one previously mentioned, depending on it, then apply tents with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what is remaining of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, cure it with ointment, causing a blister, until it is healed.
of scrofula
The ancients wrote and spoke of throat surgery; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the script of their words.
For those with scrofula, it is necessary to open the flap of the throat, called the 'epiglottis'; and this should be done gently, for all the veins and the lymph node are affected by the disease, whether the abscess is hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits. When the disease is in the lymph node channel, one must cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.Il conviant aussi que li medecins sache le goute et le sentour de la maladie; car onque il n’i a pas bon sanz sa science.
It is also necessary for the doctor to understand the nature and extent of the disease, for one cannot treat it effectively without that knowledge. Therefore, when we wish to open the epiglottis, we should do so below the third or fourth circle, or with a small slit across the middle, not in the cartilage.et que la fendure soit desoz les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac; et ne fie en la cartillaige. Et s’il avient que li pormon soit en la cartillaige ou plus hault, il faut le fendre en la cartillaige, ou plus hault, selonc le sentour de la maladie.
and those who are suitable for the incision of the epiglottis, where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from within.
And if the master is fearful, then he should stretch the skin of the throat to the Adam's apple, then cut through the skin as far down as the larynx; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then split the hyoid bone, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated through the incision of the larynx that the breath escapes through the opening, and by the loss of voice.
and leave the wound open.
And when the hour has passed of which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and sew it up entirely without the cartilage; then administer remedies that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim says one should not do this until the throat is completely choked, and the patient judged to be dead, and the failure of the windpipe. Then one should grasp the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and he will breathe through the wound, and thus be guarded from death.
And for this reason, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the maliciousness of the disease was passed, and it is passed in 3 or 4 days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a young lady take a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut open the gums of her teeth;
and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
I uncovered the wound and found that blood had issued from it; I saw that it had not bled copiously or been directed outward other than through the throat, and the blood had escaped through the wound.
I hastened to sew up the wound, and treated it until it healed.
and the lady had no more pain than a minor discomfort, and recovered her strength afterward.
Therefore, I say that one should not be afraid to cut into the epiglottis.
of the large throat
This hernia is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess the color of ochre, and it occurs often in women.
And it has two causes: natural and accidental; when it is natural, there is no innate predisposition.
And the accidental cause has two forms: one is similar to a swollen hernia, and the other is like an abscess that comes from an artery. and he has fear, and one should not work with fire except in that which is small, and test and examine all the instruments: if you find it as smooth as an egg, and cannot get anywhere with it, then chop it up like we do nuts, and scrape the top of its shell if there is any; and examine well all around, and clean it as it should be, until it is perfectly clean.
of nuts
There are many ways to do this, all of which I will describe.
And now I shall explain the difference between a dislocation and an issue.
I say that an issue is a fever and heat which persists until the effusion has passed and the swelling is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
With a dislocation, there is no fever or heat or pain, and it contains a pus-filled blister which is the same colour as the body, and begins like a pimple and becomes large.
and they are according to their appearances, either dry, or moist, and of various colors as I have said in the classification.
When you come to the treatment of the nose, you should first examine and test it with all the instruments called "introductors," according to what its shape will allow in the following chapters.
And the manner of inquiring into abscesses in the nose is that you press on the most moist spot that you find in the abscess, and twist your fingers little by little, until you feel that the instrument has penetrated the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then pull out the introducer, and take care in what it goes.
If pus runs short, whatever color it has, they should treat it as I have said for other abscesses.
and if after the incision no pus comes out, know that it is fatty, so they should make a cross-shaped cut and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape each side, and guard the coat where it lies so that you draw it out clean with the thread.
And if you cannot draw it out cleanly, then pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will return many times.
and if it lingers for a while and the pain is not severe, then treat the wound with some corrosive powders, and bandage the wound, and apply hot poultices to soothe the abscess, and treat it with other remedies until it heals;
and if it is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with that which causes scabs.
and if the bleeding vein is contrary or elsewhere, then hurry and apply ground vitriol, and leave it for two or three days until the wound scabs over, and rest from the bleeding; then return to applying what was left off earlier.
Here are the forms of the instruments for probing, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small; and there are four of them called "albaret", and one called "breb"; and there are three types: large, medium, and small, for probing abscesses of fistulas.
and are also like the needles used to pierce warts; they are made of brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are just as effective and are more often used with black pitch to encircle the curves of fistulas;
and come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the openings.
The shapes of the hooks are very varied, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are also hooks with double curves in three ways:
and there are also hooks with three curves; and there are also hooks with one curve only, and they are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these tools are sharp, and some only cut on one side, which is used to scrape the teeth, so that one does not cut the vein or the nerve.
And these probes are bent in many ways, so that the patient does not hurt themselves when opening abscesses.
They come in three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see.
And they are only used in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and fingers, and similar places.
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to slices of fistula, according to this form, with which one stops blood:
and sometimes they put it into the place that heals by the opening of veins and arteries, and sometimes according to this great form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen when they become corrupt, so that they resemble women's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and if one wishes to cure them, one should bleed according to this form from this line b. up to g.: then scorch the fat, and employ the wound with medicine that is charred, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing them, and treat it until it is healed.
and if the breast sags down, and is softened due to its size, as happens to women, then make two slits above them, by two similar incisions; so that one is attached to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line b to line g; then scorch the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about sewing and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed;
and if he is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, you should fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. and let it remain until it eats away the remaining flesh and fat; then cure it until it is healed.
of abscesses on the scalp
These abscesses that come under the scalp are types of hard scrofula, and there are some that contain pus.
Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from the line b. up to the line .g.: And when all the pus in the abscess has been expelled, fill it with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and treat with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, they should be treated as we have described for fissures of scrofula; and if a wound opens in the abscess, they should administer cautery as we have described above.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is open and the skin above it is sealed, then abscesses often form there, and likewise it happens in swollen veins and abscesses.
and if one knows it thus when it is from the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel a pulling; and when it is from the vein, there is a blue discoloration appearing;
and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpit and in the groin, and in the neck and many other places, and it is very serious. One should therefore avoid the use of cauterization with fire, and one should also avoid it in the case of a swelling on the skin caused by a rupture of an artery underneath.
One should therefore avoid the use of cauterization with fire, and one should also avoid it in the case of a swelling on the skin caused by a rupture of an artery underneath. Then operate with a sharp knife, and carefully cut open the artery beneath the skin until it is fully exposed.
Then insert a needle under the artery and pierce it all the way through to the other side, and compress the artery with a double thread in .ij. places, according to what I have instructed you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples;
Then tie off the area between the two ties with an intramuscular injection, allowing the blood to flow out and the abscess to drain;
then administer the treatment that changes color, until the ligature breaks. then treat it with ointment suitable for this, until it is healed.
and if the abscess is due to an opening in the vein, then you must dye your hand with something from the abscess all over the skin, then push the needle under the area you're holding in your hand and pierce it, and pass .I. double thread through it so that you can pull it from the other side; bind the abscess, as I have told you, with a thread around both parts of the two joints;
and if you fear the thread will slip out, then tie another needle to one end of the thread under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the thread in four places;
then scrape the abscess until the excess comes out, then scrape away the excess from the skin and leave what is tied;
then apply a moistened cloth in wine and oil, then administer poultices and ointments until it is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Also, as an abscess comes in the artery and vein, there are abscesses of the nerves when they are hurt, or from too much work, and similar things.
And this happens most often in the shoulders and elbows and in all places where there are joints, and it is a kind of neuralgia, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it has various dispositions without pain.
And when one presses it strongly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the surface of the body but deep inside;
and is mute in all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor below or above, and the one who is in joints should not be covered by iron: by chance they would contract;
and those who are at the head or forehead, make the skin at the spatumile. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, they cut it at the joint, then scrape off the skin, then remove the bone and close the wound with a stitch, and let it heal.
large boils hanging Sometimes it occurs in bellies and nowhere else, and is called "fungus" by some due to its appearance resembling oats, with thin roots and thick scabs; there are both small and very large ones.
And I saw a man who had two on his belly which looked more like fungi than anything else, without any other difference; they were white and had thin roots, and were split open, from which clear fluid was seeping.
I cut them open and found that one weighed 16 ounces and the other 20 ounces; the treatment for this is to ensure that the wound is moist, and the skin around it white and moist with thin roots.
if the ulcer is large and deep, and there are cauteries at hand, for when cutting occurs too great a flow of blood, and if the blood drains away, then hasten to cauterize it.
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision with the knife, then take a good piece of white thread, and tie it around the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then release it, and do not stop tightening the thread around the joint until it is healed; and if the roots are large, then fear of piercing applies equally to the abdomen, but you can certainly pierce half of it,
then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to pierce the thin, discolored skin with poor sensation and a milky discharge.
For this is an abscess with an ulcer, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers later.
when the boil has burst
If the appearance of the boil comes from a cautery on an ulcer or a fissure in the skin, and it is on the belly or some other body part, as happens with other wounds, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries, depending on what came before, or from windiness;
and if it is due to an ulcer and the discharge from the boil, then the colour of the abscess should be similar to the colour of the body, and there should be easy movement without pain, and there should be multiple discharges. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more varied; when pressed with the hands, it springs back, and then returns, and sometimes it is constricted, and enlarges greatly at the entrance of the bath and from great effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue; it opens easily when you press it with your hand, and it does not constrict; and if it is due to blood, then abscesses open with these signs: large and hard, and they are punctured according to a certain quantity;
and if it is due to wind, then there is swelling at the touch, and the work involves checking whether the appearance is due to arterial blood or venous blood, or wind. If you need to leave the wound open, because there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is in the intestine or the bowels, then you must instruct the patient to hold his breath and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the abdomen; then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the area that you signed all over the abdomen, then press down on the apex of the abscess to the bottom with a sharp instrument;
then cut open half of the abscess over the ligature, and push your index finger in, and feel for the intestine; if you find it caught on the ligature, then free it and push the intestine back into the abdomen;
and if you find pus, take it out with a spoon, and scoop out the excess;
and if the artery makes you go in the opposite direction, or the vein, then walk around well, then return to your work and take 2 needles, and thread 2 strong threads through them, and insert the needles into what you have made as a cross, so that you make a piercing;
then push the abscess out in 4 places over the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the hole as it is, and let the dead flesh come out on its own; or you can cut it when it is subtle and oozing, then treat the wound as necessary, and lances the abscess as we have said;
or you can cut it when it is subtle and oozing, then treat the wound as necessary, and lances the abscess as we have said; and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as appropriate, and close the hole.
of cancer
We have discussed the appearance of cancer, and how to treat it with medicine, and how to avoid using iron in its treatment; and we speak of cancers that develop in ulcers, and great care must be taken in their treatment. The ancients say that when a cancer is in a place where it can be easily reached, like those on the breast, or thigh, or similar places, then one must remove it entirely as soon as possible. But for large and old cancers, one should not attempt to treat them, because I have never known anyone to be cured of such; nor has anyone ever been cured before me.
And the treatment for cancers that can be reached, as we have said, is to first purge the patient with black colewort, then let him bleed if he has a manifest repletion, and then treat the cancer itself. Then cut away all the hair around it, and remove the bone underneath without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow out freely, and squeeze the area with your hand or something else to ensure that all the blood is gone. If bleeding from an artery or vein makes the incision difficult, cauterize it until the blood vessels are sealed off. Then treat the wound further until it is healed.
of dropsyThe following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. We have already described in the division the appearances of dropsy, and how the accumulation of fluid is caused, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment by medicine, and that which is cured by iron. There are only two appearances; these are tympany and hydrops, for they are deadly conditions. Therefore, when you treat this appearance of dropsy called "tympany" with medicines, and the cure does not help, consider whether the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropsy, such as dysentery and similar ailments; in that case, do not use iron, for there is doubt. But if you see the patient is very strong and has only dropsy, and is neither too young nor too old, then you must proceed thus: Take the patient's hand and press his abdomen to force the fluid to the lowest part of the penis. Then take the spathumile (a medical instrument) with thorns according to this form: It should be a quarter-inch wide at the tip, but not so sharp that it can pierce all the way to the intestine when inserted, nor so blunt that it cannot penetrate;
then check if the dropsy is caused by the intestines: in that case, you must split under the skin on the right side of the penis three times. If it is caused by the liver disease, then the split should be on the left side; and if it is caused by the kidney, then it should be on the right. The patient should not lie on the split so that the excess fluid does not flow to that weak spot;
perce the entire skin with the instrument and then pierce through to the spatumile, leaving your hand on all of it between the skin and the syphac as when scraping off a hangnail or around the nail; then pierce the syphac until the spatumile comes to the desired place, which is where the water is, and then pull out this instrument from which the shape is taken: It resembles a thin silver needle, and it is made of copper or light bronze, with a small hole in its base; on one side there are three holes, on another two, on another one, and the head is shaped like a pen, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes use to shape their pens:
at the top is the funnel, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it then falls back onto the instrument; therefore empty half or a third, for if you empty more than necessary in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the shock of the weapon to his spirit, or he will fall unconscious, or he will approach death;
but empty according to the quantity of his strength and according to what the dispositions of his strength indicate, and his pulse; then pull out the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the skin that blocks the hole that I mentioned above, which you pierce in this manner; then return to the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw off a small quantity of water;
make this on any day, and keep from drinking until there is only a little water left in it. And if you doubt the disease, leave it with a lot of water, then cure the grave or hot sand, and through much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and by drinking; and cure with medicines that dry up after extracting the water, as I said before.
the swelling of the penis Sometimes children are born without a foreskin, or with a small foreskin, or it is not in its proper place. So one should immediately pierce it with a very fine needle according to this form: then put into the foreskin a very fine piece of lead, and tie it and leave it for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the lead, and let him urinate, and then replace the lead; and perhaps none of this is needed, because the urine that comes out will not allow it to remain closed. Those with a small foreskin, if treated with the lead cloth as we have said, will be enlarged. Those who do not have the foreskin in its proper place are impaired, because some are born with the foreskin at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come to the glans, and this is a serious illness.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, then the head of the penis and the glans are pulled out to the size of a feather, so that the foreskin tears in the middle, as it should be; and you must guard against bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, stop the blood with something that stops blood, and cure the wound until it heals.
of the penis Many times these blisters come on the penis, and it is an ugly-looking wart; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must grasp them with a pair of fine tweezers, and pull off both the head and root completely, then moisten cotton with Egyptian ointment and apply it; then cure it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed. And if the blister is malignant, of putrid color and stinking, then you must apply cautery to it. When you have pulled it off, and if the blister is on the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the blister that is inside; and when it is healed, cure the outside. For if you cure them both together, the skin of the penis will not be secure from being pierced, and blackness and corruption will come into his penis and scrotum; so you must cut away all that is black and rotten, then apply an ointment of honey and wheat flour made from pomegranate peel and poppies, then cure it with other cures until it heals.
And if there is bleeding, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cautery has two purposes: for bleeding and for corruption. And if the glans of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must tie a string around the shaft of the penis and let the patient urinate through it; and when the skin at the tip of the penis is torn, as happens to those who have not been circumcised, or due to a wound or an abscess, then you must cut away the foreskin with a sharp instrument, so that the ligature is released and the glans of the penis is freed all around.
And if it is a serious matter to discuss this, then you must cut away the foreskin with a sharp instrument from the tip of the penis and the skin; then untie quickly between two, and place a thin linen cloth moistened in cold water over it so that it does not tear again.
on circumcision
Circumcision is not a natural process like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this act intentionally, especially on children, it is necessary to do it properly and gently for their safety.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing on this subject except what we have acquired through experimentation.
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and surgeons who made circumcision all around the foreskin, and in many places, and on every new-born; then the hyleus would coagulate because there are two membranes, and sometimes one above would coagulate and the other below would remain.
Now they cover it again and the pain is doubled; and in the cleaning of the foreskin, which is not completely healed at the tip of the member; and in the cleaning of the fingernail, sometimes the nail escapes the fire, and the wound runs, and many times they are born with no need for cleaning, and I have seen this.
Of the cleaning made on the foreskin there is always the danger of cutting too much from above and below. I have found through experience that this is the case with all cuts.
Because when you press your hand, you cut it evenly all around; but the thread should be well tied around the skin; and the manner of the first work is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you only tie the thread around the rod, and then you make him stretch in every way that you can; then hold the rod between your hands straight, and press the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, or any of the instruments; then insert your hand into the rod and breathe on the skin, and pull it upwards until the head of the rod is in; then cleanse it well of the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the site with a double thread, then tie it under one pouch to another string; and hold it with both hands by the second binding to the bag and the index finger, and pinch between the two strings, then release the skin quickly and pull the head of the rod;
then hold the rod between your hands straight, and press the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, or any of the instruments; then insert your hand into the rod and breathe on the skin, and pull it upwards until the head of the rod is in; then cleanse it well of the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the site with a double thread, then tie it under one pouch to another string; and hold it with both hands by the second binding to the bag and the index finger, and pinch between the two strings, then release the skin quickly and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the wound; and put powder on top of the powder a cloth glued with an egg yolk cooked in rose water, confit with good and fresh rosemary oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
The form of the forces for cleansing is as follows: the two heads should be tense and pointed, and the heads should be as large as the palm equally:
the error of purification occurs when the pus inside is exposed to the incision; therefore, you must stretch it with your fingernail, so that the skin forms an abscess; and then cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, hold it with tweezers, and then cut.
And if it persists for 3 days, and what is under the foreskin is swollen, let it be until the abscesses are reduced and the skin is lightly scraped; then cut as you can, taking care not to harm the foreskin in any way.
Therefore, treat the site of the wound with a powder, as we have described in the treatise on powders, and if it cuts too deeply into the skin, and it bleeds, it will not hurt; therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.Et s’il advenist que li leus se deschause et ne puet apaiser, si doit on la couper legierement, si com il est dit au traitier de l’escorche, et si le leu est sanez, si ne nuira point; car il advenit maintes fois que li leus se deschaussent, et se l’on ne le cope, il advenist que la verge se chaude et se fende, et il advenist que li leus se dessuche de la verge.
holding back urine
The retention of urine is due to obstruction by stones, or frozen blood, or a tumor, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division;
and if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained by the stone which is lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be made to stoop on his knees, and have his feet placed on his back, and press his belly from above the back, and restrain himself as hard as he can; and thus the neck of the bladder is forced upwards by compression, causing the stone to be expelled and the urine released;
and then you collect the urine that comes from the bladder into a clean vessel; and if it does not flow as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must use an instrument called a «syringe», which has this form: it should be made of thin, lightweight silver, like the quill of a bird; the tube should be about a palm and a half in length, with a fine point at the end.
The method for releasing the urine is as follows: take a double thread, and tie a small ball of wool or cotton at the end, and insert the threaded end into the syringe; then dip the excess wool into the syringe, and grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair, and anoint his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;
then lightly insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the scrotum; then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and the patient will feel the pain reach the empty space; this is not done according to this order unless the guide where it goes is wrong; then tie the thread to all the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow.
then restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
diseases of the bladder
When there are cuts or bleeding in the bladder, or when pus is accumulated, and you see the fluids and medications dripping, then do all the instruments that are called "clepsydra", and this is how it is formed:
It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see. The medicine used to stop the flow should be such that it blocks the penis without any addition, so that one can draw out the moisture and push when necessary.
And when you see your medicine flowing into the bladder, place the tip of the catheter in the moisture and draw it out with the string that is inside. Then pull the string firmly towards you, and the moisture will enter the catheter and go into the bladder, so that the patient will feel it.
And this is how the subtle catheter works to treat the bladder: it is like this:
And it is made of silver or bronze, and the head is higher up; below, there are two strings attached to it. Then take a lamb's bladder and put in it the moisture that you want to use to catheterize the bladder. Then tie the two strings formed from a long double thread together, and heat one end of the moisture over the fire. Then insert the tip of the catheter into the penis, and then pull your hand towards the bladder gently, so that all the moisture goes in, and the patient will feel it when it reaches the bladder.
And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make one circle out of it, and pierce it all around; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as you would assemble a bag, and put inside whatever you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, squeeze it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of the stone
We have already discussed in the division of stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and I have described the difference between a stone lodged in the ureter, and all the signs, and in which kind of stone one should operate with cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will now tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the urine flows from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it causes pain in the penis, and the patient may urinate many times, and then the flow stops; and many of these have the hernia; and the cure is much easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is appropriate first to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces which is in the intestines. For it sometimes obstructs the search for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and make him stand up and move around so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above; then let him sit between your hands, with his hands under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downward; then feel it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hasten to cut above the stone. And if it does not come out with touching from below, then wet your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is adult, or with middle finger, if the patient is a young man; and put him into his anus, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, push it toward the neck of the bladder; then press above on your finger, and put it out where you see fit to cut.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command the patient to extend his testicles upward with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin beneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum, of which this is the shape:
And they make it between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel; and it should be straight on the stone, and both hands should be on the anus, and the incision should go through the navel so that it is wide at the top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
Perhaps the pressure from the hands on the anus will cause it to come out without much effort; and you should know that there is stone which has angles and edges: this is hard to pass; and there is also one which is beneath, similar to a grape, and round, whose passage is easy.
For those with angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, you should grip it with forceps which are like a file at the tip, to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you insert a thin instrument beneath, and if the blood vessels burst, you stop the bleeding with vitriol;
and if there is more than one stone, insert the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then push up, then pull it out, and the smaller ones after, if there are several. And if it is very large, split it, and make a larger incision. For there are two things that can happen to the patient: they may die, or the urine will come out where the urethra cannot heal; but in any case, try to extract it, either by pulling with forceps, or by breaking it into pieces;
and when you have finished your work, smear the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly, and place over it a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the hot abscess; then remove the bandage from the patient's neck after three days.
And when you remove it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with ointment of diaphenicon and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses and scorchings, and congealing of blood in the bladder, occur due to this, and urine is retained, which is known in such a way that it passes out with the urine: therefore, pierce your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and burst it;
then lift the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and aid him in every way you know how, until it is healed; and you ought to every hour that you treat him, bind his thighs together, and apply the remedies to the affected area.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and lodged there, and the urine cannot pass; then the cure of what I have said before, that you should cut it many times, is an excuse for not cutting with this cure. I have already tried it thus.
Take a piece of iron according to this form, and let it be pointed at three angles, and fix it into a stick:
Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot return to the bladder; then push the iron into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron in your hand within the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then the urine will come at once, then press your hand on what is left of the stone which is inside the penis. Then it is broken at once, and comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
and if you cannot do this for any reason, then tie a thread below the stone and another above, then cut the penis in between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood from the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
of women's stones
Sometimes stones become stuck in women, and if they do, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who can be examined by midwives, especially when she is chaste.
The third reason is that one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of medicine; and the fourth is that the stone in a woman is often deeper than in a man, so a deeper incision is required, and great fear is associated with it.
And if you find it necessary, you should consult a skilled midwife, and with her guidance, cut it out; and if you cannot find such a midwife, then consult a wise old woman or a woman who knows something about medicine. Have her examine the patient to determine the location of the stone.
and look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then she must push her finger into her vagina and feel for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it under her finger, and she should be instructed to push her finger into her vagina with the pain, and press her left hand hard against her bladder.
If she finds it, then she must move the stone slowly from the entrance of the bladder up to the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the vagina where it is moving, and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move her finger over or under the stone, and let the incision be small at first;
then insert the probe into the incision, if you feel the stone so that you can widen the incision enough for the stone to come out; and know that there are many types of stones: some are small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and have various shapes. So know their likenesses in order to know how they will come out.
And if the blood is flowing, put ground vitriol on it and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your task, until the stone is out, and have some instruments that I told you about in extracting stones from men to help you with your work;
and if the blood flows, and it is from an artery that has been cut, then put the powder on the spot and bind it tightly with bandages, and do not loosen it again, but leave the stone and do not remove it, for otherwise the patient may die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the wound has healed, return to your work until the stone is expelled.
of fleshy hernia
Aquous pus is nothing else but an accumulation of moisture or white pus, which is located beneath the heart of the testicles and contains the sperm; and it is called "pus", and sometimes it is found within the membrane of the testicle, as if it were another testicle; and what we have said is the skin of the testicle between the white pus. And this does not usually happen.
And the cause of this disease is from weakness which comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread about.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colours; it is sometimes jaundiced-coloured, or red, or black, or watery white, and more besides.
And these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white scrotum which we have described, then there are swollen testicles, i.e., they are slightly long like the shape of an egg, and do not open the scrotum, because there is moisture all around them.
And if it has moisture in the scrotum itself, then there are swollen testicles with part of an egg, and because of this one thinks it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white scrotum, he feels it well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, probe throughout the entire area of the foreskin, from which the shape is described above. According to this, then, what comes after the foreskin, judge what is inside it.
According to this, then, what comes after the foreskin, judge what is inside it. And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he should lie on his back, on something slightly raised, and have a lot of coverings under him;
then sit on his left side and instruct the attendant to sit on his right, and extend the foreskin to one of the two testicles near the heart;
Then take the spatulum and cut the skin of the testicles from above down to the scrotum, and make the incision straight, cutting through the skin of the testicles to the white skin underneath, and then carefully peel it away.
Then pierce the testicle with a large needle and draw out all the water, then insert your probes, and the testicle will go back up. Do not touch the skin of the testicles, but only the scrotum; cut it all around carefully, in sections if necessary, so that you do not cut too deeply and make it bleed, for otherwise the water will return.
And if the testicle has fallen out of its socket during the operation, then reset it in its place when you have finished with the scrotum. Then sew up the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a single stitch and dress the wound as you would any other, until it is healed.
And if you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, then you must tie off the vessels that are suspended, fearing an effusion of blood; then cut the testicle away at its very suspension, and extract it, and dress the wound as we have said.
And if pus is collected in two parts together, know that they are two pockets; then press the other part just as you did the first equally, then wash off the blood, and put into the wound soft lamb's wool moistened with rose oil;
and put another piece of lamb's wool moistened with wine and oil, and place over the two pockets, and put over it doubled cloths, and bind it all over to follow this shape:
Then take two cloths, and fill them with lamb's wool according to this shape and have them sewn together at the crotch of the breeches, and let one of the heads press against the bottom up to the back, and the other to the part of the armpit; and let the other two heads be over the two angles, and let all the binding be in the loop of the breeches;
and sometimes this pocket is medicated with an iron brand, and it is that you press a thin knife cautery, and press the skin of the pockets, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing the fluid is exposed;
take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the wart deeply, and scorch it with this fine hot cautery.
And the cup in every way you can, until you draw it all out; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and move while guarding against bloodletting, and movements of the knife.
And if anything makes you contrary, either a warm abscess or bloodletting or anything else, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horrible nature, then administer piercing, as I have told you, and it is certain that when you are well through the indications we have discussed,
let the patient sit on a high chair; then pierce the abscess at its base to the full length of the spatula, and insert the piercing deep into the body; and let the holes be large enough for all the pus to flow out.
then place cotton on the site and bind it, and let it drain to remove the remaining pus; then treat the wound until it is healed.
And if the white film does not let the pus out through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a syringe or the instrument used to treat dropics, of which the shape is described earlier; and widen the wound slightly, and know that the pus will return, and it will accumulate again after six months or around that time, and when it accumulates as before, and thus the patient will recover.
of the abscess of the testicles
Know that in the dissection of this nerve there are several dispositions which cause fear, so it seems better to leave it.
And I will tell you about the procedure and the appearances of the abscess.
So I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the groins; and this is due to various causes.
This is known to be caused by excess bitterness and redness, which is spread throughout the body, or from a blow.
and is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and does not hurt at all, and is a serious abscess;
and sometimes there are green, fearful, and watery abscesses, and at other times they come from an artery, or from a vein swelling.
When it is from an artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
Those who are affected by swelling of the veins are recognized by their appearance and the touch of the fingers.
and one can well judge the extent of this condition, and other similar ones, and you should cut the skin of the testicles, then the yolk will be on top, and the white part will be below, freeing the testicle from all parts of the sac.
If the yolk is already broken with these colors, then you must cut open the yolk and peel it away.
and if it is aired in the face or in what is inside the vessels, you must deliver all that membrane and scoop it out smoothly.
And if the egg's yolk is at the back, you must scoop it all out and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is finished, apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to a bud, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans painfully when he walks;
and the treatment of this disease is also very dangerous as the one mentioned above,
and yet we will tell you about it according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary for you to make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspensory of testicles down with your fingers, and pull all the vessels that are close to the penis, and tighten them, and extend them properly;
then cut with a sharp spatula across the vessels, as far as they are uncovered,
and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
then I pierce an needle where it hurts, I thread it with a double thread, and tie it at the first place where the pain came from, and then directly to the other end. then I cut the skin carefully, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture.
then treat the wound as in the others where we use a cautery, so that no blood vessels are broken which might cause bleeding.
for this does not cause harm, and if it comes from all the vessels, then one should draw out the blood from all the vessels. so that the vessels do not lose their blood flow due to the incision, drying up and unable to help themselves.
of the rutting of the syphilis The cause of this disease is through the incision that comes from syphilis, or the swelling on the belly in the region of the intestines, causing the intestines to descend from that rupture to one of the testicles;
and this rupture is from syphilis, or from the swelling of it, and these two ways come from causes: from percussion, or jumping, or crying out, or lifting a heavy object, and through similar things;
and the signs when it is of extension in the sinus, are that it happens little by little over a long time and does not come suddenly. and the abscesses are even throughout to the bottom, because the sinus presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the sinus that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear diverse below the skin, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body from the sinus.
And sometimes the intestines descend with it, and are retained inside, and cause great suffering to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these cures of iron there is fear, from which one should escape.
And the manner of the operation is that you instruct the patient to withdraw the intestine with his hand inside the wound, if he can reach it; then grasp his neck between your hands and lift the hips;
then pull the skin of the testicles up and over the scrotum; then put hooks into the edges of the wound according to what you need in order to open the wound, and they should be such that the pus can come out.
then scrape off the syphilis that is under the skin of the testicles, until the hard white syphilis is uncovered all around.
then put your index finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white syphilis which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second syphilis,
and separate that which is behind the egg, and between the second syphilis; and then move with your right hand into the scrotum, and hold the white syphilis upwards in your left hand, and lift up the egg to all the syphilis towards the groin; and instruct the assistant to extend the arm upward, and loosen what is tight behind the joint;
and feel with your fingers if there is any hard, white membrane or intestine wrapped around it, and if you find anything, push it back into the abdomen below;
then take a needle with .10 threads of thread made from 10 fibers, and insert it into the back part of the syphilis, which is under the skin of the testicles; after the scrotum, then pull on the head which appears from the threads, until there are 4 threads; then tie them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie up the syphilis, which we said was under the skin of the testicles, with a strong ligature of 2 parts; then wrap the head with thread, and tie it tightly into two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter, lest an abscess form there; and place the ligature according to the first long ligature of two parts, and after these two ligatures leave the subcutaneous fat which is under the skin of the testicles the size of a bean;
and after that, according to the roundness that the scrotum bears; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the testicles, as far as the blood flows, and the bowels, as we have said before;et aprés la partie qui est desoz le cuir de l’euf, si com nos avon dit ci devant. Et qui il velt faire l’operation de la cauterie au feu, prenne liien de liier selonc la grandeissunce de l’euf ou de la testicule, car quant il sont grantz il convient que le liien soit plus granz;
then apply soft wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and then apply the ligature that we have described. And sometimes the white ulcer we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bleeding.
For this happens many times, and it leaves the wound open until it drains through it; and if it is slow to drain, one should use hot water, and apply what we have said, until it drains.
Then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.Quant il y a grans vives douleurs sus li membre, si covient le membraier tant qu’il soit sanz dolor; et s’il est sanz dolor par lui mesmes, si est bien, car il n’a grant besoin de membraier.
of fleshy hernia
In this branch of medicine, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients say that it is done in the same way as the vein that is next to the artery, by tightly binding them together after making an incision just above the testicles.
Then cut it open halfway, and treat the abscess of the one who has it, until the vessels drain; and cure it as we have said, until he is healed.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the intestines, as we have said, and it opens up; and none of the intestines fall out into the rectum, and if any do fall out, it is only a little bit, and they return at every movement.
And even if he stays too long in that position, the patient believes that the wound or fistula will close up as long as the intestines do not fall out.
And this happens because of the extension of the fistula in the intestines, as we have said, for it is extended and then softened and swollen and opens up.
And the treatment if by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way:
and let the patient lie face down on his back between your hands, then press hard on the wound with your fingers according to the amount of .iii. times;
then pull out the sty that is underneath the skin, then take the thread and place it over the visible area of the sty;
then press down on the bottom of the belly, then tie off the two visible areas of the sty on the head of the thread, and tie one and then the other;
then pull out the head of the thread, and do not touch the sty or stretch the skin or anything else, just as I have told you in the cure for a rupture of the intestines;
then treat with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it heals.
The syphilis is restrained, and has no appearance in the buttock, and the cautery is more effective in this area, and closer to healing.
of softening the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men because the parts inside become soft, and it is milky in appearance; and when one wishes to treat it, one should make the patient lie on his back, and cut the soft skin over the scrotum; then sew together the two edges of the wound with a single stitch, or two stitches or four, firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the sutures.
chastisement
Do you know that castration is considered taboo in our laws, and because of this, I would prefer not to discuss it in this book; it is only necessary for two reasons: one, so that the doctors can respond when asked about it, and know how to perform the procedure; and two, because we often need to castrate certain animals to aid us, such as goats, sheep, pigs, and other beasts. Therefore, I say that castration is done in two ways: by attraction or by incision. When done by attraction, one sits the animal in warm water until its testicles are softened and dangling; then, squeeze them with your hand until they are removed and you no longer feel anything. For the castration by incision: tie the animal down, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand; then cut above the scrotum, and cup over each testicle a dozen times, when you have cut them well; and leave some pus and the fine membrane covering the vessels; and this method of castration is better than the one by attraction, because in the latter, sometimes something remains from the testicles, causing the animal to desire sexual intercourse; then cure the wound until it heals.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites exist in two ways as males: one type has both male and female characteristics, with the physical appearance of a male, including body hair, but sometimes their urine flows upwards. The other type is found in females, who have a penis and testicles on their groin. For both types, if they have an opening between the testicles, treat them as you would any other wound; cure them like any other wound. But for the second type, where the male's urine flows out through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
of the testicles
of the testicles
of erratica
Erratica is when the woman's nature is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that came to it; or it is due to a growth, or a subtle and thick syphilis, and it is caused by an ulcer in the wound, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever it may be; and they affect conception and childbirth, and perhaps flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is through the examination of the bail. If the stump is clearly apparent, then seek it with your fingers or a string. If it is a subtle syphilis, and it is close to the testicles, then you must hasten and pull them thus: place your two fingers together, and the woman should be on her back with her legs spread; then the testicles will become erect, so that the subtle syphilis is drawn out, and cover the stump; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the area, and let the woman lie down at home every day so that it does not adhere. And if the syphilis is hard and thick, you should cut it with spathumile similar to bay leaf. If the stump is of a newborn character, then it should be covered according to this manner, if it is not encrusted abscesses. For in the abscess encrusted in the wound, one should not touch it with fire.
of hemorrhoids
Emorroides are openings of veins from which blood flows excessively, and when hemorrhoids become old, they turn into throbbers; and I have already described their appearances, signs, and treatments in the previous section. I stated that both hemorrhoids and throbbers, when they are deeply rooted in the anus and do not respond to natural remedies, can be cured with iron instruments. For those located at the entrance of the anus, one can feel them and treat them effectively. Therefore, one should place the patient in a cool room, cut off the hemorrhoids with tweezers, and apply powder made from blood-restraining medicines like acacia, dragon's blood, and incense to the roots of the hemorrhoids. Then, one should bind her feet against the wall for an hour and immerse her in cold water. If bleeding occurs, one should make her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, gallnuts, and similar ingredients. Next, prepare a poultice of barley flour mixed with honey and garlic, and apply it to her back. If there is no discharge, one should use leeches on her back and breasts without using iron instruments. Then, take lamb's wool, soak it in plantain juice or dogwood juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the affected area. Once the abscess has drained, treat the wound with ointment until it heals completely. The type called "albathir" is red and resembles a rough surface; it should be treated like a throbber as mentioned earlier and then healed.
of anal abscesses
There are many types of abscesses that can occur in the anus, such as chancres, pierous abscesses, herpes, estiomata, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, among others, which I have described in the previous section. Now, I will discuss the treatment of hot abscesses that arise in the anus and are not caused by bowel movements. If you notice that the abscess is hard, accompanied by fever and a red color at the beginning of its onset, do not rush to pierce it immediately. Instead, wait until the pain subsides, and then have the patient sit on a low seat with two small pillows to lean against for support. The patient should also bend their legs and spread their buttocks, placing their arms under their knees, and tie them with a strong cord. Then, suck the orifice of the abscess towards the right side, and insert the instrument used to open the anus, being careful not to go too deep and cause discomfort or bleeding. If the instrument is too large, cover the depth of the anus with cloth so that it does not cause any distress. Insert the tip of the instrument and then withdraw it, allowing the content to flow out. Then, clean the wound with soft tenters soaked in rose oil or linseed oil, placing the tender against the wall of the wound at the deepest part of the anus. Place another piece of linen soaked in warm water or a decoction of malva flowers and aristolochia over the anus and around the wound, and change it every two days until it is healed. If there is pus discharged from the wound, apply a poultice made from crushed beans and honey to the affected area. Once the wound has drained, treat it with appropriate ointments as mentioned earlier. If there is no discharge, one can also use enemas of warm water mixed with honey to clean the wound and promote healing.
of childbirth
It is first necessary for the midwife to know the natural signs of childbirth, and to understand that when you see a woman straining and pushing downward, and desiring to smell aromatics; then the child will soon be born. You should also observe the signs that the birth is natural, such as the child emerging head-first, with the placenta following close behind. The mother's excess fluids are expelled through good cleansing. Any other position of the child indicates an abnormality in the process. It may come out feet-first, or through the chest, arms, abdomen, or back; it might even get stuck on its neck. The midwife must be wise and shrewd in these matters, guarding against mistakes and deception. I will now describe all the positions of the child, explaining how to assist in each case.
If the child emerges head-first in a natural delivery, but the woman is struggling and weak, then seat her on a stool or have other women support her. Boil an ointment of olive oil or fenugreek, and use a small spatula (as described below) to gently open the child's mouth: If the two hands emerge, gently pull them back in one by one. If they cannot be pulled back, then seat the woman on a chair with her feet raised; then lift the chair off the ground and tilt it forward so that she is leaning backwards. If the hands still cannot enter, use the technique described earlier to dislocate the child's neck and pull out the arms.
of the child's feet When the child is born feet first, he should be turned upside down; and then turn him slowly, until he is straight;
then hold one of his feet and stretch it out slowly.
When it jumps just up to its hips, instruct it to grab and make it sneeze from the back; if it jumps, God willing.
And if it doesn't jump as we have said, then turn it gradually, as long as it is according to its natural shape. For then it is easily done.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then take musk, and oil of sweet almond, and molten gum, and grind them all together in a mortar; and apply this ointment according to the nature of the woman then let her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
and when she is soaked underneath, make a collar of myrrh and put it on her, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and press her mouth and nose, and gently squeeze her abdomen, for the child will now jump out. of the child emerging onto his knees When the child comes in this form, then the midwife should put her hands on him little by little.
of the issue of the child who comes from a wide one hand during You should try to bring the hand back: if you can't bring it back, then have the woman stand up and walk. If that doesn't work, then:
if she can't walk, then have her lie down on a bed and raise her legs straight up;
then administer the medicine that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair, then study to bring back the hand; and turn the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to hold on until the child comes out.
of the child's exit from his neck, and has his hands spread out, and his face turned towards his mother's back I must have him hold his hand, then turn it slowly little by little, and gently;
and when it is even, then apply to it a poultice of mustard and oil, as we have said, then instruct the patient to move it little by little;
and when you have done this, then make her sit on a chair, and instruct her to sneeze; and make her yawn. in the same way with all of the afterbirth
in the same way with all of the afterbirth When it comes out in this way throughout the afterbirth, then catch the afterbirth with your fingernail, as long as the moisture is expelled;
and if the child can press its face and neck with its fists, and the mother does not restrain it, then the child will die.
then put the baby inside, as you should, and instruct the woman to hold on tight sometimes:
of the twin's birth Know that twins are often born, and sometimes there are three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely. But two is a strange thing, and they do not live, if at all.
I know that they are multiple, and are separated by the placenta that divides them, which is attached to the womb;
and sometimes they issue as naturally as one, as we have said.
And if they are bleeding heavily, then apply the cautery as we have said, and be nimble and quick in what she does; and do thus as it is best for her health. of many children
of many children Sometimes they are formed in the womb: one, two, three, four, five, six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the glorious Sage,
and it is necessary for the surgeon to know all of this, because similar things might happen. if they act according to what is appropriate.
of the dead child
When you are treating a woman of a dead child or in labor, as I have said in the previous chapter, and there is no progress, and you are forced to use your hands; if you need to know whether the woman is of sound health and has no fear of death.
the woman should be laid on her back, with her hips tilted down and her legs raised.
and the midwife should apply a compress of ten parts to the womb, keeping her in bed so that she is not distressed by the child's descent.
Then rub the mother's mouth with moist oils infused with mugwort and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint her palms with these oils and infusions. then he lightly strikes them, then he seeks out the joints where they are convenient for this,
and takes care that the child is positioned so that it descends onto its head; if he inserts them into his eyes or throat or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs,
and if the descent is on the feet, he should push or pinch and press on the middle of the shins;
and it is necessary that he holds the needle in his right hand and places the thread between the fingers of his left hand, and wraps it around all of his hand lightly, and inserts the needle into one of the locations we have mentioned so that it reaches the hollow;
then pierce with another needle, or a third one if you need it, so that the extraction is equal;
and then they are moved equally from one side to another so that they exit, and the needles are bitten to hold them in place, as shown in this figure:
And if a part remains, then anoint some of his fingers with oil, and put them in that part, and draw out the other part;
and if nothing remains, then place this joint higher or lower, and do this until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the dislocation, then you must wrap him in a cloth, as much as he can go;
then cut at the joint of the sole or the heel, and so you should do in the other hand, and on both feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is congested at the exit, or there is acute swelling in the head, you should push the spine-like spatumile between your fingers, puncturing the head and drawing out the congestion; or you may use the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and so naturally the fetus grows to a large head; and then pulls out the bones with tongs,
and if the head pops out and is forced, so that the moisture which is in the wound issues forth;
and if it cannot exit, then cut it into pieces as much as you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
And if the swelling is on his feet, the pulse is light, and the healing is swift at the mouth of the wound.
And if it is swollen in the belly or foot, then you must stretch it with .i. bandage wrapped around his hand; and cut the belly or foot, so that the moisture which is in it runs out;
and if the other members are dislocated, and the shoulders remain, if he puts his hand in the wound deeply, and pulls it until it reaches the mouth of the wound; then he puts in .i or ii inches, and pulls it out;
and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by a hot abscess that has formed there, then one must not work on it, then one must apply moist and fatty things; and poultices, and apply warm moistening and softening water.
And if the child is on its side, and you can get it to lie still, then administer what we have said for a living child:
and if one cannot, then let the birth take place in parts, and leave nothing of the afterbirth behind.
And when you have done this, if it is administered to those we have mentioned in abscesses that occur in the sea;
and if there is bleeding, let it be put in hot water restraining, and let other remedies be administered.
And I saw a woman in whose belly some children had been dead, then another was sewn onto it, and the others died too. After a long time, an abscess came to her in the groin, and swelled so much that it burst open, and began to emit a foul odor.
I was called to the priest, and I thought long, and could not heal the wound.
I put on a strong attracting plaster, and an bone came out, and after a few days, some more. I was very surprised because the belly has no bones.
I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Examine the wound, and with your fingers, move the bones until the woman is in a better state. and let the woman stay like this for a long time, and then move her slightly from side to side.
And I have included this chapter especially because when the masters encounter something unusual, they should know how to provide aid.
to bring the dislocated back to its place
Here after comes the form of the press, to which one applies books; and at .2. turns for .2. chaps of .2. strings. Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle of the constrictor, and should be made of box or of yew;
and the mouth of the stalk should be one digit wide, and the edges of the trees one digit, and in length a palm and a half; and in between the .2. limbs are two adjustments of this same stalk, which are secured in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two adjustments are inserted in the mouth of the wound to open it when you turn the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the appearance of tweezers; and it has two heads with two adjustments, as you can see, a palm long and two digits wide;
and when you see the wound open to all the instrument, then let the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging and her legs spread apart, then press the two incisions together in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument under between his buttocks; then work your hand on the entire instrument, just as you did with the tongs, according to how much you want to open the mouth of the wound, until the patient does what he wants.
These instruments are all tipped and have multiplied their appearances; and when the surgeon has prepared them, the work is faster and higher in men due to their quantity.
Do not despair of the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessity is inexcusable.
When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold back her breath, then make her sneeze with some powder, and hold her hands over her mouth and nose. And if she vomits, all the better.
If not, take a jar or vessel and put in it herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as chamomile, fennel, anise, and clary sage.
All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in water over the fire; then put one end into the jar's opening, and the other end into the mouth of the womb,
and let the hairs grow until the vapors enter the wound; then make it sneeze, as we have said. Then let the pus drain freely. And if it remains after this treatment and is not removed, then command the patient to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in musk-saturated olive oil, and then let her wave it around in the air.
and seek out the pus; and when she has found it, she should squeeze it gently little by little so that the wound is not pulled on; but it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled; it will come out and be cured.
And if the mouth of the wound is tight, we have described the cure through sneezing, and the fumigation of herbs;
and if it is not cured by all that we have said, then beware of pulling;
but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the wound, that you tie him to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse her with four-fold ointment;
if she will let it out and then put it back in, but nonetheless when she does this there comes a bad smell to the stomach and head, and it makes her ill.
Therefore one should use suitable fumigations: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The instrument used to fumigate the woman for retained placenta and afterbirth is as follows:
And it is made of glass like a pipe, with the narrow end inserted into the woman's body and the wider end placed over the fire;
and let there be fumigation over the coals, and the dye until it is exhausted, and then begin another.
of piercing the foundation
Many children are born who do not have their foundation pierced, but rather have a thin, subtle membrane. so the midwife should pierce this membrane with her finger, and not with a sharp instrument, and guard against tying it too tightly so that it does not touch [the child].
then place on moist linen with wine and oil, then dress with ointment until healed.
And if you doubt that it will heal, then place a wooden plug in the hole, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go inside.
And sometimes the healing of a wound or abscess comes suddenly; so it must be covered suddenly: then it should be dressed, as we have said, with a plug of wood.
from the fistula in the anus Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodular and grow larger than those that originate elsewhere in the rectum or in the space of its two parts.
If there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodule is old, it opens and discharges moisture or pus and thin blood.si li cuitent li fondement, et l’un en l’auter costé del fese, et encort par le corps sus le quareix, si est grant mal, si li gaste li meisme cuit a l’auter costé del cuit.
And sometimes these fistulas are piercing; and they are caused by what is in the digestion or wind when the patient makes an eruption, and by chance some of it emerges.
And if there are fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and up to halfway down the penis; and they reach up to the joint of the thigh, and up to the head of the cow.Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.
And thus one knows a fistula which is not bleeding from the anus, but which is still bleeding. and you should push your index finger into the anus and insert a thin needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it is twisted, then you should insert a thin tent or horsehair into the fistula until you feel the tent or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge or farting or feeling of the fistula as we have said: let it heal without piercing it; then you can dress it.
And when the fistula has pierced to the bladder or the passage of urine, then the urine flows out and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it has pierced to the hip joint, then the tent will feel wet at that spot. If there is twisting and the pain extends around, then it will be better to let it drain without using any ointment or medicine.
and in these persian fistulas there is no cure but labor and the folly of those who interfere with it.
In that which is not Persian and is not old, there is hope of healing by fire, as I have experienced.
and the patient lies on his back with his legs stretched out to his thighs and his thighs sloping towards his belly. Then insert a tent of bronze or lead, if there is tortuosity, as far as you know the tent comes.
If the pain is felt around the anus, you must insert your index finger there.
Then feel around with your finger until you perceive the hole; and if it is covered by skin or flesh, then know that it is perforated. if one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
One can indeed heal some, but that rarely happens;
and the help that is given, one burns the cautery thinly according to the size of the fistula, as has been said before; and insert it into the fistula as far as the anus; and do this two or three times until you know that the infected matter is burned, which will appear like the quill of a bird;
then treat with moist bandages soaked in butter until the infected matter comes out, and then apply ointment to heal and close the wound.
If it is healed like this, that is good. If not, then it cannot be healed otherwise;
and if the tent is inserted, and does not pierce all the way to the bottom which is in the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or of syphilis, and you see the fistula following the covering of the skin; if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and insert again before the tent, and then cauterize afterward, until it reaches the tip of the tent;
and the tent will be released and fall out; then cut off those false meats which look like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
And if the pus runs, and cuts between your finger and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
For fire cautery brings together two things: the charring of the flesh and the stemming of blood and the drying of moisture.
Then dress the wound with moist bandages or with crushed substances until the flesh heals and the scars fade.
Then treat the wound with ointments of soft fat, which is solid, and they are dry remedies.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes all the way from the anus, and is separated from the body, put your finger into it and probe it.
If you feel the tent, and between the two is the foreskin or scrotum, or it is about to pierce, there should be no fear but hope, through the administration of one of three remedies:
either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can, put in a tent and treat it as before.
And do not go too deep, lest you cut the tissue that holds the anus, and cause the evacuations to come out through there instead; then heal, as we have said;
then heal, as we have said; by chance if it is healed, then remove that covering and wash it once the wound is cut away from the foundation, either by probing or by another pointed instrument; then clean the wound as much as you can;
then examine how to heal the wound and keep the fistula in the part above the foundation: if there is something lighter for the patient.
And sometimes they are fistulas according to this manner: it is when you tie a thread in the fistula, and it is on the side of the root of the skin above. take a thread pierced at the end according to this form: And he ties .a. twisted thread in ii, and ties the thread all the way into the fistula until it reaches the root.
If it is piercing on the margin of the root inside, then pull out the thread from that hole as you would when you put your finger into the root;
and draw the head of the thread, and gather the two heads together, and hold one against the other, and let it rest for one or two days;
and restrain it sometimes, until the threads catch the hairs that are between two;
then heal the wound until it is closed and healed.
If the fistula does not drain, then have it drained in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
For it is not advisable to bandage the wound so tightly and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the thorn-spine, from which they make a fistula, is very sharp and pointed; and on the other side, not at all, because one should not bandage it as you will see below:
Hemorrhoids are of two types: they can be inside the anus, like grains of resin, and they come in small and large sizes, and they ooze blood. There can be one or more of them, and they can be either inside or outside the anus; but those that are outside have less moisture.
They ooze pus or a little watery fluid or blood, and their color is like that of the body.
And the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves until they pass the stools, and then the hemorrhoids will come out. If you are in a hurry, seize it with tweezers or your fingernail, then pull out the roots.
And if the tweezers cannot hold it due to moisture, then take it with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of cambric. And pull them out with your fingers, then pluck them, and powder some hot powders on top that act as a cautery. Or you can cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
and if the foundations cannot come out, then cleanse the patient with a strong and harsh enema to wash away what is in the foundation, so that it can come out clearly;
and if the patients defecate, and if the thread comes out from the foundation, then the cure is easy; and you should grab them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healthy and afraid of incision by iron.
If you need to perform suturing in this way: take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle, then pull the thread through the top and push the needle through from the other side, and then bring both ends of the thread under the needle, and if it is swollen and tender; then tightly wind the thread, knot the thread, withdraw the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one to drain the excess blood;
then place on the wound a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and apply it to the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave them until they fall off, and when they have fallen off, treat the wound with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
from dryness of the vagina or anus Many times there is dryness of the bowels in the intestines, and through constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
If you should cut with a spatulum or your nail through the skin above it, so that moisture does not reach it. Then dry it as much as necessary;
and if he cannot dry up, then start the scraping again stronger than before, until it heals and is scraped off; then treat it until it heals.
where it trembles Antors is a small appearance that arises under the body and goes deep inside.
And sometimes the antors cause trembling, and it can be felt throughout the body, more so in the hands than anywhere else.
And the cure is that you take a feather of a goose's quill, or a strong vulture's feather, and place this feather on the vein, so that the purple circle encompasses the vein all around. Then turn your hand along the entire feather, so that you press all around the vein, and insert it deeply, and squeeze the vein from its roots.
And if you see fit to make this instrument of a feather of iron or steel according to this shape, and have it finely polished beneath and drawn above.
do not pierce it, so that it can be held in the hand and pressed firmly. And if you see fit to cauterize the vein, as described earlier in this chapter on cautery.
of the form of the enema Sometimes an enema is made of silver or bronze, or melted copper or brass; and sometimes these instruments are small and large, depending on who they are administered to.
Those that are administered to children and the weak and painful are small.
The form of the enema, whether small or large, is inserted widely into the stomach, according to this method:
and he has a rupture where the abdomen is tied, as you see, and the buttocks are pierced inside; and he has two holes on one side, and one on the other;
and the abdomen where one puts the medicines of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes;
and has between each hole a distance of one finger's width, then inserts into these holes one strong thread of twisted thread in ten or so places around, and gathers the belly together like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, he ties it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then clysters; and this is the shape of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the syringe with oil or egg white, or similar thing, then insert it gently;
then the minister squeezes it with both hands together, until it is empty, then withdraw the syringe and let the patient rest his legs against something,
and if the medicine wants to come out, let him strain as much as he can; and if he sleeps for a night afterwards, it is all the more helpful.
And if you syringe him for a disorder of the stomach, and the medicine rushes out, then he should do it again until he is cured.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or an abscess, let the enema be as fine as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle enema above which the skin is stretched:
of wounds
We have already discussed in the division of the treatment of wounds; now we will discuss the treatments by hand and medicine, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and according to what makes them.
The things by which wounds are made are by the impact of a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or spear or staff, or arrow, or similar objects.
Or according to the places in the body where they are made, such as a wound on the neck, or head, or leg, or belly, or liver, and similar organs;
And I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess easily: then have the patient bleed from the head immediately if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction to the injured part;
and let the patient avoid surfeit of wine and rich foods.
And if he will not bleed, then his diet should be reduced, and he should drink no wine nor eat no meat;
and put sorrel on the wound, if a hot abscess develops, wet cotton in rose oil only, or in astringent wine;
and if there is no hot abscess, put sorrel on the wound if it has all its blood and has not been moved by the wind; I will describe the powder in a little while.
and if it has been moved by the air, put it on some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like that of a sword, and the lips cannot be brought together with tenting, then bring them together by suturing, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it can be picked at, and only holds on by a bit, then cut it away; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as meat, and similar things.
And if you find suppuration in the skin, and it is not near the bone, then cut away the suppuration completely, and then cure it;
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which does not clot, and cannot be staunched with medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy; you must apply this powder that will heal as soon as it has burned.
And the method of making the powder is this: take incense one part, dragon's blood two parts, quicklime three parts, and grind them together finely. and apply it to the wound, pressing firmly until it scabs over and joins with the rest of the skin.
and then bind it well, and leave it untied if it does not swell; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with chalk alone, when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound is moved by the fire.
And if the fire has moved the wound, it should be treated in the same way, and no powder should be applied.
but one should place upon it some digestive ointments, or a poultice made of barley flour with water and honey, until the swelling goes down. and then treat other wounds until he is healed.
And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound and it is small, I will extract it with fine pincers;
and then I will tell you about head fractures.
about the wound on the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerve, there is no other treatment but to leave it alone and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat. And do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
But let there be medicine beneath, such as cold wash in lukewarm water, and mixed with rose oil, and cucumber washed also in lukewarm water, and other moist stones according to this method.
And if the wound is large, cut and bind it, then heal it.
And if the wounds are deep and she is pregnant and full of bowels, then pierce her in a lower place.
and if the artery is cut and bleeding ensues, then tie it off, and ligate it, and cauterize it if necessary.
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the bones, and the windpipe is kept safe, through which the food passes, if he cuts the bone on the side of the throat, and doesn't touch the throat but puts it back in its natural position; and then he stretches it gently, and leaves it for a few days, then he treats it with cleansing ointments until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then he should; and if there are bone fragments, pull out all those you can, and leave those you cannot reach until the wound heals. and the dislocation should be made smooth and aligned;
and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I described earlier. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I described in its chapter.
of a wound from a spear or knife
If it is a spear or knife wound, and the wound is deep, then observe whether the wound breathes winds: know therefore that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder on it at first, nor bind it because of the blood that comes out profusely, and returns to the heart, and heals the patient; but I apply an attractive ointment, and bind it .ii. times a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture,
and let the patient sleep on the wound for .iii. days, or .iv., or more; if a spasm or tremor of the heart does not come, nor shudders of the soul, nor twitches of the eyes; and when you see the bones aligned, then you know the wound is healed. Heal it therefore with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, and there is pus, then you know there is a fistula; then treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a cut by a sword or knife, and it is superficial, on the face or the back, then treat it as one should;
if it is large, then stitch it up; and if it is small, then use powder on it; and if it has gone deep into the bone and has broken off fragments, then clean the wound and draw out any foreign objects if they are loose; and if they are not loose, then let the wound fester until you can extract them easily;
and for other wounds in other parts of the body, make your judgment as we have said.
a hernia
There are great, medium, and small ruptures of the belly;
from the large wound sometimes the intestine, or the nerve of the intestines, by which the entry of air;
and the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes the smaller wound is worse than the larger,
because one puts the intestines back in more easily, if one does not put them in warm and cold; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, they contract more with pins,
and for this reason the female wound is better, for this reason one resets the intestine in its place more .ij.
And know that there are .iiij ways of rupture in the belly:
the .ij common sutures occur in the suture of the abdomen,
and the stitches of other wounds on the body, and two other special stitches, are common to all other wounds;
yet they are most suitable for stomach wounds, and I will describe each one and explain them:
I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestine has come out, and if it is difficult to put back inside, this can be done by one of two methods:The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this way: wet a sponge or soft cloth with tepid water only, or you cook in water squinant and cypress and spike, and the intestines until the swelling is removed;
and sometimes makes this restraining wine, and it is mixed with water to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling leaving, then mix the intestines with water or altée and maliciousness be cooked, because it restricts the entrance to a small amount;
and if it cannot enter, they make a small wound with an instrument that is used to cut out hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is bloodletting rather than cutting, that one shouldn't cut unless there is a great need;
and this is the instrument to split it with:
if you cut inside the curve and not out, and see here the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out, if you put it back according to its natural shape in its proper place, if you have the power, for this is worth it.
When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the belly, you should make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the area below the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts put the affected part higher than the other;
and so you must apply what I say to large and medium wounds.
For small wounds, use whatever is available to you:
then have ready in your hands a minister of pity who will press the wound all around with his hand, and gather the lips; and this is the common method of sewing,
and this is the common method of sewing, take a needle or several, depending on the width of the wound, then leave about an inch of space from the head of the wound, and pierce with a needle where there is a good strong thread; and pierce the two pieces of skin with the two pieces of thread,
then draw it with a double thread around the needle in two parts, then bring together the two heads of the wound properly,The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and then leave.i. space, and I push another needle through; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need in terms of needles, until the entire wound is closed;
and let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and thick, because fine needles pierce all the flesh, and too thick ones cannot pierce well: therefore they should be medium-sized;
and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin,
that they do not close and open the wound before the solder;
and then cover the heads of the needles, so that they do not hurt the patient while sleeping, and put tents or pieces of cloth on the needle heads to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is sealed;
and this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because you only need one needle or two.
The second stitch is common, and it is that you join the two pieces of skin and the two pieces of the wound together with one needle, or a strong thin thread; and when you have pierced all four together,
and when you have pierced all four together, then bring the needle back to the part where you started, in the manner that one sews cloth;
and space each stitch apart by the thickness of a thumb;
this stitch should be seven times the length of the needle;
and I sewed up a wound that a man had on his belly,
which had been made by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm-width wide, and the intestines protruded well over .10. palms wide,
and the wound was in his belly. I returned the intestine to where it had been 24 hours prior
and the wound was sewn up for 15 days, and I treated it, and it healed.
And they had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment because I was in a place where no such things could be found, neither medicine nor anything else; and I applied cotton wool soaked in honey to the wound twice a day, and washed it with honeyed water until it healed.
Now I will tell you two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle and insert it from the outside just into the inside;
when it has pierced the heart directly, then insert the needle into the vein or artery where you are going to inject.
and let it pierce through from another part of the body into the chest cavity;
and the understanding of this suturing is that you sew as the leather workers do to hides, and that you leave one side of the vein open, and close the other, so that the suturing is complete.
The second manner of sewing, which Galen calls properly,
if it is as when two parts are joined together naturally, and they apply one end to the other end, in such a way:
stick an needle or awl close to the edge, and only pierce that spot, and leave the two shoulders of the syringe; then turn the needle and pierce it from the outside inwards, through to the inside, as the two shoulders of the syringe;
then pierce one and the other from the outside inwards, through to the inside, in two other shoulders of the syringe that are on the other side;
and this is the principal method of sewing and the most common one.
Galen says these words, and some testify to it,
that one should sew the belly with two needles, having thread in each;
and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew hide;
and know that when the hernia is in the belly, the sutures are more difficult than in other places in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as long as the heat has not moved it, if one re-inserts the intestine, and sews it up; then place the cauterizing powder on a piece of cloth,
if one re-inserts the intestine, and sews it up; then place the cauterizing powder on a piece of cloth, and if he burns it, he should immediately apply some ointment to cool the wound; and they cut the thread, and sew up the anus, and the navel; then clean the wound as with the others, until it is healed;
and if you do not have medicine, place old cotton wool on it as soon as it starts to ooze pus and move it 14 times a day until it heals.
For you do not need any other medicine for various wounds that are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound is causing infection in the principal members, if you should moisten a light woolen cloth in tempered oil, or in rose oil, and place it around the angles, and under the armpits;
and if there is pain or swelling in the bowels, and this happens many times, then let him take enemas of warm red wine, especially if the swelling comes up to the intestines;
and pierces inside it, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "young" cannot heal when it is raw, and it is because of the thinness of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
And if the thread jumps out of the wound, it puts it back as far as the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and turned white or black, you should tie the area that is black so that no blood flow comes from it, because there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligature, and place the two ends of the thread from under the wound up to the edge to ease the extraction when the thread is pulled, and the wound is closed.
of the boiling route
When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, one can mend it in some ways,
because I saw a man who was pierced in the belly with a lance;
was located on the right side of the stomach, and became a fistula, and from it came digested food and wind;
I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not stop cauterizing until it healed and the wounds closed.
And when I saw it healing, I feared that the patient had discomfort in his abdomen; and it did not cause harm but persisted in better conditions, eating and drinking;
And some experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it must be bound in such a way: take fine thread from a large testicle, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the thread has opened the mouth, he places it on top of the two lips,
then puts another grip after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely grasped;
and checks the wound. If they are absorbed into the intestines and do not harm the patient,
and one can ligate the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such a way: take the end of this intestinal thread that is very dried out, and then tie to the head of this thread a thread of fine twisted linen; then push the thread through the needle, and sew up the intestine, and return it to its proper place;
and this method of stitching a hernia is not without risk, according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no healing or health, unless with great subtlety.
of fistula wherever it may be You should know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula." And especially when it is deep and narrow.
A fistula is a hard white swelling without pain, and it has a head like the beak of a bird;
sometimes it jumps very high, and sometimes low to the ground. sometimes it poops, and sometimes not much;
and I have spoken about this in the section on wounds, that any wound that is not healed and there is no discharge, It is caused by one of eight reasons:
namely, by the smallness of blood or body; or because of its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, that does not allow flesh to grow; where there is too much bowing; or the skin is perished, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for the treatment; or because the corruption is of a pestilential nature; Or by virtue of the nature of the region digestion is tardy, and health delayed, and it swells by nature. Or there are veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicine in the division.
Now I must tell you about the treatment of a fistula that is done by hand.
Know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins and arteries and nerves, or the face, or intestines, or bladder, or any of the sides, or to the ears, head, eyes, limbs, and teeth.
And all the fistulas that are in this way are of great harm, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have described, and you are confident in the treatment, and you see it, take a tent of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, so take it;
and if the fistula is crooked, then probe with a thin, blunt instrument, because the blunt instrument will bend around the crook;
and if the fistula has a narrow opening and you cannot probe it well with instruments, if you cleanse it through one of the openings,
for moisture quickly travels from one hole to another and cleanses.
then you should let it bleed until you can tell if there is bone or nerve involved, and if it is deeply embedded.
and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and where they feel it.
and when you know the exact location, if it is far from a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or in any of the ways I have told you, if the wound according to what I have said;
or in any of the ways I have told you, if the wound according to what I have said; and remove the foulness and corrupted flesh within; and then treat the wound until it is healed;
and if the fistula is very deep in a straight line, you must cut it open as much as you can, then I wet tents in medicine ague, and I press them to the head of the fistula
then I wet tents in medicine ague, and I press them to the head of the fistula until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom
and then I apply ointments to heal the wound, until it is healed
and if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it off. If a vein or nerve causes you distress in your limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and darkness, then cut it until all the corruption is removed, then cleanse it with things that are cooling until it is healed;
and if it is not healthy, and return bow as before, know that you have not gone to the fountain;
if you uncover and desire as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is so without pain, that is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach. if there is no other way than to let nature take its course,
and if there is a small corrupt bone that you can pull out with tweezers, if he removes it with an instrument suitable for this purpose,
and if there are many bones, he should pull them out one by one;
and if the moisture makes it difficult, and there is no error or fear, then cut through flesh and moisture and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in one hour, place something on the wound to prevent putrefaction, and let it remain until the pus has collected around the bone,
and then they will have the bones more easily;
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, if you only treat the corruption until the darkness is completely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large amount of corruption and it reaches to the bone; if you should cut away and cover everything until the corruption is reached, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man on his leg, so that you can take example and help in your work.
He was a young man of about thirty years old who had pain in his leg for a cause that came from within the body,
and he could not lift his foot or leg. So the matter came to the leg and it was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it;
but through their madness they worked so much that the abscesses opened, and many matters flowed out and became a fistula, and there came many openings which all discharged pus and moisture from the body;
and many of them had treatment for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine,
until I was called to him, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what ran through the holes in the body and became red with the juice of the young vine, and had a citron colour.
I pitched a tent at one of these holes, and then blocked up all the holes,
and found that they came into contact with each other from all sides of the leg.
I hurried therefore, and struck one of the openings so hard that I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced all the way to the bone inside;
I removed what appeared to be rotten bone, and believed that there was no other corruption except for that which I had taken out;
and began to heal the wound with strong medicines for a long time, but it would not heal;
and then recommenced, and exposed the bone as before,
and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I cut it out, and then removed it, and worked to soud the place;
but I could not until I had split the bone for almost a palm's width, and drove it out from all around its socket, then restored it with remedies; and it was healed and souded firmly,
and one must not repeat the procedure except for the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure it, and for fear of his death that I had for him. For often due to bloodletting he bled profusely, yet he was completely healed,
For often due to bloodletting he bled profusely, yet he was completely healed, and in the place of the bone a hard lump formed, and he was in good health with no harm or ill-effect anywhere, nor any difficulty in walking or moving.
and are the head, so that you draw out the corrupted flesh from below, and expose the flesh above the area where you see swelling, so that the swelling does not press on the flesh; and place a brand or a knife under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and one must see and feel the corruption as much as possible, and do this again and again.
And if the bone is broken, and does not open, and the fracture is in the middle or in one part, exposing all the flesh; then place a burning brand underneath it,
and then sew up the corruption from one end to the other, and let the stitch be as long as the fracture, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, cut through the joint, and sew up the bone on the other side of it;
and if the dislocation is at the juncture of the two joints, then there is no need to cover it with anything else;
if the dislocation is at the knuckle of the hand or the ankle, then that thing is very serious, but nevertheless you must inquire into the dislocation, how it appears to you; and cleanse it in every way that you can, but be careful that the vein or nerve do not cause any harm;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and know that the knives and probes used to cut these bones are many, depending on the position of the bones and the appearance of the teeth, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason one must prepare for each kind of operation its appropriate instrument;
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to your knowledge of this art, and to testify to the ways of diseases; then prepare the instrument that you need according to what is appropriate.
of fire The shoulders may dislocate due to an internal or external cause;
and when you have treated that corrosion with remedies, but they are of no benefit, you must cover the affected limb up to where the corrosion is located, so that the patient does not escape through death or through greater harm from the defective limb;
so that the patient does not escape through death or through greater harm from the defective limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black and seems to be burnt by fire, and then comes darkness, after which this corrosion of members spreads member to member, and affects the whole body; so take care to cover it up quickly,
and if it is due to the sting of some venomous creature, such as a sea-scorpion, adder, or similar,
if the corrosion is on the head or neck, then cover it and do not give it any space to reach the hand.
And if it comes just to the hand, then the cautery at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then the cautery at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death, and there is no amelioration for this beyond the quantity of its virtue;
and thus it is done when the cautery comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then the cautery after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, it affects the entire foot; and if it goes up the leg, it affects the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy except to cauterize the disease to death;
and the method of cauterizing the member, whether with fire or with silk, is that you tie it above and below, and extend one servant one of the lines downstream, and another servant the other line upstream, and you dislodge the joint which is between the two lines to a width of one digit, as far as the bone is exposed;
then the wound or cut, and place from each side a piece of linen, so that the silk does not touch the healthy area, and bring about another injury and abscess in the patient.
And if you see blood flowing when you are working, then cauterize the spot firmly. or put on some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete,
then bind the dislocated member with a suitable ligament, and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what happened to one man in his sleep:
there happened to him a blackness which seemed like a burn from fire,
and this corrosion began in his toe of the foot, so that it affected the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered the foot and was healed;
and long after, the corrosion returned to his finger on the hand, and he came to me,
and I placed upon it things that would cause reverberation after the purification of the body, but could not stop the corrosion;
and he asked me to touch his hand, and I refused because I had no hope that I would reverberate the matter; and I was also afraid that if I cut off his hand, he would die, because the man's strength was weak; and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land, and he covered his hand, and was healed;
and I have no other cure to tell of except for this one, if anyone has need of it.
Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; and then bursts and discharges, and the place remains hollow, just like vessels; and the skin on top is as delicate as a loose napkin. and they do not reach the bone or nerve; such an illness is called "healthy."
but if it extends to the bone, then it is called a  "fistula."
and cook it until you cover the entire skin, especially when it is thin, just like a cloth; and do not add anything to it for flavor.
And if you see that the skin is burning and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it thus:
examine whether the breasts are large, and the navel which is in them has a foul smell, then cleanse with an Egyptian medicine enema made thus: take asafätida, oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and put them to cook in a vessel over fire, until the medicine turns red and as thick as honey;
and then take some of this according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and use it as a suppository in the breast, and constrict the opening; and leave the medicine in for .ij. hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this several times until the breast is healed and the pore is closed;
and sometimes they are cauterized with water from ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you should take ash wood from a vine and pour water over it,
then strain it and use it to enema until you know that the bowels are clean.
and if the patient cannot endure it, or the Egyptian medicine or the water from ashes, if you use an enema of water and honey or one with a little litharge powder ground up in it. or you can enema with honey and melted wine, as honey has the property of purifying and washing out. and the wine makes it sweat.
And when you have done this, and are confident that the intestines are well cleansed, if you enema with that which causes flatulence within him,
and it is that you press a suppository gently, and they make it with rose oil and wine; or you can enema with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in the treatment of ointments;
and if the opening of the rectum is small, and the tube of the enema cannot enter, loosen it with a blade a little, and put in some Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is loosened;
and if the wound is too wide, then cut and leave only enough space for the catheter to enter,
and if the anus is above, then cut higher up or lower down where it is. For when the bow is at full stretch, one must not let the arrow fly. and if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you wish, then arrange it in such a way that the bow points to the lowest place it can reach,
and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, prepare it in this way: let the bow run smoothly downward, and leave nothing of the bow behind; and take consolidating medicines to put on the breast,
and place them on a linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then press down firmly on the opening of the armpit . The second hole should be larger than the first. then apply a soft ointment on another piece of cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it over the armpit to ease the bowstring, and do not remove the large cloth for several days.
And whoever is above the armpit, remove often to remove the bow, and know what flows from the bowel, whether it is venom, or little, or enough, or digested, or undigested;
take note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has spread in this way and you see the nature that rises above the opening of the breast, if you know that the breasts are soft, and approach health;
and then loosen it in the morning, or the third day, and when you loosen the wound, change another bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast milk flows badly after many days, know that the breast does not heal. And if subtle poisons spread after a long time, do not despair of health,
because there are people who slowly heal their wounds with poultices, and those that do the opposite.
and if milk doesn't flow from the breast after many days, know that the breast won't produce milk.
and if the breasts are slow to produce milk and are distant, then apply moist remedies in substance but dry in nature, as with an ointment that is diaphanous, for it contains a large portion of vitriol, and that is the last medicine.
take a definite ointment, and they make it with rose oil, and rose wine of equal substance;
then they cook it and use it; and with that same one makes honey cooked thickener, when a definite ointment is not present,
or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and the powder on the honey when it is over the fire; and then glue a cloth to it, and apply pressure to the chest, and sometimes they administer an aromatic long poultice, and roots of celestial lily, which is as fine as wheat flour and centaury;
and roots of celestial lily, which is as fine as wheat flour and centaury; and in the use of simples or compounds: grind them to a powder, and mix with the honey I have mentioned, and use it; and if the wound is long, and is not healed by this treatment,
and if the wound is long, and is not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is complete, and makes an impression on the bone, or on hard members, or on soft tissues; as we have said before, if the treatment for a fistula.
of the abscess of the nail
Panarice is an abscess that develops underneath the fingernail of the hand, or from the foot, or perhaps it grows in other places;
and when it becomes infected, and no care is taken, then an abscess forms, and they grow and ooze pus until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps they grow all the way;
and the corrosion reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the toe becomes swollen, and its color is purple.
When you treat it as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, you must cut away all the excess tissue that has grown from under the nail. Then you should cauterize the wound afterward. Cauterization is very helpful if both the bone and nail are healthy.
and if the nail presses on the flesh, and begins to poke through, and bleeds, you should put some thread under the nail so that it doesn't hurt the flesh, and pull upwards, and gently push down on the flesh, and put burning and corrosive medicine on the rest of the flesh to remove everything;
And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and draw it out, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the tooth decaying, pull it out with a pair of tongs as mentioned earlier, then treat it until healed;
and if it is wild, and biting, and it feels great pain, then you must treat it first. then cut the nail of the big toe diagonally from above,
and be careful that the cutter does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
And if it happens, put something on top to soothe it.
You should treat a tumor that grows in the hands of some people by chance, which is all fleshy, and sometimes it has bones and sometimes nails,
and some grow at the root of the joints, where the growth is in some fingers. He who is born with a hernia in his navel should not move. and he who is born at the joint of the navel, perhaps moves;
the size of one who is fleshy, if it is slight in such a way: cut it at its root with a wide spatulum.
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; if you hold it tightly, it will stop bleeding.
For one who is born in the anus, you must cut the flesh around the anus first. Then cut the bone to a convenient depth, then treat it until it heals.
The joints that come together come from birth, or from the joining of a wound, or from arson, or similar things.
It is necessary to cut this wound so that the parts may join together according to their natural shape. then place between two tents or wet cloths in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you place between two pieces of thin plaster, until the wound is healed, as it should be.
If swelling comes to either of his hands with the palm, then cut that wound as it should be.
Of the poor
Veins are large enveloped tubes filled with melancholy humors, which come from various parts of the body;
and they occur more frequently in legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Therefore, you should administer to him a purgative, and then the basilicum herb.
The treatment with fire can be done in two ways: one is to apply it directly to the skin and draw out the black blood; The other way is to open a vein and draw it all out.
Incision should be performed in the following manner: first, heat the leg with very hot water until the large veins are dilated, then stretch the leg from the patient's thigh down to just below the knee. then open a vein in one place, or two or three places, of a broad size,
then press and milk out the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the nature of the illness can endure;
and then have him drink some red wine mixed with black gall;
and resume the bleeding and the bloodletting when the veins are full, and it is harmful to the illness.
The remedies for this are as follows: shave the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then place it in a bath and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and swells the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then apply the poultice to the vein from the top of the knee down to the ankle or just below the ankle;
then open the skin at the vein's origin, and scorch the vein on each side until it bleeds when pressed;
and it is seen red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord;
then pierce the vein underneath, so that it is raised from the skin, and then it can be bound tightly at the wrist,
then cut the skin above in three places; then scorch the skin over the vein until it appears, then open it with a razor, as you did before, and bind it at another wrist, as you did before;
then cut another size, or several if you need them, then lift it, and cut it to the toe of the foot,
then pull and lift it until the second size; then pull it out by size until it is all loose, then cut it;
and if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a needle with a strong doubled thread and tie it and pull it, and insert it under the skin, and turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out; and ensure that it does not crack, because if it cracks, then one cannot milk or lift it, and this brings harm to the patient;
And when you have finished milking it, place a pad soaked in wine and rose oil over the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the head is bent, twisted, and wrapped together, not straight, as we have said, you should split it crookedly, but do not crack it; and milk it as we have previously said.
you should split it crookedly, but do not crack it; and milk it as we have previously said. The shape of the knife with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut unless it touches the vein.
and is of great curve, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein; but let it be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is found in the legs, in hot places where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land where there is no moisture;
and sometimes they grow elsewhere than on the legs, and this happens with warts that come underneath the skin,
like snakes and worms which creep between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then the place changes color, and the vein starts to protrude outward, just like the root of a plant.
When the head is open, you must wrap it around with a piece of woolen cloth from one and a half inches to two and a half inches, and the knot,
and let the cloth hang down to the leg, and every time it comes out of place, wrap it around the cloth again, and the knot; and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap around the remainder, and do not cover it at all in its root, until it has come out entirely; because if you cover it, it will go back into the flesh, and cause an abscess and swelling in that spot, and a serious illness;
for this reason it must be treated little by little until the end, and nothing should remain in the body;
and sometimes this vein is treated from five to ten inches long, and a man came to me whose vein was cut from ten inches long, and when you cover it, it forms a lump or hole, and pierces all the way to the bottom,
so that everything comes out; and after emptying the matter inside, bring healing medicines to it for several days, then heal it as you would an abscess.
And sometimes this vein bleeds more when it opens at the joint of the foot, or the foot itself, and there is much bleeding and it spurts; treat it therefore as we have said before.
Of worms which grow between skin and flesh:
This disease is called in our land "disease of oxen" because it often happens to oxen,
and there is a small worm which grows between skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body both upward and downward, and it travels from limb to limb, as far as it can go under the skin, then it breaks out;
and it is caused by the putrefaction of some humours, like worms and snakes and roundworms and hookworms in the belly;
and one fears its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see him bleeding and milking, he cannot hold back until he has finished:
so you must tie the area above and below with a strong string tightly,
then cut on top of it and bleed him forcefully; if the pus is deep in his flesh and you do not release it, if you cauterize with fire on top, until it dies;
and the greatest harm it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye, then press firmly under the eyelid, then pull it out;
and one must use the patient's body with purifying medicines for dissolved evil humours;
and if there is pus coming from wounds caused by burning meat.
Of pain which comes from flatulence This disease is called "vomiting" in our language, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and can move from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and I uncovered her arm, and saw a small swelling on the vein in her arm;
and soon after, I saw it rise up as high as a worm at her shoulder, quicker than anything else, as if it were bright silver when it moves from one place to another;
the pain left that spot and moved to her shoulder,
and then a little later it ran throughout the body until it came to the other arm;
then she began turning around the body, just as I saw her.
I marveled greatly how she moved from limb to limb in this manner, for I had never seen this illness act in this way before. Nevertheless, I had seen many who had felt pain moving from one place to another, but I have not seen this in a woman;
and I thought that it was because women have dry bodies and uncovered veins, and due to this constraint, the wind appears;
and it does not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and rested veins.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it reveals itself as we have said, examine it above and below thoroughly, and then press upon it until the windiness constrained in the place comes out; and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it yourself,
let the one who dislodges windiness, as with foul-smelling pills, and serapin pills, and similar ones.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse according to their appearance and according to where they land on the body.
Their diversity is that there are those which have large points, small points, hooked points, and blunt points. And there are differences in arrows according to the heart that carries them: for there are some from a strong heart and some from a fearful heart; and you must know how you should guard yourself in all ways, as I will teach you. And there are those with two angles, those with tongues, and those with pieces. and that which occurs in any limb, it occurs according to two ways: or in a principal limb it dislocates,
such as brain, heart, liver, lung, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it therefore occurs in any of these members, and the signs of death which I will tell you about below appear to you: then you must be careful about the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully out, then draw it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and jumps out the sphenoid sinus which is above the brain, is when there are cuts and wounds and bleeding, and inflammation and redness of the eyes, and spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile; and it may also be that there is blood coming out of the nose or ears; and it may cause loss of speech and voice; and there is white moisture coming from the wound, resembling pus, and also coming out like blood from a wound.
And if this sign appears, stop the bleeding, and remove the arrow if it is still inside.
The signs of a wound when it falls on the heart are that it is close to the left breast, and feels as if it were pierced into a hard object, not hollow; and sometimes the wound becomes mute like the pulse, and black blood comes out, and there is coldness and cold sweat, and syncope: then know without doubt that death will follow.
And the sign of the arrow that never leaves the lung is that there is no pain from foam coming from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow hits the cover of the foot, it is between the small ribs; and it causes great pain and great discomfort and breathing difficulties; and all the limbs from the shoulders are affected.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, by chance some indigestible meat may come out of the wound.
And if an arrow pierces the chest or belly, and no feces come out through the intestines, then there is no hope of a cure, nor of extracting the arrow.
And if an arrow pierces the bladder, and urine comes out and escapes, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, elbow, spine of the back, hip, thigh and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various dispositions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you how to do this.
To .I. man an arrow fell into his shoulder at the root of the nerve: I probed it, and dislodged it from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without pain.
And I dislodged an arrow that had lodged in the fat of the eyelid below the eyeball, and the arrow was pushed back so that only the tip was visible above the surface, and was struck by a large arrow from a Turkish bow, right through the ear; the wound healed, and no ill effects occurred.
And he received an arrow in the throat from a Christian, and the arrow was an Arab one, going through the ear:
I removed the barbs and extracted it gently, and the Christian was healed.
And he received an arrow in the stomach from a man, and I thought he would die;
and then after he had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition; I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and there was no bad outcome.
And if you see a person who has an arrow shot into his back, and the wound is closed over it;
and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions do not change, he found no harm in any of his natural works.
And I saw another man who had an arrow shot into his face and the wound was sewn up;
and he remained like that without experiencing great pain; and many other similar things.
And I saw an arrow shot at a man of the king's party, who was hit in the eye, and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was all drawn out
I was called to the sickbed after she had been sick for three days. I found the wound very tight.
I examined her with a small needle and didn't feel anything. and felt numbness and pain below her right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
I placed on the wound a digestive and astringent plaster, to prevent inflammation of the eye; and I saw the eye of the arrow.
and I saw the eye of the arrow. I applied the plaster more often, and the wound healed quickly, and the patient suffered for a long time,
as long as he felt the arrow one day within his flesh; and he told me so. I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was healed
and I probed the wound and felt the head of the arrow which was lodged there; then I applied the corrosive medicine to the wound again and again until the head of the arrow became visible;
and transgresses the terms for about four months,
then lacerate the wound that I pricked with tweezers, and tore at from both sides, but could not extract it;
therefore I did not cease to use subtlety and cunning with instruments until one day I took it with well-made tweezers, according to how it was described in this chapter, so that I treated it and restored the wound.
And the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I therefore restored it, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was completely healed.
Now I will tell you about the extraction of certain arrows, so that you may focus on what I do not mention, for books cannot encompass everything;
but the wise masters consider well a little great thing, and what is present and lacking to them; they seek new work, and new tools, and the descending of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows grow in the limbs where they are stuck in two ways: either through the place where they enter, or through another part;
and that which jumped out of there where it entered, is an arrow entering their flesh, and sometimes jumps out.
And if it doesn't jump out now, then leave it until the wound around it has healed over, and the opening has closed up.
And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, then leave it for a few days, moving it slightly each day;
and then it will jump out, and if not, then pierce around it with a very thin needle, until the area around the wound is enlarged, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged deep within the body and cannot be seen, then it must be sought out throughout the entire body; and if you feel it, then extract it with an appropriate instrument;
and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut as deeply as the wound is large; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears on the arrowhead that are holding it in place,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears on the arrowhead that are holding it in place, then cut the flesh that is stuck to the arrow's barbs as deeply as you can, and then breaks or folds the ears of the arrow so that you can draw it out;
and then breaks or folds the ears of the arrow so that you can draw it out; and carefully so that you do not break the arrow, which you will pull more violently.
And if you cannot in one go, then leave it until around the joint is swollen; then draw it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the bleeding makes you feel faint, then administer what we have said about curing in its chapter;
and beware of cutting the nerve and opening a vein, and use whatever means you can to pull out the arrow without danger.
quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and treat the patient according to how they were when the arrow struck them, for it is the best help you can give them; and if you cannot, then treat them according to what the signs show you.
Arrows that come from another direction, or where something can be seen or felt escaping from them, or where the skin is swollen:
Cut it off, therefore, as far as the pincers can reach, and then pull it out; if it does not come away at once, cut it again.
And if it is caught in the bone, then rotate your hand swiftly as far as it will go into the bone and widen the opening, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, then let it be for now and start the extraction again until it comes out.
and if there is a arrow in it, remove the entire arrow;
and if it is cut, and you see to administer a bandage, then let him administer .i. chewed instrument, so that the point of the arrow enters into the gum of the instrument; and then bind it tightly,
and if the arrow is chewed, let him apply  .i  instrument with an entering point, to alleviate the extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, then you must cut all around the flesh where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as necessary.
And if the arrow pierces in the thigh, or buttock, or belly, or bladder, or ribs, and it is deep, and you can reach it, then cut over it.
and be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, and then extract the arrow, and then stitch the wound if necessary; and treat it until it is healed.
The form of the forceps used to treat arrow wounds resembles an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
And there are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrowhead.
of the common veins of the body Of the veins from which one heals, there are 31, and of these, there are 16 in the head,
that is to say: 2 veins that are behind the ears, which are called the two "ear-veins"; and the two arteries which are visible in the two temples; and two veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, called "aspirers"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is in the head of the neck; and the two windpipes which are in the throat; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth; these are the veins called "eye-veins". and 2 veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which we commonly bleed are 5 in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, which is on the left side, and people call it the "vein of the head"; and the method is called "binding", and it consists of the cephalic and basilic veins, and common people call it a "blood vessel"; and the basilic vein is on the right side, and common people call it a " belly vein ", and it is above the navel, and it is that one which opens clearly over the pubic area.
And the salvatella is the vein between the little finger and ring finger, and also on both sides.
and in the leg and foot there are three veins; one is beneath the curve of the pouch on the left side, and the second superficial vein which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein which is called 'nesse', which is at the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins beneath those.
The healing of veins that are behind the ears is helped by old catarrh and by leeches. and the qualities of the healer, as I told you, and it is that you heal the head of the sick person,
and the qualities of the healer, as I told you, and it is that you heal the head of the sick person, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then squeeze the sick person's neck with a twist, until the two veins appear behind the ears, depending on the head in two places: Take them to your fingers, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, press firmly.
Then take the lancelet, and insert it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards. And pierce the skin and the vein well .ii. times, and let the blood flow until you see it;
Then strain and bind it, until it is healed;
and I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
The bleeding from the two arteries in the temples, if it is an old wound, and eye-sores and blind eyes; and in the body of tears and ulcers;
and the nature of the bleeding is as I have said: and it is that the patient stretches his neck, so that the two veins appear clearly; and feels pain under your armpit, and then sign inward;
then lightly press the vein above your armpit with your index finger, and insert the lance underneath, and lightly press the vein above, and constrict it, as you have done in two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then loosen the bandage, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton;
then ligature it tightly, and let it until it heals; and we have spoken of their bandaging and their extraction, at the beginning of the book.
The bleeding of the frontal vein is just as good for ancient diseases of the face, and for migraine, and for redness.
and its qualities are such that the patient turns their neck while twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "digging", which is made as follows:
And place the tip on the vein, and push with your hand or another object, and let the blood issue according to the amount you see; then loose the collar around the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healthy and sometimes work with a wide flame.
However, it is not advisable for the flames to be too small; and heal it crookedly, because the bone is close by, and accidentally break the flames when they are thin.
The healing of the two veins that are in the two eyes helps them, and also helps with tetter, and redness, and eye infections, and facial illnesses.
The nature of their healing is such that the patient should twist their neck using a bandage, as mentioned before;
Then he should heal it, and the healing should go through the wound, from the tip of the flame to a little way above it, because there is no flesh there.
And if the flames are thin, they might break; then draw out the blood, as much as you need to, and then tie it up with a thread, and tie it well.
The bleeding of the vein from the nose is useful for headache, and for dizziness, and for facial ailments, such as migraines and redness that occur in the face, and especially when they are chronic;
and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient tilts their neck to the left, then pinches their nose on the same side, and takes a long, thin flame and inserts it into the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well, and now the blood will begin to flow;
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then tie it off for a night, for it is quickly restored;
The juice of the .ij. gundages helps with strangulation of the gullet, and at the beginning of measles, and many illnesses, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and stomach aches;
and the quality of the healing is such that the patient stretches his neck upwards from both sides, as we have said; and let the master stand over the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair,
then open the vein widely, then draw the blood tempered, or as much as is needed;
then do the same to the other vein, then untie the ligature, and bind both veins gently, letting the patient bleed until morning so that the wound can heal.
Of bleeding from the lips: The bleeding of the veins of the lips helps with ulcers in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and toothache and gum pain.
And the quality of the bleeding is to have the patient sit before you, and strain his neck as I have said; then turns the lip, and looks at two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left; and one can identify them because they are black, and because around them there are thin black veins: so take hold of both of them, and if you do not know them and you are in doubt,
so take hold of both of them, and if you do not know them and you are in doubt, then take hold of the thickest one on each side, and it is the same method for those above and below, and for those on the right or left, and for those on the upper or lower lip; then take hold of the thickest one on each side, and it is the same method for those that are above and below, because it is the same thing.
Of bleeding under the tongue Bleeding the veins under the tongue helps after bleeding from the head, and it is for tightening the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the bleeding are such that the patient holds his hands out in front of the sun, and touches the tongue, and looks under each side to see a black vein;
then bleed both, but do not go too deep, as there are arteries underneath.
The veins of the neck from which blood is commonly drawn are healed according to two methods:
either with a sharp steel needle as thick as a thumb or with an olivary needle as fine as a hair, and it is called «ane sil». and they are wide and narrow according to the width and tightness of the veins. The shape of the steel needle is very important, and it should be as thick as a thumb:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth on top and contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the shape of an olive-shaped flame:
and it is more pointed and sharp, and is used to lance delicate veins, where there is delicate yellow blood.
The basil vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to cleanse the wound thoroughly and to cauterize the artery underneath. And if he punctures the artery, and bleeding ensues, then it must be staunched as I have said. and the vein should not be punctured, but cut short as though it were a thread.
And if the basilic vein does not open up clearly, then you must stretch it and change to another; or you can cut a vein from it, or you can open the vein in the arm: it will become apparent. and apply the cautery to the flame, as we have said.
And if you want to find the vein for bleeding, you must stretch out the arm and touch the spot until you feel the pulse; then mark the spot, release the arm, and cauterize the vein with the flame.
and make sure you do not pierce an artery when you see the spot swell up, for that is an artery; avoid it then.
And if you see it bulge upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood: hurry then, and place your finger over it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops, as often happens;
bind the arm, and leave it be, and do not move it until the patient is healed. And have him remain fearful, and do not let him move it until he is better.
And if the blood is not staunched and it flows, and you have no medicine at hand, then press upon the artery to open it, for that is where the blood retreats, and staunch the flow.
Take a piece of elderwood, split it in half, and take one of the halves and tie it on tightly until the next day.
If the blood is staunched, that is good; if not, then stop it as we have said with powders that stanch blood.
And the stanching is not effective in many cases due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
The healing of a vein is helped if it draws blood from the head above and the body below. This is because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and the surgeon must be careful not to pierce too deep and find the nerve, and if it swells and the saint is troubled, and by chance cannot heal.
and this nerve opens in many places, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, you must heal the instrument with your breath; then protect the nerve as best you can.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they will make it long.
Healing of the cephalic nerve helps to attract blood from the head and helps the eyes.
And it should be healed by pricking with an olive or myrtle twig, for it is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Nevertheless, one must seek the lightest method, and not worry if it fails the first time, but try again. and sometimes inflames the area in some people if it fails the first time, but it does no harm. The quality of bleeding depends on your thoughts.
The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is not done solely for the sake of healing, but also to maintain health.
and to prevent future illnesses; and the incision should be made in one of the three veins: these are, the cephalic, the fasting, and the basilic; and one must bleed at the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
and one must bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours in the morning.
The medicine that is administered for illnesses has no set time, but whenever there is a need, at any hour and at all times;
and one must not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor women carrying a child before the fourth month until the seventh month. Nor should the very old who have passed 60 years be bled.
And when anyone wants to be bled, in any manner, they should first clear the intestines with a gentle enema, if he has retained much feces so that the veins are not attracted by the harmful superfluities from the intestines to the principal limbs;
nor is he healed who is too full of meat, nor who is drunk, as long as that lasts, nor the hydroptic.
and if they are to be healed after colic, vomiting, diarrhea, and frequent intercourse with a woman, and from exertion, staying up late, and fasting, and anything that weakens them, either through the weapon or through the body;
then skillfully modify the humors, if the sickness is gross, through meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
then enter the bath, if nothing else helps, to draw out the blood,
and heal the vein of the foot around the third, as we have said;
and guard against that day of labor, and puncturing, and luxury, and similar things;
and be bound and joyful, and let the healer be above those whom one heals, and rub the arm 2 or 3 times,
then loosen the ligature above it, because if it is too tight or too loose, it cannot move;
and then he rubs the area with his hands, until the veins swell and can be felt;
then he moistens the needle with the flame of a little oil, then puts his finger from his left hand on the vein under the site where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not break when cut. For there are veins which flow like strings to the heart, and others that are filled with air. so that when one places them over the flame, they withdraw from the heat and cannot open the vein, and so it is with these.
And if the vein opens, the wound is too narrow, so the surgeon must be skilled in these matters.
And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; if not, then try again a little lower on the same spot, or above, if the area is swollen.
And if the limb is swollen and the patient despondent, let him have a day or two, and do not bind the arm: by chance there will be abscesses; do not enter the bath, then resume bleeding if she wishes;
and if the vein is small, cut it short and you doubt that it will not release as much blood as you want, then pierce that vein itself directly with a needle;
and open it slightly so that the limb becomes swollen; because this happens many times when the vein is small.
If you see the site swollen, do not change the bandage and apply a little linseed oil, for it eases the body's blood and in this place the linseed is crushed.
and thus administer the linseed oil in each bandage that you dress the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and this also makes a triacle and bowels move, when one puts it on the site; thus subtly the blood escapes and is scattered when it is too thick.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not bled first, or the opening of the vein is small, if you hasten, and place on the site a sponge moistened with water and salt that is lukewarm, and compress it for an hour;
and you should do this after the blood issues from the vein, and if it remains in place for a few days with no sign of blackness or greeness, then it does him no harm; and if you see any swelling, place on it some aloe or myrrh that has been softened in the juice of hellebore, monkshood, or similar.
And many times there is an abscess and appearance of pus at the site of the basilic vein; therefore, place your hand on it, and if you feel the area soft to the touch upon compression with your hand, then that appearance is bad.Et si tu veis, met sus le leu esponge moillie et chaut, ou l’estraincture de la main, si ne tu veis aucune noiror ou verdor; Therefore be sure not to put anything on it of what we have said, for by chance it might enter an artery; but let him make a dry plaster to harden the spot, then heal it with another healing, until it is cured.
And draw from each person blood according to the quantity of his virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, that one makes him a larger wound, and the flames are wider;
and to those who are weak, do the opposite, and one must bleed little and often, and one should bleed by cutting across, not piercing.
and this bleeding method is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and it is better than bleeding long or wide.
And if the body needs bleeding, one should give moist bread in pomegranate juice; if it is scorched, then bleed three or four times.
And if it is of a cold complexion, one should eat moist bread before bleeding in rosewater syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and anise, and good-smelling syrup.
And if he faints from the bleeding, after the loss of much blood, then he should breathe in the fumes of vinegar and subtle-scented syrup,
and use the other things we have discussed in the chapter on syncope for opening a vein.
And if he wants to bleed his arm again and again, then when it is weakened by excessive bleeding, he should bleed a little bit at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
And those who want to bleed their arms again after the first bleeding, and they have strong bodies, should bleed again after seven hours, or after nine hours.
And who wants to bleed elsewhere, it must bleed on the second or third day.
For there is a lot of blood inside the body that has been heated and causes fever; so we must draw out a large quantity and widen the orifice so that it drips out in drops. Then you should know all the ways to bleed, and put your hand over his pulse when he is bleeding so that death does not come through the orifice, and this happens many times when the bleeder is negligent;
and it is not necessary when you see the arm being dislocated, and blood coming out a second time, and the hole is closed, that you press directly on it; nor if it is crooked, that he extends his arm forcefully, for that would be bad;
but let it be until it heals the second time; then you may apply the tip of the flame to the frozen blood at the hole, and place a little bit of salt dissolved in water on it and press gently.
If a vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it until the abscess has been drained.
If necessary, bleed a second time in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Veins in the arm are bled in the area of the vein in the head because it is more complex.
And the way to bleed is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the vein turns red;
then let them be bound tightly, so that the vein appears well, then heal now through the middle, not the wide or long [part].
and the hole should be wide, and healed near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot issue from it, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
and heal near the neck, and not too close to the hole so that the blood cannot issue and cause death. And if it is in summer, then do not push the hand into hot water, for we put it there more in winter than in summer;
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are no arteries or nerves in it.
The salve for healing the right hand is good for all illnesses of the liver, and this is how to make it:
Soak the hand in hot water until the vein is swollen, as far as one can see. And if the vein is crooked and you cut it from top to bottom, it will not hurt at all.
But do not go too deep, because the nerves are completely stripped of flesh underneath,and
and then put the hand in warm water, if the blood is frozen in the wound, and cannot come out.
And when you have treated the blood as needed, put oil and silk on the vein to seal it quickly, and do the same for each vein.
The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the right side, and do everything as I have told you for the right side.
Bleeding from the vein in the throat is beneficial for all diseases that are below the body, as diseases of the eyes, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the arms, legs, and older limbs, and similar diseases.
And the nature of his healing is that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs the vein until it opens. and lies down on the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot, many veins go there.
then heal it in the widest vein, or at the ankle, which is better.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And if you heal it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath, and heal it across as well by coping; and let the flames be ανέσυλη.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
And if the healing fails the first time, then try again the second time higher up a little, because the place is salty; do not worry about nerves, as we have said, and do likewise with the other foot equally.
The site of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its cure lies in the pain of the hip when it is due to hot blood.
And the qualities of its cure are such that the patient should immerse himself in a bath and twist his ankle four times in a circular motion.
For otherwise it will not open; and if it does open, then treat it in every way you know how, by applying pressure and stretching. And it is good to cup the vein, for the site is safe, and it is very effective in treating many people.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And it is good to cup the vein, for the site is safe, and it is very effective in treating many people.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. And if you do not treat it, then cut a vein on either the back or the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves.
Let the blood flow until you see it, then untie the ligature, place cotton on top and press it; it is now healed.
Bleeding with leeches.
Leches are made of horns, or iron, or glass; and bleeding is done according to 2 methods: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this farting which is without pain is according to two manners: either it is with fire, or without fire;
and two others on either side of the neck; and the windpipe under the chin; and the cupping glasses on the .2. shoulders; and the cupping glasses above the kidneys; and the cupping glasses in the .2. arms; and the cupping glasses on the .2. legs; and the cupping glasses at the  .2. ankles; and the ventilation does not draw blood, except from small veins that are scattered throughout the body,
and for this reason it weakens one no more than bleeding; and it must not be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body has been emptied.
And if due to necessity or habit it is necessary to bleed, then we bleeding every hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle and at all times.
For there are those who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
and some who experience fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and some who spit up a drop of blood in their mouths, have swollen tongues, and ooze blood; and if there are those who dream, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially when it is during the month, we command them to fast after 3 hours in the day.
Bleeding from the nose helps with headaches ... that comes from the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this ventilation if it is in the place of the healing of the cephalic,
and those of a cold complexion should not use it, nor those with catarrh, for it does them great harm;
and for this reason the elderly should not use it, nor those with head colds.
And those who often heal from it become oblate, and for this reason the cupping should be placed a little lower down due to the risk of oblateness.Car li veillart et cil qui ont chief froides maladies, si conviennent que les ventoses soient plus avals sur la cephalique, car ce lor fait grant bem;
Ventilation in the neck is located at the junction of the neck and the base of the skull, and for this reason, it helps with constriction of the feet. and with rupture of the windpipe, and with hoarseness, and with inflammation;
and it should be pushed gently, for if it is held too tightly, it causes damage to the stomach and heart.
Ventilation at the .ij. ribs in the neck helps with headaches, and eye pain and migraine, and with strangulation, and toothache,
and is in the area of the basilic vein; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand when putting it in, so that he does not compress the artery and cause a flow of blood.
Ventilation under the chin is good for mouth diseases and gum corruption and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the area of the two lips.
Ventilation on the shoulders is good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Ventilation on the armpits is just as good as ventilation of the three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins
and instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for beneath lies naked bone, and underneath that nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass that is placed on the buttock is useful for hemorrhoids and other diseases underneath, and it should be large, made of brass, and well-suctioning; and by chance, if it is fragile, it may break and cause great wounds.
Cupping glasses on the legs heal very well, as they draw blood from the whole body; and they are useful for old pains in the kidneys, and for diseases of the stomach, and of the bladder, and they bring relief to flowers; and they are located at the .2nd sophene, and at the .2nd ankle, and all the while they weaken the body after a long time, and bring on fainting in many dispositions.
The method of applying the cupping glass is to place it first empty, and suck gently, and apply firmly, and move evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see the spot red and swollen, and the blood appears; then stop, and remove the cups, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have thin skin and wide pores: one must strike only once, and one must make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, then one must strike twice: the first time to subtilize the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, then one must strike a third time; and when we want to draw blood a little at a time, we only need to strike once.
And if we want a lot of blood, then we must strike repeatedly; and if the blood is thick, then we strike it deeply, and the endings are such that the skin is pierced suddenly,
and it suits those who have thick and tough skin, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the places where the cupping glasses will be placed with an opening and dissolving oil: if it is in a state of inflammation, then use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
and if it is in a state of suppuration, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar.
And if the suppuration is thick and cold, then take marigold oil, or balsamite oil, or dill oil, and similar oils.
And if those whom we heal have tender flesh and large pores, we must not put any oil on them.
but they must be washed afterwards with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar.
And those who have a lot of moisture should also use parsley, or water from the myrtle tree, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large swollen areas should use old wine, or water from the nettle plant, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or other similar things;
and it is not advisable to bleed with a cupping glass before the bath or after the bath, but an hour or two hours after the bath; and do not sleep after bleeding.
and it is necessary that he rest when he is to be bled and when he has been bled. And watch out for those who are bilious, and if the blood is too thin and inflamed; if it is advisable to eat cool foods such as pomegranates, endives, lettuce with garlic, and similar things;
and eating small fish, and meat from the bowels, and moist meats.
And for those with cold complexions, take syrup of honey, and moderate sweet wine which is between old and new, and drink small birds and small fish;
and on the day that he fasts, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some people treacle or musk at certain times before or after fasting, to comfort the main members; and dilute the wine, but it must not be drunk by those who are hot.
The cupping glasses that are put without bleeding are those that are put on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the goiter, and on the belly and the udder and the kidneys and the hip, for these members do not endure being bled on wounds,
and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as when we put them on the breasts when the nipples are sore; to reduce the swelling that is in a member, as when we put cupping glasses on the belly and udder to diminish the member;
it removes pain when there is obstruction or stone, and by its attractive power it may remove the obstruction or draw the stone from its place.
and thus it acts when placed upon the liver and spleen when there is retained flatulence,
and these cupping glasses are administered empty to draw only, and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water,
as in diseases of the pleura, and in such a way one fills the cupping glass with warm water, or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The form of the fire cupping is as follows:
And it has 2 inches of width and a half palm depth, and on the sides all around the middle is a small hole like for pushing an awl through,
and it is made of iron, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
and in the middle there is a crossbar made of iron or steel, for holding a candle in place,
and are both large and small according to the illnesses and ages of those who take them.
for the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the elderly, and for the thin than for the fat.
And thus one must place this cupping glass on the member:
take the wax candle or the linen and place it inside the cupping glass through the tube that is inside the cupping glass, so that the brightness is at the bottom of the suction cup so it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and your fingers should be on the hole that we mentioned, so that when one wishes, the vapors go in and out, and one removes the suction cup;
and use the poultice as before, and repeat it often if necessary.
In the suction cup which is administered for disease of the pleurisy, in all aquosity, there is no tube or hole, and it is not used until it is filled with water, and is placed on the limb only empty.
And this is how it is done:
Leeches are only applied outside of areas where cupping glasses cannot be used due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places. and on bare skin, such as the testicles or nipples, and other similar areas;
and the quality of their use is that when you apply leeches that are in clean, clear water without any odor, they will take them.
and puts them in fresh water, until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; then he should bleed them from a vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place leeches on it;
And when they are swollen and itching, if there is a suitable spot to apply cupping, he should do so, for this brings great relief.
If not, he should raise the affected area, and then apply a poultice of ajuga, very well, and then express it;
and if the bite is too close to the body of the snake, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and apply it until the swelling goes down;
and if there are many bites, apply powdered vitriol or gall, and similar things, until the swelling goes down;
or you can put half a pod of peeled peas on the site and leave them until they turn green; this will stop the swelling immediately;
and if you need more, catch other snakes.
And if the leeches will not attach, then rub the fresh wound with blood, or insert a needle so that the leech can suck out the blood. and then place them on top, and as soon as they sense the blood, they will attach.
And when you see that they are sucking, then powder with a mixture of aloe and salt, or ashes, and they will stop immediately.
Here begins the book of fractures.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the foolish people think this chapter comes from nowhere but their own heads, and that they have never read about it in any ancient books or letters.
And for this reason the knowledge of medicine is strange in our land, for I have found no good ones among them.
And I know nothing about it except through the study of ancient books, through which I have acquired the knowledge and through experimentation and the habits of my life.
and I have described in this chapter what is contained within, and summarized it at the end, and clearly demonstrated the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in the two previous chapters.
Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book the subjects of the discourse and the chapters where the sage sets his understanding, and dwells on their truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture, dislocation, twisting, or broken bones occur to anyone, you should quickly treat the patient from both sides, unless something prevents it, such as weakness of the body, or age, or old age;
or if the weather is very hot or very cold; and eat cool foods, that is, cool jellies, and deer and hare meat, and do not drink any wine, nor consume any fatty foods, and do not fill himself with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have suspected a hot abscess or material swelling in the affected limb; then let the patient return to their previous course of treatment.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, then one should nourish the patient with foods that promote swelling, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testicles, and feet, and cow's placenta, and offal, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with such swelling the fracture is stopped up and heals more quickly.
And know that broken bones of the old and infirm cannot be well mended or joined according to their nature because of the dryness of the members, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of small children;
but have no worry, reset the broken bone with a large tendon that joins and holds the member together, forcing it as it was before; and do not stop all of its function, and for this reason it must be nourished with substantial foods, as we have said.
And you should know that there are various types of fractures in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg; and I will tell you in this chapter about all types of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another one that is superficial, just like the cut of a quill pen for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another one that is superficial, just like the cut of a quill pen for writing. And there is a fracture with a wound, and a complete fracture is a small split.
And for each dislocation there is its own method and proper instrument for restoration, depending on what comes to mind.
And the fracture of the bone is known by its being twisted and clearly visible through the skin, and it sounds hollow when pressed with the hand.
And when there is no twisting and no sound when touched, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture.
But there may still be twisting, or a crack, or a small fracture. You must not move it by hand, but apply remedies that follow, then hold it steady with a gentle grip.
And know that the fracture that goes into the bone, and are the two disjoined parts, they must now be put back in place evenly, so that hot abscesses do not come from it;
and if hot abscesses come, let them be for a day or two until the abscesses are settled; then reset it as evenly as you can lightly and gently, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration of that which has pieces; then hold it steady, as appropriate, as described below.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, it is to be set with two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or your hand if it is a small member, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand;
and place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are set, you must reset them with all your strength in their places as much as you can, and be careful that your action does not cause the patient injury or pain;
and adjust the two heads of the bone according to the best shapes.
And feel it with your hand if it does not seem right; then adjust it well, and do not pull or press too hard as those do who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the member through their actions, as we have seen many times.Et s’il est desaloiee par cause de moistor ou de fureur, si le ramene en sa leu, et il ne puet y demorer, si le remet a leu si com il doit etre;
And when the member is healed, then carefully instruct the patient not to move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or otherwise. and make sure that the member is so secure that it does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, then he is not healed, and you should put him in such a position that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, then he is not healed, and you should put him in such a position that he feels no pain; and be sure that it is set straight, so that no crookedness comes when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken members vary in size, shape, and form.
For there are small members, such as fingers, toes, and the like: in these cases, one should use soft, thin linen wraps.
And for larger members, such as the arm and leg: one should use a wide, sturdy wrap, as a wide wrap encompasses the entire large member and constrains it evenly all around, so that there is no pressure point.
then tightly wrap the joint with light bandages, three or four turns depending on the member, and hold your hand firmly against all of the ligament for a moment, then go above the dislocation and press less hard, so that the dislocation is moved slightly away from the joint;
then soften the ligament little by little, until you press on most of the healthy area, then take hold of another ligament, and go around the dislocated joint again;
then go to the part below the dislocation, and press gently, not too hard or too softly, as we have said above in the first ligament;
then put between the bandages of linen or cloth, until they are all even, then bind everything tightly with a bandage, and then put your splints on well-made, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something hot that soothes the abscess and reduces the swelling for a few days.
Then press down with your fingers, and let them be made of half a thick cane, or of wood that chisels are made from, or of palm tree branches, and let them be shaped like this:
but it is necessary that the finger placed on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others.
and let it be as long as it needs to be for the small or large limb;
then hold it against the stars just as you did at first, then tie a thread over it gently, just as in the case of a fracture.
the tighter it is held, the less it will move; and the thread must be neither too thin nor too thick, but of medium thickness, and made from soft flax.
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen fools make their knots with twisted flaxen cords, and this is a great error, for the knot cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be less than a finger's width between each star.
And if the patient is wounded on the head by the stars after the binding, place underneath woolen or linen bandages so that it does not blister.
When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the bones are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
And you should not attempt to straighten all the broken limbs on the first day. For when a limb is large, it should not be set until after five or seven days, or longer depending on the heat of the abscess;
and here is the method for ancient poultices to restore fractures, dislocations and torsion: You should take flour from the walls of the mill and mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common method for a poultice to restore fractures in various conditions, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Another method of plaster to restore the fracture and dislocation and twisting: take 3 parts rose oil, 1 part each of myrrh and aloe, 8 parts alechi, and in powder, mix with egg white; if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and is suitable for many people.
Another method of plaster that is useful for twisting: take myrrh and viscovium, each 10 parts; aloe and acacia, each 6 parts; Armenian bole 10 parts, and grind well, and cook in water or egg white, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for joints and bones displaced from their sockets, and to ease the resulting pain, and to smooth the bone, and for fractures: take new lamb's wool, and moisten it in arsenical oil and cook it, and apply it to the affected area. This plaster does not heal, but it is good for easing hot abscesses and removing pain.
Another method of plaster that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and deadnettle leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster from it.
Another method of ointment for the restoration of the fracture of the bone and to reduce the remainder of the abscess. Take the root of marsh mallow, chamomile, violets, wheat flour, each one part; and bruise, and cook in wine, and if the member is hot, cook it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another method of ointment stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take the roots of marsh mallow, and flax seed, borage, sweet-clover, and sanicle, and violets and chamomile flowers, all in equal parts; and bruise, and cook in salt water or sweet water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member and its rest.
Hypocras says in his book that one should not put anything on the broken member to restore it other than a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between soft and too hard.Et dist qu’on doit prendre la cerote en la meine et la mettre sus le membre, et la faire adurer a la manie dou feu, si come l’huile chaude, et la mettre sus la brisure.
And it seems to Galen that one must put on the broken member, in order to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of ointment that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair, or bird feathers, and beaver castoreum, and mix them together, and grind them up, and make an ointment out of it, and apply it to the affected area.
And then loosen it a little later, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if so, loosen it again after several days.
And if pain or itching comes to the area, or discomfort or swelling, then be quick about it and loosen it, and remove the ointment; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea water, and dip it in water, and wipe the affected area with it, until the itching stops and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry linen, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it with a bandage, until you are sure of the hot abscess;
and soothe the inflammation of the limb, and take away the pain, then restart the gentle binding, and a little ointment, and do not bind it as tightly as before; gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the hot abscess is red and painful and swollen all around, and you need ointment and binding, then restart it, just as you did at first.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, then do not loosen it until after 3, or 4, or 5, or 7 days; and sometimes let it be for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and the bone draws near to the skin.
then restrain it more than before, and increase his food, as I said earlier; and if you see the site drying out more than necessary, know that healing cannot come. then give him warm water to drink, every time you release him, and do this three times a day, and ease the pressure slightly each time.
through this work, the healing comes to the limb, and quickly diminishes what the foolish doctors do, who restore the limb crookedly: it is harmful, and such work is cowardly, and I see nothing in it but laziness and doing it properly.
of various breaking methods There are many types of fractures, with various shapes and distinct causes.
for there are fractures that are caused by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone is broken all the way to the shoulder joint, just like a spear or staff; and this type of fracture is called a "haichure".
Or the sword cuts into the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound from these two fractures is large or small.
And if there is a closed fracture, or a split, or from the collarbone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
And if there is a deep fracture that approaches the membrane below the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And if the fracture is lodged in the bone as delicately as a hair, and the crack is small, and for this reason it is called a "capillary" fracture.
and if the wound is made by stone or by falling, or in a similar way, and forces the bone fragment inward, and the site is hairy like the blacksmith when they work on kettles; then the stone goes inside.
And this happens more to those who have moist skull bones, as in children's skulls;
and happens with all these types of fractures, that small pieces are dislodged as they are; and I will speak about them in their place.
And we know all types of fractures through examination, and through the corruption that is on them.
The capillary appearance is known by the fact that when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it with a finger, the fracture appears black.Si li os est fraiz et tuit contuz, et n’a nul semblant de brisure, ne conoissons pas s’il y a brisure si nous ne veons la sanguine qui s’en va ou s’en vient; car la sanguine qui s’en va, ne li dislocatiers ne se guarient si tost.
In the treatment of a fracture, be wary of signs of infection in the patient, and if you see any malicious accident, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, swelling, fever, eyes bulging and reddening, and other similar signs in various dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.Et si li os est contuz et rompu, et li brisure n’est point noire ne sanguine ne s’en va; et les accidens dou malaide ne sont pas sus; et li os est en son leu, et la dislocation est guariee, si covient que tu esprouves li os se il est tuit en son leu; car il adonques n’y a nul semblant de brisure, si li os est contuz.
And if you do not see a dreadful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the child comes to you for the first time, and it is in winter, then you must remove the tooth before the fourteenth day that you can.
And if it is in the spring, then you must hurry to remove the tooth before the seventh day, otherwise, the gum under the tooth will be corrupted and the accidents that we have described will occur.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part thus: and it is that you grip the head of the patient with the mouth open wide, and expose the bone in every way you can, and at the level of the wound more than you can,
and if blood flows when discovering the bone, or if an abscess forms, assist using what is appropriate, and you should fill the area with wet rags soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is soothed and bleeding stopped; then begin around the bone to remove it, and there are two ways of doing this. One way is to cut narrowly in front, which is the shape:
And then cut another larger slit than the first one.
And the second way is to have various slits, some narrow and some wide, pointed, and made of iron; and work gently so you do not cut the head.
And if the bone is hard and protruding, you must pierce around it so that you can administer cauteries with tongs without breaking through the bone into the chest cavity; above the tip there should be a rim or a ring that prevents the tip from going beyond the bone. You should have several of these, so that each one goes in at the level of the thickness of the bone, and you will need tongs for all parts of the body. There are three types of tongs:
The technique for piercing around a broken bone is to place one tong on the bone and twist it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the tong to another spot a little further along, and do this all around. Then cut away the bone between the piercings as precisely and gently as you can, as we have said, until you can pull the bone out by hand or with instruments such as pliers or tweezers; be careful not to touch the brain or the sinuses.
And when you have pierced and loosened the bone, it is necessary to remove the membrane that is still attached to the bone with any suitable instrument like an incision knife, but it should be thinner and more flexible than the other knives.
and if there is anything left of the small bones or scales, remove them with instruments; then treat the wound as we have said, with bandages and ointments.
And the other method of treatment is that which Galen speaks of, which is safer; he praises it highly, and it is his word. First, you should expose a part of the bone where the fracture is open, so that when you have exposed that part, you will place under the head of this lens-shaped instrument, of which there is one made especially for this purpose:
Do not cut on one side, but the part is pointed in two places, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then hit it gently with a small mallet, so that you slightly chip the bone all around, and be careful of the membrane below.
If it is glued to the bone, loosen it gently, for bones are loosened without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is cut only slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then you should smooth that roughness, and remove the shards with a thin rasp, of which you should have various quantities, in order to apply in each place what is most appropriate, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Take the largest rasp first, then one that is more subtle, and do not cease to do so until it is well.
In each of the other subtle hair-like fractures and breaks, you should treat according to its nature; and this is something that has not been handed down to one who has devoted his studies to this art.
And if the sinus is exposed, then you should spread a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another cloth doubled into two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not burden the wound, then apply another ligature over it, and do not tighten it more than necessary so that it only presses against the wound.
and leave it like this for one or two days until the abscesses are soothed, then remove the ligature, and apply medicine such as lily roots, and flour of beans, and incense powder, and aristology, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and then apply other medicine without biting;
and be careful that the wound is clean and dry so that you do not leave any ointment or pus, because when pus gathers under the skin, it will fester and cause great harm to the patient; for when something biting is placed on the wound, it will fester underneath.
Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, without a doubt.
And if darkness comes only because of the medicine that has been applied, for such a virtue it should have, then you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and with it glue one piece of cloth and place it over the ulcer; then treat it in ways that are appropriate until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the jaw above are broken, either one or the other, for they are two bones; and below is cartilage, which does not break but only becomes dislocated or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must push your little finger or finger into the hole of the jaw, and put that broken part inside your index finger and hold it there until the jaw returns to its natural shape. and do this gently, and make sure the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is in the upper jaw and the tooth cannot return to its place, then you should put it back into alignment with a thin tool.
And if it is a double fracture, do the same, and try to restore it on the first day if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses have healed, then put on a head bandage made of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you can use a cautery of fire, if the break is there; and let the tent be so large that it fills the holes in the nails.
And some say that one should moisten the tent with butter, and change it every day. I do not think this is good, but one should moisten it while preparing egg white, and flour from the mill; then leave the tent as long as the bone is stiff, and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes they insert the quills of goose feathers in place of tents, and tie a silk cloth around it, and hold it in place, and the patient blows through it; do as you see fit.
And if painful abscesses come to the nails while you are working there, then put a poultice of cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a pouch of diaquilon.
And if no pus comes out, then apply a plaster made from flour of mallow leaves, and powdered incense, cooked in egg white, then place on top light sponges, but do not bind it too tightly.
And if the fracture of the bone is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate instruments for this purpose, then cut the wound, and treat it with healing substances that are warm and soft, as with plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose;
And if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents, and put in splints of plaster, until it is healed.
On dislocation of the jaw:
When the jaw is completely dislocated and there is no open wound, and the dislocation is only on the surface, and not broken in two where the corbels are inside, then it can be easily identified.
If the dislocation is on the right side, you should put your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if it's on the left side of the jaw, use your right hand's index finger, and gently push the dislocation back into place with your other hand, and make it equal.
And if the dislocation of the jaw is to one side, you must administer an extension of two parts, so that it is equalized.
And if there is movement in the teeth, or a dislocation, then he should be restrained with a gold or silver or silk thread, and then put cerate on the jaw, and put over it two layers of cloth; and put on top of the cloth a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather as long and wide as the jaw, and tie it tightly according to how he can bear it, and command the patient to rest and eat light foods.
And if you see that the figure changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and apply an ointment made of powder from the mill with plenty of egg or flour of sisament, after you have removed the cerote; and apply another light ointment on top, and if the ointments hurt, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it until he is healed; many are healed in three weeks.
And if hot abscesses come, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine carefully to see if any piece of bone has been removed; then remove it skillfully using appropriate instruments.
And if the wound is tight, then loosen it with a flame according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains nothing, then stitch the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing, until it is cured.
of the scrotum The scrotum may rupture in several ways, towards the shoulder, and there are three types of rupture: one where it is ruptured and separated into two pieces, which is the least serious and can be easily repaired; another where there is a rupture with a wound.
And the procedure is, when there is no wound with the rupture, to have two assistants: one holds the scrotum where it is ruptured, and the other stretches the neck towards the affected area; then use your fingers to bring the edges of the rupture together so that the shape is correct, with no gaps or misalignment.
And if you need to extend further, place under the shoulder of the patient a round pillow made of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your needs; then hold steady the arm and press the pillow in your hand so that you set the break evenly as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the arm out of its socket because it is deeply lodged, then the patient should lie on his back, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and the assistant pushes the shoulder upwards while pulling the arm down so that the bone of the arm is dislocated.
Then adjust the break with your fingers, and if you find it broken, then you should split it open; and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then cut into one of the incisions that you have made, but place this instrument under the arm to protect the skin:
and is shaped like a spoon, and has no sharp edges, and is as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the extent of the wound; and has .ij. edges, as you can see, and one is wide, and the other narrow, just as the edge of the wound that you made when you pulled the bones;
and when you are certain of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt it is a hot abscess, then pack the wound with bandages and poultices according to its size.
And if hot abscesses arise, moisten a bandage in rosemary oil and garlic and wine, and apply it to the affected area.
The dislocation of bones, when there is no wound or cut, is treated by applying a poultice of millpowder and egg white to the bone, and placing light compresses on top. If necessary, place a wooden splint underneath the joint. Then take a very wide bandage, about the width of a palm, and place a double bandage on top of the compresses and poultice. Then take a thin staff, three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down; and put the splint over the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy collarbone, and under the collarbone on the affected side; and reset it from each direction, and when you see that the ligament is holding the fracture in place properly, and you can clearly see that the splint is not moving over the broken bone, then release it each day, and when the ligature slacks, restrain it.
and let the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the collarbone to raise the shoulder, so that the fracture will be pulled upwards by the weight of the arm; then release the bandage around the neck, and tie the arm to the neck if no bad event happens, until 20 days have passed.
Then restart the poultice if you see that it is needed, and keep doing this until he is healed; and it will be healed within 28 days, but some people recover sooner than others.
of the shoulder fracture
Here, the shoulder is broken or dislocated, and it is not felt except by touch; then adjust the apparatus according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form in every way you can; then apply powdered flour with egg white over the affected area, and light dressings, and place a double sheet over that; then place a broad, thin pillow, slightly larger than the shoulder, on top, and if there is any swelling under the pillow on the shoulder, pack that area with linen dressings so that the pillow lies evenly; then bind it firmly with a wide bandage so that the pillow does not move from its position, and check the binding every day; and whenever it becomes loose, bind it again, and adjust the pillow if it has moved, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 or 25 days. And when this period is complete, loosen the bandage, and be careful, for it is not a bone that sets easily.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes outward and not downward into the chest, make an incision and remove the bone, and do what we have said about healing a hot abscess.
about the fracture of the foot:
The penis is sometimes broken in the middle, but that seldom happens; it often breaks at the tip. And when it is broken in the middle, it sinks downward, and the patient experiences great pain, and loses his sexual desire, and feels cold all over, and may vomit blood, and the break shows through the skin of the broken bone, and he feels it himself.
And the treatment is for the patient to lie on his back, and place a cushion between his shoulders, then press the shoulders, and bring the two sides of the ribs together with your hands, pushing gently to ensure they are even; then apply poultices and bandages made from salt or some other light material over the broken bone, and tie it in place so it does not move; then wrap the whole area in a cloth, and keep checking every hour, loosening the ligature if it becomes too tight, and changing the poultice regularly to treat any infections, pruritus, pain, or abscesses that may develop; once the bone is healed, remove the poultice and bandages, and address any scarring with appropriate remedies.
about the breaking of ribs
You should know that rib fractures only occur in the upper back near the spine, and they do not bend unless they are slippery; and it feels good when pressed on both sides.
And then the restoration is to put the broken bone back in place, as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone punctures the lung; and they have shortness of breath, and cough up, and vomit a great quantity of blood, and it is a serious illness, and the elderly have died from it.
And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture outward.
We do not make the fire, that hot embers won't come from it, if they didn't come from it. And if it has come, then heal it.
And some say that one should place cupping glasses over the area to draw out fluids, and this is reasonable; however, there is a risk that the cupping glasses will attract excess fluids due to the weakness of the body.
And some say that one should cover the area with wet woolen cloth soaked in warm oil, and place tents between the ribs to ensure even pressure all around; then it should be treated with pleurisy-cures made from meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone piercing through the tent, and there is doubt about the condition, then one should split the skin over the broken rib, and place a padding underneath to protect the pleura; then one should saw through the bone, pulling gently, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, treating it with poultices until it heals. If hot abscesses form, place damp cloths soaked in rose oil over the area; treat the area around the abscess as needed, keeping the patient lying on their side where it is most comfortable, until it heals.
of the break in the neck
Sometimes there is a fracture of the bones in the neck, and it doesn't bend; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will survive or not, take note: if you see their hands soft, swollen, and lifeless, and they cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick them with a needle, they don't feel it. Know that it is deadly in many cases; but if they can move their hands and feel the pain when you stretch or press on them, know that the joint is saved, and the injury will heal if treated.
And if this happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if they will recover or not, take note: if their feet are swollen, and they have similar symptoms in their hands, and they pass gas and defecate without wanting to; and when they are lain on their stomach, they pass gas without wanting to. And when they are lain on their back and they want to sit up, they cannot. Know that it is deadly: if there is no progress in their treatment.
And if this accident does not happen to him, then the case is lighter.
And if there is an abscess that is hot, then the doctor should put rosemary oil or hen's egg white on it until it is soothed; then he should apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bandage it, and instruct the patient to rest; and he should not sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed. And if any bone is exposed, then it should be covered with a bandage; and the bone is removed, then the two lips of the wound are sewed together, if it is large, with a single stitch, and the doctor applies ointment and a plaster, if necessary; and he instructs the patient to keep it pressed, and if there is an exposed bone, they should press on it, remove it, treat the wound until it heals.
of the fracture of the hip bone:
Then the bones of the hip are broken, and if they are, then there is usually some lessening in the upper part; and it hurts a lot, and declines toward the perineum, and brings pain to the area, and punctures, and swells what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as far as you can reach the break; and know which is the break and its shape; and if the break is only in the upper part, then make that break even, so that it returns to its natural shape.
And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then let the patient lie on his stomach, so that the restoration of that break is prepared for him.Et s’il est dou lonc et decline au pardedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son dos, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie. And when you have set it even, then put on the plaster, and then put on a board or splint, and bind the break so that it does not move; and apply the area under the ribs, so that the collarbone is made even.Et s’il avient que la brisure soit au chief soulement, si met le malaide sus son dos, et li estele soulement sus l’emplaustre, et li lieure desoz les costes, et li brisure adessous.
Instruct the patient to sleep on their sound side or on their back.
And if a boil erupts, do not touch it until the boil is suppurated, and apply what we have mentioned earlier; then return to restoration, and constrict as needed if there is no bad outcome; and that is the way.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The adjutoires is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the .ii. ways: one of which is that you take a plain stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie two feet with two ropes, and they can be pulled up, and the patient is seated on a chair; then he lowers his broken arm onto the beam until it reaches the ground, and puts a curve in the beam, then pulls it down over some heavy object or the minister stretches it downward; then put the mirror at an angle equal to his hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
And the other method is to suspend the patient from his harness, and tie his hand to his neck, then command two ministers, one to pull up what is above the break to his hands, and the other to pull down under the entire rope, and each pulls on their own side.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then tie one rope under the break and another above it, and each minister pulls on their own side. And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, then you must put a light rope under the joint, and another toward the elbow, under the break; and likewise, if the break is toward the elbow, then tie a light rope gently without effort so that the break is equal on the joint and toward the elbow; then put the mirror at an angle equal to his hands together, so that the break returns as it should, and tie it tightly if no abscesses form.
And if a deep abscess comes, do not drain it until the 7th day, and place soft linen in ash and rose oil on the abscess, so that the deep abscess is relieved; then drain it, and the manner of draining it is to place the plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm over the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and place a cloth, and drain it over the shoulder, and over the arm, so that the arm is in its place, if nothing moves it, or if the bone is not displaced.
And if you doubt that the bone is moving, use splints and place a splint larger and stronger than the others over the fracture, and have 1 inch of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it extends 3 inches on either side of the fracture; then drain over the splints, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter over the fracture, more strongly and less by pulling.
And if you see the settling of the splints and the drainage, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it be bound until the 7th day, as we have said; then look at the bandage every 3 days to see if itching or swelling comes to the site, or if suppuration can come to the member because it is too tight. If so, loosen it, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, then do not loosen it for three days or more; let the patient sleep on his back and keep his hands on his stomach; place underneath the shoulder a plain woolen cushion, and every hour of the day or night, check that the broken limb does not move or the ligature become soft; then treat him with medicine and give him food as we have already described, so that the food is in its most subtle form first; when he begins to recover, then make it thick. It is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset within 40 days; then loosen it and administer baths and ointment treatments to ease the pain. And if the dislocation is severe and swollen, leave it for one day or two months.
from the fracture of the arm
The arm is made up of two bones called the 'ulna', one of which is small and located near the armpit, and the other is large and located below the small bone towards the little finger; sometimes only the large ulna is fractured, or the small one, and sometimes both are broken.
When the small bones are broken, their restoration and healing are easy; but when the large ones are broken, their healing is difficult, and they cause more pain than when they were both broken together. If it is only a small bone that is broken, then it should be gently straightened and set even.
And if it is the large bone, then it should be pulled harder; and extend it onto a cushion, and tie the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross their arms over themselves, and place a cushion in front of them so that they do not feel any pain; then extend the minister's arm under the affected area to his hand, or to the other one above it. And then set the mirror even according to its best form.
And if there are broken pieces, place each one in its proper location; and if any stick out, grab the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before regarding the bone.
And if there is a wound with the fracture, I have spoken of it in the individual chapter; then take the cure.
And if in the beginning of the restoration, pustules occur, then apply .i. cloth of cerote made of rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and place .i. cloth over it gently, so that the pustules are soothed. And then remove the cerote, and apply the plaster of the powder of the mill with the yolk of an egg, then put the bandages, and let the bandage on the fracture be stronger and a little larger than the others; and know that it must have six bandages on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or both; and press more on the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread with which it is bound be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And then inspect the member and the bandages after a few days. And if any bad accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes on it, then you must moisten the member with warm water so that this itching is relieved; and do not let the member remain tight, but loosen it. And then restart the binding, and if the bandages become loose and the bone slips out of place, or anything similar happens, then adjust it.
And if you take care so that the healing cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then you must loosen it a little, and let it be thus for several days, until the healing occurs, and then bind it again.Et se li maux sont de la guareine, si covient que tu le tiens estreit et que tu l’esprenges de vne uie chaude, et li pons  .i. drapeil de cerote, et li pons  .i. drapeil de la poudre dou molin, et puis li pons les esteles, si com nos avons dit davant; et laisse li maux venir au membre, et ne li esprenges mie; et se il vient au membre, si covient que tu l’esprenges, et li tiens le membre estreit.
And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until twenty days have passed or a little more, then he can move his hands to his neck and keep his neck even, and guard against movement and straining, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is healed within thirty days, or perhaps within twenty days, according to the combinations of the virtues.
of the hand fracture
Know that in the back of the hand and around the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from many折ures.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then the patient should lean forward, and then he should extend his hand and stretch out his fingers, and then the minister should reset any displaced bones and align them correctly; and if there are no abscesses, then they should apply a plaster and bandages according to the size of the injury, and then wrap it in a single piece of linen.
And if the fracture is around the stomach of the plant, make a sphere out of cloth, and instruct the patient to grip it with their broken hand; then hold it with a long piece of cloth, and let the mark of the burn be as big as the palm of the hand, and hold it, as it should be.
And if the fracture is on the outside of the hand, you should place one splint above and another below the hand, so that the hand is open and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the fingers.
And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, such as the thumb, set it straight, as it should be; and hold it with the palm, and see if you can place a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and keep it from moving; and if the fracture is in any other finger, such as the index or another, set it straight as well, and bind the injured finger with the one next to it; or you can bind them all together while keeping them straight, or you can place a splint on top, as in the case of the thumb; and take care in the restoration and preparation of a hot abscess, and treat any pus that forms, as I have said.
of the broken thigh
The bones of the thigh are often broken and this can be seen when it is bent forward and backward; its restoration depends on binding with a bandage above the break and another below. And let the patient lie on his back, then extend each bandage to its respective part equally; and this is when the break is in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one bandage should go towards the buttock and the other under the break. And similarly, if it is near the knee, then the bandage should go past the knee and the extension should be directed downward; then the surgeon should align the bone with his two hands as best he can to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and the bandage, unless an abscess forms.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down first and then return to your work and treatment; the time frame is as follows. You should wrap the fracture with a hard bandage doubled in two or three layers, and leave it for the surplus, then return the leg so that the heels come to the root of the toe, and thread a long piece of string between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the string come out above; then go back up the leg and over the thigh with the bandage, then place splints on the fracture, and put one splint on top of the bone of the leg; then tie the space between the leg and the thigh with soft fabric to even out the pressure, then start tying three or four turns around the fracture firmly; the more you go up from the fracture, the less you should tighten it; then feel the two pieces of string that you threaded between the thigh and the leg, and tie three splints that are on top, then go back down to the end of the string, so that you reach the foot; tighten it so that it doesn't move from its place, then leave it as it is so that no abscess, swelling, or anything else comes.
And if something happens, remove it and treat what happened as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone protruding, they should be removed if possible; and if not, the area should be split open and cleaned out; and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.Et s’il i a aposteme ou enfleure, si le deslie et adrecce la briseure, si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.
And sometimes the thigh is broken as if by stars, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, such restoration does not help the patient.
And you should know that the thigh is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the different complexions.
of the groove of the knee
You should know that there is little breaking of the knee, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a crack or a hole, and it happens to all, with or without pain, and everyone feels good.
And the restoration is that one puts equal to what is torn in his hands, as long as they can be assembled; then put the plaster, and if necessary, place a round splint, and tighten it as needed; then observe all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar conditions; and apply to each occurrence what is appropriate, until he is healed.
of the leg fracture
You should know that in the leg there are 2 bones, one of which is properly called the "tibia", and the other is called the "fibula"; and all kinds of fractures occur in it as they do in the arm, and so the restoration is the same as that for the arm, and the procedures are the same.
And if both bones are fractured together, then the leg turns completely inside out.
And if the small bones are broken, return above.
And if the large bone is broken, there will be great pain and it can be seen; then go below. Therefore, apply extension and make it even, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the break is disfigured and there are multiple pieces, the extension should be lighter and more gentle; and adjust it according to your skill.
And when you have finished your work, take two wooden splints which support the leg on both sides from the knee down to below it; then wind two bandages around them above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this time the leg should not be able to bend to the right or left, and thus it is well; and some use a board as long as the leg, and they put the leg on it to guard against movement, and properly they make that which is in the break where there is pain; and move the leg every day to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; then treat it until it is healed.
of the break of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and toes, and nothing more than a sprain in various locations.
And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot, and you see the bones rising above one another, then place the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on top of his, at the point where the bones are raised; then press it so hard that they return to their proper position. Then apply the ointment and bandages, and underneath the sole of the foot, place a small wooden board with two flat sides, then tighten it securely around the foot, and wrap cloth and other materials around it as needed.
And after three or four days have passed, loosen the binding, for you will find that the bones are healed, whether they were fractured or dislocated.
And if there is any broken bone in the foot, treat it as we have described for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be slightly larger; then place underneath the foot that wooden board which I mentioned earlier, and tighten it securely; and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, place on top of each toe a splint according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the board underneath the foot; and let the top of the board press firmly against the sole of the foot.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures; and treat each case as it arises.
of the fracture of the bone in the wrist
When the bones of a woman's wrist are broken, have her sit with her back bent forward, and hold her from behind; then fill the wound with cotton, and insert a stone as large as a bean; then make the woman stand up, and gently lift her back up little by little, and the cotton will come out with the stone as it returns to its natural place. When she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, put it back in, and do this for seven days; the fracture will be healed. Then take a goat's bladder, attach a tube to the opening, and fill the bladder with air by blowing into the tube until it is inflated inside the wound; the natural place will return to its original position. Fill the wound with cotton and leave it like that for several days until it is healed.
And when the bones of the wrist of a man or woman are broken, treat it as we have described for the hip bone; these fractures are not hidden from those who dedicate themselves to its study and practice, and who understand my book. For the fractures indicate in various ways the right path to restoration; listen therefore.
When a penis is broken, take a goose's throat and insert it into the penis; then wrap it tightly with cloth, leave it for three days or until it heals, and it will heal quickly.
from breakage with wound
It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thigh or shoulder or similar, to be treated immediately, and the treatments that we have described bear witness to this.
And if the wound heals, and there is no sign of infection, then you should restart the treatment for the break in the same hour or that day, if no abscesses appear.
And if painful abscesses arise, let the healing wait until the next day, so that the abscesses are soothed, and do not touch them on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about an evil event.
And if the broken bone is apparent on the exposed chest, you should gently put it in place with your hands, with slight extension.
And if the extension is not apparent to you for putting it in place with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the width depends on the amount of the wound; and it requires the surgeon to grasp it three or four times, depending on each case of broken bone; and it should be round and a bit thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, and thin at the front, and thick from the middle towards the front, thus:
And it is called a «palainche», so that the curved shoulder should be placed on the head of the apparent bone; and bend it once, as far as it will go, and make it even with the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot grasp the bone well, then you should cut the head of the bone, so that the instrument can hold it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then cut into it with an appropriate tool, or a scalpel or saw, to your ability; then remove that which is lodged in the bone, with roughness and small scrapings.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. Then do as much as you can to put it back into its proper place, then moisten a cloth with black wine vinegar, and apply it carefully if there is swelling; and do not put any ointment or other medicine on the wound that would cause pus and corruption; then bandage the wound after you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the bandage around the entire wound, according to its size, and be careful that the wound is not restricted by the bandage; and many times fools have done this and caused their patients to suffer pain or even death; and the dislocation should be looser and softer than other fractures.
And if the wound is large or deep, and you doubt that harm may come to it, as we have said, and there is pain in the area, then do not put anything on top of the bandages; but wrap around, instead of the bandages, hard cloths, and tie them. And when you see after a day or two pus forming at the wound, remove what you have placed on top to the very bottom, and apply ointment that heals wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon and similar ointments.
And you should loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and mended.
And it is necessary for the limb to be positioned in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly downward.
And if they persist for many days, and it cannot be souded but keeps dislocating the bowstring, know that there are small pieces of bone causing this, so you should probe the wound with a tent, and remove all these dislocated pieces which cause the pain.
And if a fistula or other form of corruption appears, then it should be treated according to what he says in the chapter above. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as with the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not splint it, because many die from this, but leave it until it can be healed; perhaps it will fall off after 20 or 30 days; then cure the wound if you can, and if you cannot, let it be.
of the bruises that come over the soudure
After the fracture, many things come to the surface, especially when it is near the joint; and it is an ugly sight to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
So take care that the pus is brought to the surface: so the minister to him astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others; or you grind some of these things, or all together, and confit them with wine astringent, or with vinegar of eggs, or with garlic; and put it on the wound at night in poultices, and tie it well, and do not loosen it for several days; and then loosen it, and start another one, until the knot is removed; or you apply it to a piece of plaster well made; for the property of plaster is that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the knot has turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, scrape it off, and bring the superfluity to the surface; or you have it removed by someone skilled in shaving, so that it is removed, and the wound is healed.
When the fracture of the bone is healed, and the limb remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or because of profuse bleeding; or because of excessive movement, and not at the right time; or because there is little blood in his body, and it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body tender, so that the blood multiplies in him; and the minister gives him a bath, and gives him joy and relaxation; then put pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts a great deal of heat, and often washes it with tepid water, so that the heat runs into the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
then the limb becomes straight after health
When the limb is twisted after healing, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb again completely, and many fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm, and even death can come from them; nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are fresh, then they should be washed with hot water, or soft herbs are cooked, such as leaves of mullein, and roots, and marsh-mallow, and similar medicines that soften; and you make an emollient, such as a well-made diaquilon, and you take the mucilage of mullein, and infuse it with tallow or sisam oil, and apply it as an ointment; or you take fat figs, and grind them with colon-fibre, and similar medicines.
And sometimes the dislocation is relieved by rubbing continually and repeatedly with moist hands; and movement is applied to the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosities are awake and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove them with iron, then one must cut them down to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and put cotton and study into the cure.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in someone, one must immediately reset it without delay.
For if it is delayed, the part will become swollen and, by chance, if one tries to reset it in place, one must not move it at all while it is swollen; otherwise, many times it brings on swelling and other pains.
Nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient bleed, then leave it until the abscesses are drained; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and cure each part as the healing comes in its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocation from the head to the feet.
of the mandibles
Then the jaws become dislocated and both dislocations occur in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and softened a little, or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the feet, and saliva flows from the mouth which he cannot hold back, nor can he close his mouth or wrap his tongue around words.
When the dislocation is small, it can be corrected with various manipulations.
And if it is complete and accomplished, you must reset it quickly without delay.
And the other two fingers are free to apply pressure and hold firm; and command the patient to soften his jaws and move them from all sides.
And the midwife keeps an eye on it until it returns to its place.
And if it is stuck, especially if both jaws are together, then use hot water and oil, gently massaging until they loosen; do not try to force them open, as we have said.
And when they are brought back into alignment and the mouth of the patient is closed well with a soft bandage, then place it on wet cloths made of rose oil and wax, then tie it gently with soft strings.Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.
And the midwife keeps an eye on it until it returns to its place. And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his shoulders be propped up between two pillows so that he does not move his head to the right or left, nor try to stretch his neck, but take light food, until the pains are relieved and the jaws are relaxed.Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.
and then let him eat what he wants easily, and do not worry about opening his mouth to eat and drink, as long as the jaw is well bound and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be reset in an hour and are not converted to their place, then fever and usual sickness come, and perhaps stomach upset, and perhaps vomiting clear fluid.
And when you see this, then know that it is a bad omen; and many die from it within eight days.
of the fork
The shoulder cannot be dislocated from the ribcage within its continuance, and it is sometimes dislocated by force, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the area firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply the plaster and bandage, and bind it;
and the shoulder which is towards the neck cannot be dislocated; if it can, and if it is sometimes dislocated, then reset it to its place as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage, and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
and thus the shoulder of the spine is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
of shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: one is that it dislocates at the part of the shoulder blade below; the second is at the part of the foot; and by chance it dislocates above, and that rarely happens.
And it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and sometimes it dislocates below towards the shoulder blade, especially in those who are thin, because in those who are sturdy, it dislocates easily and goes back in easily.
And sometimes it happens to some men that they have a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of that.
Then you must test it until you are certain of it, and then begin the treatment.
And you will know that there is a dislocation when it is bent towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them: and you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and under the armpit at the top of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way;
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can clearly see it by looking at it;
and this type of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or if the infant is ill.
And the method is for the assistant to lift the ill hand upward, then place your fingers under the shoulder joint and lift the joint forcefully upwards into place; while the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upward, then lowers it; this will bring quick relief.
And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and they should be anointed with a soft and soothing ointment, such as a decoction of alder, fenugreek, and sweet violet in water, and then wrapped up.
Then the assistant should support the ill person's back and place a soft piece of cloth under the shoulder joint, neither too soft nor too hard, then the assistant places their heel on the cloth and lifts the head of the shoulder gently, and pulls the ill hand;
and other ministers dye the head of the sick person, so that it does not move down; the shoulder will return right away, and if you see that he dislocates it according to this manner.
and you should have present a man who is larger than the patient; and he should stand straight towards the armpit, and push his shoulder under the arm of the sick person, and lift the arm up high, so that the patient hangs in the air. and other ministers pull the arm of the sick person down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, they can use something heavy with them, and the dislocation will return right away.
And it is dislocated in another way as well: a long peg is driven into the ground so that its head is as tall as a pebble, and not too big or too small; then it should be placed underneath the patient, but with a soft cloth on top, and the patient should be standing up straight; then his hand should be extended downward on the other side, and the joint will return to its place gradually.
and if it does not return despite all these things that we have said, then perform this cure: take a stick .i. yard long and .iiij. inches wide, with the end shaped to easily enter deeply under the dislocation, in this shape:
then tie it to the top of the shoulder with soft cloth so that the shoulder does not hurt the patient, then place it under the dislocation; and extend his arm along the length of the stick, and tie the shoulder to the stick, and the arm at the hand, then place the arm on .i. plank that is broad, and extend the hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in place, however it may be, you should then place a woolen sphere underneath the dislocation, then apply the prepared plaster of mill-powder, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the dislocation gradually, and tie the bandage over the plaster, and hug his hand to his neck, and let his hand remain thus.
And it is necessary that he eats little, as long as the member is comfortable, because he will heal faster; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that it has come from, or for another reason, then you must administer cauterization at three openings, as it is described in the chapter on cauterization.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm upstream, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fitted into its place.
Dislocations that are towards the bottom, and in the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one administers it elsewhere; and treat it until it is healed.Li dislocation qui sunt devers lou costé, ou en l’espaule, et li mameles, si est par impulsion et estendement, et on li met le membre sur son leu, et il se tient; et si ne se tient, adonc covient que tu remets li membre en son leu.
And if after healing, there is stiffness in the limb, and with time and movement, the patient uses the bath many times until the stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original state.
of dislocation from the shoulder
You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated by the fingers, and it returns with the fingers; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one can see and feel it well, and it dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the sick shoulder with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and the arm cannot bend or touch its shoulder at all.
And you must reset it as soon as abscesses form there, for if abscesses form there, then resetting it will be painful; and by chance it may not be able to be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance death can come.
And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you stretch out his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands bent according to the elbow, from the inside and outside, and push the joint on his wrists together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the front, then it will return when he bends his hand to his hand and pushes from the root of the palm the elbow which has become dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then strong extension is administered; and it is that two ministers stretch the arm, and the patient bends his hand with both hands, so that he does not move with the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then wrap a long, wide cloth around it.
and when he examines the joint in his hand, he should apply oil to loosen the joint, then tighten it completely so that it heals.
and when it is in place, he should apply a dry poultice with egg white, and tighten it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then loosen it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not healing well, restart the poultice and the bandage, and leave it for several days, until it is firmly in place; then loosen it.
And if he feels stiffness after the joint is put back in place, and it moves, then bathe and massage it thoroughly, and press until it is relieved; you can also put a snowpack of fat mutton on the joint, leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath. and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the bandage back on, and then enter the bath; and do this .ij. or .iij. times until he is healed; and if you see that, put moist cow manure heated with butter on it, and hold it in place; then it will return to its proper position.
dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand is a light injury compared to other joints; nonetheless, it must be put back into place immediately, in the same hour that it was dislocated, especially if the joint is swollen or a hot abscess has formed.
And the method of putting it back into place is to have the patient lie on a table, and the operator extends the hand, and looks at it to put it in alignment, and presses down upon it until it returns to its proper position.
Nevertheless, you should check that it is in the right position; then place the patient's back against a table for extension and bending. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's back against the table and have the assistant place their hand over the appearance of the joint. If it goes back into place now, that is good.
If not, then apply soothing poultices to soothe abscesses, and leave it like that without re-dislocating it.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after several days, then let the joint remain dislocated;
and does not harm the patient before the hand is weakened and cannot extract anything at all: then you know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other remedy except to cauterize below the wound, and by chance nothing else helps.
And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then he pulls and leaves it for .v. days, then he loosen and leaves it like that.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then moisten it with warm water, and rub it until it heals.Et s’il est desaloie par cause de l’estrainage, si le met a leu et le frotte et remue ains qu’il soit en son leu, puis il met l’emplaustre sus li chiés, et li remedeit.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the handAnd s'il est desaloie par cause de l'estrainage, si le met a leu et le frotte et remue ains qu'il soit en son leu, puis il met l'emplaustre sus li dois, et li remedeit.
At times, they are dislocated on both sides of the hand, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the inside;
then pull on the fingers, and force the dislocation back into place as far as it will go, then hold the head of the finger, and push it toward the part where it is dislocated;
and let it be for two days, and then put it back in place that day, and tie it up as we have said, and loosen it at night, and move it, and tie it up again at night; and do this often, until it is healed;
and do the same if it is dislocated on the inside of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is dislocated elsewhere.
dislocation of the spine from the back
When the spine or neck is dislocated, there is no treatment, for death comes quickly with this injury.
And the signs are that the bowels move without will, and one cannot hold them back, and often a limb becomes paralyzed, or both legs or an arm or leg.
And often the spine becomes dislocated in four parts; that which is dislocated at the back is called 'gilbositez':
the cure is to determine if the gout has come from childhood; if not, there is no cure nor healing from it.
And that which comes from falling or from blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cure are great in word, yet they do not bring much benefit.
But I have abridged it according to my understanding and created instruments in diverse ways.
I say that in the gout that comes from the big toe, there is no cure nor healing.
and also one which comes directly from both sides, and cannot be cured unless that one which comes to the back is cured properly, as I say;
and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in one place equally, and he has the strain underneath him so that he does not hurt himself;
then insert a brand into the ground at the head, and another at the feet, and tie a string under the armpits of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two ministers hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two brands;
and are well closed, the embers as we have said, and the surgeon places his palms on the spine, until it recovers.
And if it does not recover from this treatment, take a table three yards long, and saw under the wall, and let the patient lie on his side, and insert the end of the table under the wall, then place the middle of the table on the spine; and have the surgeon press his feet against the other end of the table, pressing firmly until it recovers; and if you see that it is turning to the side which turns to the hand, then do it to the turning side.
And it is that you insert two embers at the head of the patient's arm, and on the feet, two others, and have between each ember, above and below, a palm width of space in length;
and has in each post hole .i. peg, around which the rope turns, and let the posts be firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between each pair of pegs there is a turning peg, over which the ropes turn, and there are .ii. small pegs of a palm's length for turning the rope;
and then tie the rope which is between the pegs to the turning post at the head, and the other rope to the other post at the feet, and each of the ministers turns his rope all along the rope, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, put on a drying plaster with plenty of egg, and then the compresses, and then the pillow of a tablet .iij. inches long, which purples the area of the hernia and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a ligature, as we have said, and use the patient for subtle cooling until he is healed;
and if anything comes at the end of health, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the pillow that we have mentioned earlier; and sometimes they apply a piece of plaster,
and sometimes the appearance occurs in the rear vertebrae of the back, and one believes it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that is exposed, because of which one must not presume on it: by chance it would bring about death.
of hip dislocations
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not become dislocated except as dislocations; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and most inside, and less dislocated in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the affected knee appears more than the healthy one, and the affected person cannot bend their knee towards the fire; and the place which is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes as a defense, is that this event is contrary to those before.
And the signs of him who experiences it in front are that his leg is well according to its length; nevertheless, he does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot, and he retains his urine, and the groin swells, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
And the signs of him who experiences it behind are that he cannot bend or straighten his knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you examine whether the dislocation is recent, and it remains according to its condition, then there is no cure; and he must not presume.
And for the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four kinds of dislocation, you hurry to return the joint, and hold it in place and stretch it out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and it does not need another cure.
And if it does not return in this way, you should prepare a very strong bandage, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or tie it to the knee; and another person stretches his hand above it in such a way that he pushes his hands under his armpits, then pulls the neck with a strong band; and another pulls the head with a band;
and stretch them upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to the four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, one must pay attention to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, one should lay the patient on their healthy side, then place the ligature on the root of the thigh, and on the part below the armpit; then stretch the ligature upwards towards the armpit and the underarm.
Then have another person hold his arms and grasp the thick part of the dislocated thigh, and extend it forcefully: it will then return to its place; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot bind it in the way we have described, then you must tie both of the patient's feet together with a strong suede strap above the heels and above the knees, and the affected leg should be extended two fingers more than the other;
Then let him be hung from the end of a pole, and let it be about two arms' length above the ground; then instruct one assistant to hug the head of the thigh, and let another assistant hang with the patient, who firmly hugs the thigh, for the joint will return quickly.
And when the dislocation is reduced, let the patient lie as we have said in the case of sciatica, and tighten one strap on the affected leg properly, and on the foot as well;
Then put two embers, one at the head and one at the feet, then insert an ember between the thighs at the patient's navel; and has wet bandages wrapped around it so as not to hurt the patient, then extends each limb towards him, and the helper puts his hand evenly over the dislocation.
If it goes back into place, that is good. If not, put him on a table and press him as we have said in the chapter on dislocations, and lay the patient on his sound side.
And when the dislocation is in front, one should stretch out the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and the helper puts his weight on the painful shoulder, then presses with the other hand, and pulls downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back, one should not stretch out the affected leg downward, nor lift it up off the ground, but it must be positioned as if the hip were dislocated backward, as we have said regarding lying on one's side with both hips. and let it be over his face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and someone should press on the joint on the table;
and it will be effective when the patient extends his legs and they are even; then adjust the thighs and apply the ointment and compress with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
and let him rest for 3-4 days, then release it, and apply the ointment again; and if you see that they are even, compress as before and let him rest for 3-4 days; then release him, and have him walk comfortably until his limbs are healed.
of dislocation of the knee:
There are three ways that the knee can be dislocated: that is, inside, outside, and behind; it cannot be dislocated in front.
And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, then know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back to his face, and put his foot on your feet;
Then take his knee in your palms, and pull it gently between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee sharply; and another minister extends his foot, as far as the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg at his thigh easily;
and apply the plaster, and draw up the leg to the thigh, and bind them together tightly for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it; and do not have the patient walk around while the limb is being supported.
And if the member is not healing well, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
Heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and hurts before the part where it is dislocated;
the movements if light, and one should lightly stretch it out with his hands when it is only dislocated.
And when he is dislocated from everything, then you should make the patient sit up straight, and hold him with one hand by the leg, above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and pull the foot upwards firmly;
and do this two times as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it comes back into place, that is good; if not, then restart the operation, for it will come back into place.
and if it cannot come back into place in this way, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert a wooden stake firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and tie a cloth around it so that he does not move;
then have one assistant hold the leg, and another stretch the foot out to their hands or with a rope, so that they hold it up by the ankle; then stretch each assistant equally, and the stake should be between the patient's buttocks to hold them in place when they are stretched;
then he places his fingers on the dislocation with his hand, and another minister holds the healthy leg down below, and the dislocation will return steadily.
And when it is at the point of returning, then he applies the plaster and compresses upon it, and presses it firmly, and binds the foot to the leg, and guards the nerves which are on the ankle behind, so that the ligature is not too tight.
Then he leaves it for two or three days, and if the ligature softens, he tightens it; then he releases it on the third or fourth day, and the patient can go about their business in four days. And if he goes before that term, it is not safe that he does not relapse again.
And if a hot abscess comes, you must calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of the arms
When the arms are dislocated, they should be gently extended without force, and that is a minor matter.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, you should have the patient lie down on his back on a flat surface or table, and place your foot on what is exposed of the joints, then press firmly on your foot until it pops back into place.
and when it is even, and there is no opening, then place a table with two legs under the sole of the foot, then stretch it firmly, and leave it for three days, then release it; and let it rest until it is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
if you are not experienced in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not wise, compassionate, and cautious, do not be bold.
and at the beginning of things apply a hot poultice to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see hope, then immediately reset the limb in its place so that the hot abscess can heal.
and when the limb is in place, then administer a hot poultice to the abscess, and treat the wound with drying ointments as needed;
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones displaced, then set the bones and do as we have said in simple diseases;
and keep from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it makes you move according to your creator, and for the safety of your weapons and your body. Amen
