Here is the translation of the text line by line: And it came to me in a vision that I would complete this treatise for you, which is part of the work of the hands, that is to say, "surgery".
And because the work of the hands is done in our region and is strange to all, it is very difficult to comprehend its science and scope, and there is nothing left for the force that moves the hands but to describe in books the small movements of the ancient hands. And from this origin comes error and vanity, and intentions are closed and science is alienated.
Or me seems that I will make it new life along the order of this doctor according to the way of exposure and proclamation and abbreviation; and shall come along the forms of the iron instruments of cauterization, and other tools of the work with the assistance of the proclamation and preparation of him, as is fitting.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our land, the art of medicine is prolonged. And it is necessary for him who deals with it to rise in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so much that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and connections and separations of vessels, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and blood vessels and the number of organs, and the movement and rest of veins, and the place of their issue.
And for this reason, as Iopas says, no one is good with the hand alone, and with the work it is little; and most of all in the art of hands.
We say to you in the introduction of this book that whoever is ignorant of the things said above should be careful not to make mistakes and harm people; so that I have often seen many of those who meddle in this science and abandon themselves to ignorance and unproven theories.
For I saw a foolish man who cut an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and he cut the arteries at the base of the neck; so that there was so much blood that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another foolish man who took a stone from a man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he took a piece of the bladder with him, and he died in three days.
And I have already seen it called for by the law, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; and if he were to remove it, he would surely die.
And see this other man who came to cure.i. duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break he got a wound; and the doctor ignorant pulls out the break on top of the wound by strong medicine, and leaves nothing in the wound but pain, and so he left it; and he ordered that he not take it off; and he waited until the leg was all healed and his foot and came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I had dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But every way of corruption was confirmed in him or the member, and he could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until all the members were lost.
And see this other man who came to cure.i. an abscess that had become putrid, and then inflamed because of the wickedness of his lordship.
For chancre, when it is purified of melancholy humor, it cannot but be touched with iron if it is not in its proper place so that one can completely destroy what is corrupt.
And for this reason, you skilled artisan, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into .ij. divisions: namely, where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each of these in this book where there is fear and danger.
For by doing so, you need to keep yourself safe, so that the foolish person cannot speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons with caution, and undertake your tasks lightly but firmly, and use the better path so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are loosed; and reject those weapons that make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Gallein says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on the care of bad diseases, lest you be called a fool."
I have devised this treatise according to .iij. chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cautery and medicinal water, and the chapters ordered from the beginning until the end; and forms of instruments, and tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and sucking up blood, and extracting arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are ordered and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it is ordered that the bones be cut at the joints, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus we remember the work; it is necessary that I speak of the quality of aid and the harm of each color.
I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest word and the most subtle science, and its responses are hidden; and many wise men would speak of it, and agree with what I say; and I am short of words, for I shorten them.
I say that fire is universal aid to all colors, except for the two colors; that is to say, color hot in substance and color dry in substance.
In hot and dry combination of substances, some agreed and said that fire cautery is great aid; and the other said the opposite: that cautery does not help in diseases that come from heat and dryness.
For the fire's nature is so hot, and should not be cured with heat but by cooling it down; and he who says the opposite that fire cautery does great aid to hot and dry diseases that come upon men. For when you compare the body of man and his moisture with the fire's complexion, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have never found this by experiment.
And any path, don't get involved in it but those who have experimented and know through long use the ointment of cauterization, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and remedies and space of ten; we do not fear other complexions, however, for cold and moist illnesses. And all this will come together and agree with the cauterization.
And know, children, that fire cauterization is effective for the cure of secretions, and is of greater benefit than fiery medicinal cauterization.
For fire is simple, and comes not forth but to the limb which is cooked, and harms no other member so much.
Burning remedies come from one limb to another by removing, and cause disease in the limb for cure; and perhaps the sickness will be brought back.
Fire, due to its greatness and goodness of its substance, does not cause this, if there is no excess.
And I have found this by experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and is based on the truth of things; and because I do not like to steal the secret of fire, which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in his proof; so receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they should be made at what time the cauterizations should be done, and they should be prayed over.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all seasons, for because the imminent harm is overcome by the aid of the cauterization; and most especially the cauterization is for necessary pains without delay so that they cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And I do not think at all, son, as they do; for because the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and it serves thus: but it is not so as they think, since cauterization is only medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and worth more than medicine for the swiftness of its effect, and for its excellence and nobility.
And it is possible that the disease will come again according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and are assembled in it the excesses by the acquisition of meat and similar things, if it is not administered cauterization at the place where there is little excess and moisture, as is administered for the pain, and the similar things, and the pain does not return again; but that happens little.
And many people do not understand why the remedies are called medicinal remedies, and that is so; but they do not believe that the remedies are worth anything after medicine, but their understanding is wrong, and the remedies are the medical remedies because when we administer them in any disease, they do not work, then we administer the remedy, and it works. Then open well that the remedies are the medical remedies, but not according to the understanding of foolish men.
The ancients said that fire-poled remedies are more healing than those of iron, and they said that the quality of gold and its greatness of substance were the reasons; and they said that the heat of the remedy does not cause fever, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that in some people it does; and fire-poled gold remedies are more healing than iron, as they said.
And moreover, when you heat gold-poled instruments, you do not know when they are too hot by the color of gold, and they cool down very quickly; and if they are heated too much, they go out into the fire; and therefore there is enough impediment.
And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or you should read this chapter up to the point where the vision becomes clearer so that you may more easily find the way.
And the olive oil cautery
For the olive oil cautery, apply it to the head, and in doing so, it will help with a variety of issues, including a disease called "soda," and due to multiple humors that affect the hair, ears, and cause many dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and also many diseases caused by coldness.
The form of this cautery is that the sick person be purged by a solution medicine, speaking the three days or according to what the virtue and the eagerness and the habit of the sick person can bear; and then do again the head of the sick person.
And then make it sit crosswise between your hands, and place his hands on the sides of his neck; after that put the root of your palm on the root of his neck between his two eyes; and let come thy two knives, if he bleeds from then on heat the cautery which is called “olivare”, for this is the form:
And place it over the ink mark, and as you descend and extract your hand little by little in turning it, then let your hand rest, and reward the place with a small hammer; and if you don't see the bone, then restart the cautery until you see the bone, as I told you; after that take 1.1 pound of silk, and put it wet and soft cotton inside, and put it over the mark, and leave it 1.3 days; after that put cotton soaked in oil on top; and let it be heated until the bone is cured; then cure the wound with the ointment which is called “tetrafarmaçon”, until it is well.
And say the ancient one, that however long the wound stays open, so much more it is purged; and for this reason if you help it.
And none of these said that one must let the cautery burn as much of the bone as is burned, and then resect what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
And another said that one must let the cautery burn as much as possible on the bone, and then cut off what is burned from the bone, and be cured; and one must let the wound remain open for a long time; after which one must cure and make it well.
And these two methods of cauterizing do not seem to me to be good in all cases; they seem good only when there is a risk of death in a person; and I think that I should let it burn, for the shoulder joint is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness with other members; and even if the shoulder joint is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems more gentle and milder to me, and from which I gather my experience, and thus I use it in all cases.
of the old pain of the head
When in all the head comes a chronic pain, and lasts longly, then must use yeris and pills which are called "cochie", and head-washing and oils and plasters; and if one makes the fire cautery that we have above said, and it is not worth anything.
Take care if the patient's head is of a strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then cauterize him slightly as we have said above.
After you have made the fire cautery on each horn of the head as we have said above, and you have made the cauterization at the place which is called "vesselz"; and it is there where one sets the leeches; and align your hand so that you do not see the bone: the pain that the patient feels in this cauterization is much greater than in the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be made finer than those at which one cauterizes the hair of the head, and this is the form:
the fire cautery of the head When in one side of the head there is sudden pain, and it extends to the nape until the oil, and the jaw is purged with medicines mondifyants, and have been done all other cures that I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not profit: then make cauterization according to .ij. ways, that is to say, with medicine water and fire.
When the pain in one side of the head extends to the back of the neck until the oil, and the jaw has been purged with medicines that make it mondify, and all other cures have not helped: then make a medicine cauterization by taking a dough of aloes, and removing the skin and covering it with .iij. pieces, and then returning the aloes to the skin; and when it is re-covered let it rest for .xij. hours; and then release it and treat it again with a dough of garlic, and leave the wound open for .ij. days or .iij.; and then put cotton dipped in balm on it as long as it will absorb.
After the oil treatment until it is healed; and if you see that fire treatments such as those I have written or any other fire treatment are necessary, then do so.
The fire cauterization if it is according to this manner. Heat the fire of which this is the form:
And is called "close" because the head is made in the form of a clove or there.i. little of a corbeau, and in the middle with a small appearance; and put it on the sore place, and take your hand and turn the fire slightly a bit, until the half of the flesh of the cure is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is away, and runs an abundance of blood.
After it has been dried with cloth, and put on the place for .iij. days; then I dip cotton in oil, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called "cultellare", at all points, and be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine which is not old.
of migraine
When you cure migraine as we have said above in the divisions of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cautery before spoken of at all points does not hurt, then it comes that you heat the cautery which is called  "cultellare" until it is white; and sign so on the sore place a line of half an inch long, and hold your hand once, and turn it so that you do not cover the artery and that you come not to the jaw; and guard against the mandible that mutts when one chews, and the loins are not relaxed that come from the artery when it is coped, or copement has great fear and more importantly at those who do not know and who are not students and tested; and leave the work in mid-path; but I will tell you how sanc is stung when the artery is copied, and I will show you to the place where it hits in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice to the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him with fire on his head as well, and cure the wound until it has healed; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have said or the extract of the artery with the cautery which has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than that and more useful.
the pain of the ears from cold
For when pain in the ear comes from cold, and one has applied the حلول [solutive] medicines and other remedies which we have said in the chapter on the division of pains, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "poins," which has this form:
After heating the whole ear, or the inside of each ear where the pain is located, and moving away from the root of the ear then, having marked the spot, make 6 points in each ear; then heal the area until it is healed.
of the mouth torture
who must be cured by fire is only for those that move with fluid, as we have said in the divisions of the diseases; and not to do any fire on the similitudes that come from the heat and the stench of fish.
When you cure this torture of fluid movement that comes from the heat and stench of fish, and there is no other remedy, then you should make three fire cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, another a little further away at the temple, and the third between the two lips; put the fire in the healthy part, and let it burn half of the cauterization before removing it; and this is the form of the cauterization:
And is the resemblance of the scalpel that we have put forward, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the scalpel be a little thicker; after cure the place as I have said before, until it is healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, it does no good, and the patient has no fever, then make .iiij. cauterizations: .ij. on the .ij. horns of the head, and .i. cut off the head, and .i. where it is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and also cauterize the mouth of the stomach; and be cured thus as we have said before.
of chalk
This is a medieval medical text and the translation is as follows:
If he is well in this way, it is good; and if he is not, he makes .iij. cauterizations by cutting off the hair from the scalp to the neck, and leaving space between each cauterization of .iij. two big ones; and heal thus as the others, and if he struggles, and the patient suffers, he makes .i. cauterization in the middle; and if it is needed, .iiij. others on the .iiij. horns, and heal him as long as he is well; and let the cauterizations which are called "olive", be made thus as I have said before.
of the cold to the head from cold
against epilepsy
against epilepsy
Et s’il est un enfant qui ne peut pas supporter le feu, on lui fait gargarisme et mastication avec des viandes sèches; après quoi on met son chef au milieu, et on lui fait .i. cautère selon ce que nous avons dit ci-devant, et .i. cautère sur sa nuque, et sur chaque cornet ; et si le malade est hors de lui et souffrant, on lui fait des cautères comme je l'ai dit à celui qui a la paralysie et la mollesse du cou, sur la colonne vertébrale et sur le cou, et on leur fait des cautères d'olivier selon la manière que j'ai dite.
If the patient is a child, one should make a subtle cauterization according to this method:
When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupt and thick moisture, then one should make a partial cauterization as we have said to the one who has paralysis:
And if due to melancholy there is a declining excess of melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then one should give him to drink something so that his brain is purified, according to what it says in front in the division.
After resecting the head of the disease; after making .i. a well-formed tortoiseshell, also as a circle, so that it is placed under the head; and the patient's seat is crossed and held fast on all sides; then present the liniment, and moisten with old butter; and heat the fire moderately, so that the two may be able to drink it without suffering; after emptying the circle through the top of the head, and letting it cool down; and do this to the disease every week once with other good treatment, until he is well.
Or if you want to cauterize with fire, making many punctures all over the place. This way of cauterizing moistens the skull evenly; and then put cotton wet in butter and in grease of goat's milk on it.
of the eyes When awoke comes first as eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the disease purifying the head, and warding off all moisture, and making him sweat or bathe many times while fasting.
After he has commanded his head to retreat, and made a fire cautery on the top of the head, and made 2 cauteries on each side of the temples if it has fallen out of place and is together, or if one side has fallen out of place, make it long according to the width of the temple; and guard against the evacuation of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop him with a cloth so that he can't breathe.
And I will teach you how to stop the blood flow in the extraction of arteries and in cutting, the fire cautery is made so that it is stopped; and never make a fire cautery or hurt them behind the 2 bones.
of the eyes.
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or deluge the arteries which are in the appearance of the head outside; and one can see that it is cold and watery excess, then he makes the fire cautery that I have said at the beginning of the awes descending to the eyelids: 1 fire cautery on the top of the head, and 2 fire cauteries on each side of the temples, and 2 fire cauteries where they hurt behind the ears; and if it is necessary more, then he makes all small cauterizes.
to dry up tears within the eyes
When you have finished making medicine as we have described in the division, and it does not benefit, then do three times a day the wine of the ill; after that, place the head back into position, and make a cauterization with olive oil fire; and make three cauterizations with the cautery called 'clavis' on the two scars, a little bit in the hair; and beware of the artery so that you do not cover it. And this is the form of the cauterization called 'clavis':
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization with this cautery called 'olivaire'. For this is the form:
And if you see so many fire cautery on the same wound as long as the hair is; and do not release your hand until the third part of the paper has burned up according to the way I said.
the hair that points to the oil No time has passed that the hair of the oils is converted to the parched, and strikes the oil, and it does one cautery according to .ij. ways: that is to say by fire, or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. Car en l’ovraige de cet chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.
When they are born and grow long and even, then put the patient on your side; sign upon the paper of the hairs a figure which is also like the furrow of the heart, and is the beginning of the sign with which to pierce the hairs; then cotton wet with smoke and musk root made into oil, then heat the cautery by which this form is made:
After cauterize upon the figure that you have signed a little and little often, so that the scar be burned in place; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper retire, and the hairs stand up at the tip of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it so for .iij. days, then put cotton wet with smoke into wax as much as the heating be burned; after the cure of the dressing until he is healthy.
And after these come the hairs, and the paper is softened then begin the cautery again at the same place, as you have done first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and is even, and do not prick the hairs into the oil.
The medical hot cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make of parchment the shape of the furrow of the heart; then take French soap and live fire, each one a ½., and grind them together well; and do it hastily, so that it doesn't cool down again, then pour on the shape that you have made like the furrow of the heart, and put upon the paper of the hairs; and if the patient is in oil only for 1 hour at most, then work also in water both as well; and put cotton wet with smoke into an aban of smoke; and the head of the shoulder be in your side and open mouth showing, and press 1.5 times and pour the smoke cotton upon the medicine; and if the patient feels tingling from the medicine, he shall feel burning too, for he feels burning also as from fire. If you have done this for a long time, keep the medicine to your mouth. When the mordication has passed, lift up your jaw, and if you see that the paper is raised as though it were lifted by a constraint of fire or by an incision; and if so, it is good. But if not, put the medicine back on the spot where the medicine has not worked, until your teeth are even, and your gums are in place; then put cotton wet with balm on it until the aching stops, after treating the sore which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if you are in a position to well guard your teeth by great care that the medicine does not touch the gums at all. And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs come out in oil, then begin again the medicine on the same spot which has become soft from the paper itself, just as you did before; after treating until it is healed; and this is the form of the fuel of mirth:
And know that the hair of men is different in length and thinness, and according to what it is like for you; and do not answer the right way to anyone who studies this craft.
about the treatment of fistulas by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and dip cotton wicks in oil of mustard or apple juice on oil; then heat the cautery, which should be sharp: and set it against the hair at the root; if you see, so point it from one side to the other, like a tent; but nevertheless, what is most important is that it be sharp for your treatment.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and treat the porosity, and dry it; and if it is closed, then open it again, and treat the bowel; after that, put a very hot cautery on it, and hold your hand over the cautery with oil, so that your hands do not play tricks; and put the cautery in the oil, and corrupt it.
If you come to cauterize up to the bone, that would be good. If not, begin cauterizing again, and if you need to, leave it .iiij. days; after i put cotton wet with oil on it, and cure the wound-healing dry as long as it is healthy, and when .xl. days have passed and it is still healthy, I put medicine of corrosive water until the bone is uncovered; and treat according to what comes in his chapter.
And I have a way of cauterizing fistulas that no one of the ancients has said. Understand fistula, and pierce the place; after put in the incision .i. small needle of silk so as to be the form: and I make it in the quantity of one .Z. of plaster; and hold your hand or camahan firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the plaster melts and does not run to its oil; and it is good that you put cotton wet with oil on the patient's fistula, and rub it gently: the plaster if applied to the place of the fistula, and he heals with a wonderful cure.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have described, it is good. If not, let him give a piercing to the nose, and bring the fistula to the root of the nose according to what comes in his own chapter.
the sores on the lips Mouth times have sores on the lips, which are called "hair", and most commonly on the lips of children.
When you treat these sores as we have said in the previous chapter, and the cure is not successful, then apply a small surgical cauterization according to this shape:
And let him rest in bed in those sores until it comes out; after the cure, rub with ointment until he is healed.
from the abscess of the throat
When abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the uvula or in the roots of the teeth, after done putrition and rotten and is waking and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit: so it is necessary that you have .i. cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the bottle or hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes at the bottom of the font, and behind it; and do thus once or .ij., after the cure of what we have said in cures, until he is healed; and if he is cured thus, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to uncover the place and cut off the bone corrumpt, according to what you will find it in his chapter.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not help, then put the head of the sick person in your lap; after heat the cautery so that its form will come out after a little way that you put a chain on the tooth; and place the cautery inside quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; then release your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will; after fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and leave it for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
And in this way those who were moving are calmed down, and the gums are softened and restrained, and the moisture is dried up and腐敗した。
of the teeth
When toothache comes from coldness or heat, and the remedies of medicine are not effective, then there is a need for fire cauterization according to .ij. ways: and cauterization with butter and fire cauterization.
Cauterization with butter: If it is so that you squeeze butter from a milk-vessel, and the tip is made of iron or gold; after taking cotton and wrapping it on the tip of a needle, and the wetting in butter, and placing it on the aching tooth carefully, and keeping it as long as it becomes cold; and doing this often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton wet with butter become cold, and place it on the aching tooth, and place it on 1 gold tip as hot as possible.
The fire cautery all together if it is such that you squeeze a tooth from iron or steel, and make large so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; then heat the cautery, for its shape will come later, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, because the pain will be increased the next day or the day after. And it happens that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of the cautery, and then he swallows it; and this is the shape of the cautery:
When the scrofula is of cold and damp humors, and does not respond to medicines by digestion, then heat the chaitive of hair that comes after; and put the cautery hot on the abscess once, or as much as it takes to come to the base of the abscess; and let the chaitive rest there for .iii. days; and put cotton wet with butter on it until the burning is over; then treat the affected area with oil and poultices until it is healed.
When the moisture wins over the windpipe, and most importantly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be voided first by restorative medicines; afterwards he makes fire cautery at the root of the throat, and keep you from coming any further than the throat, and dare not touch the cure but a little. Afterwards he does another cautery to the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let these cauterizes which are called "clavicles" which we have the form before; and heal the place as we have said before until it is healthy.
for the tongue When all and disease of the windpipe are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, but is an ancient disease, then he makes iij. cauterizes on the forceps in his eyes; and another cautery emmi the pis between ii. mamilles; and let these cauterizes which are called "clavicles" according to the form that is before said.
And if you see, make fire cautery piercing all the cauterize which is called "poins" of which the form is here before in the disease of the ears; and let the piercings go up to .xxx., or enthor. Afterwards heal the place according to what has been said before, and let the cauterizes be iii. rains according to this form:
And so these cauterizations are lighter because you make them.ii.a cup.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, speak softly to the patient on his back and side; then lift up the thumb that is inside the little finger of your left hand; and if the joint has dislocated inside, then heat the cautery that has .iij. nails; here is the form:
and cauterize him until he pierces it as far as the coast, and the figure of the cautery comes together with the cautery that has three nerves; because the nerve is according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves.
And no more is put on this nerve because there are eight cauteries.
After that, put on the fire cautery, grind it with salt; then let the patient rest, and do not move his limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated again, pour liquid on it so that it sticks; then make cautery with the thick cautery claw, or many cauteries in one place. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is dried up, and the disease is cured.
To treat pleurisy,
For pleurisy, the ancient said that one must treat it with root of aristoloche, and in this way: take a long root of aristoloche, the largest you can find, dry it, and make it as thick and as long as your two fingers; moisten it with oil, hold it over the fire, and cauterize .i. cauterize between the collarbone and the neck, and .ij. small cauterizations a little down in the part that is soothed by the beard; and .ij. cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly behind; and .i. cauterization under the breast, and .i. another above the stomach, and .i. between .ij. shoulders, and .ij. cauterizations between those shoulders; and do not press your hand, but open it widely as when you are smelling something.
And no ancient said that any man uses a fire cautery resembling a razor, and scuffles it and puts it between the ribs until it comes to the apogee; and he leaps away from the pain, as we have said in the apogee of the liver. But in this work there is doubt and fear that the patient may now die, or there is a fistula that cannot be healed.
of the mouse
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Out of which one way is that you make 3.ii. cauterizations, or 2.iii., in accordance with the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the fire cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient lie down on his back;
And another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery which has 2.ners, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; and apply the cautery to where the cut comes from left to right, and let the elevation on which you apply the cautery be in accordance with the length of the body, and the cauterization be in accordance with the width of the body.
After that, you pour the 2.ners while the elevations are perceived on the other side, and then treat it with fire, and thus you have made 3.ii.. And if you see, then cauterize all of it with 3.ners. After the cure has been poured over for a long time, and that is enough to complete the other treatment that we have said before.
About dropsy.
Here is the translation of the text:
After letting the fire cauterization remain for a long time, and not leaving the patient's treatment after the cauterization, healing would hurry along, and both the two intentions would come together with the help of God.
The shape of the fire cauterization for the navel is the key we have mentioned before: olive for the back, according to what it is called in front.
Of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in a person who is hydropic, and they are plain yellow, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the index finger; and take your hand away from the cautery without turning around. And do not enter too deeply, lest the yellow substance be forced out, and the cautery be done according to this form:
After that, make 20 cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the heel; and let the cautery be long, one behind the knee in front and the other behind, with the leg; and leave the cauterizations to remain for a long time without wiping, so that the yellow stuff may come out; then cure the others as we have said.
of the mansion
When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtue that retains and digests it in the stomach and in the intestines is exhausted, and cannot be cured by any way; and you see the patient suffering much and of great virtue, so do. i.i. great cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken before or cautery of the stomach, to the cautery that circulates; and 2.iii. cauteries within the small bowel to all i. cautery claved subtilely, and 2. cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, do cautery on the wrist, and 1. cautery on each finger, and 2. small cauteries on the stomach of choice, for the cure is profitable when there is good assistance.
for the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are or foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and are cold and damp corrupted humors, and are cured if we have said in divisions, and does not profit, so do: 1.iii. on the spine of the back, this which is all around the anus almedt little and little in triangular fashion, and 1. cautery around the anus. ij. two
and if you think that his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then the face on .i. great cautery over the stomach, as it is said before, and another on the liver, and one other on the mouse to all the cautery nailed; and leave the cautery overt long. After heal the wound until he is healthy.
of the tissue that is called "thelul"
When you apply heat to the tissue called "thelul", if you warm the cautery that seems sharp, and then put it all on fire on the cope of the althelul; and leave it so that your hand can cool down again; do this once or twice, and if there is any burning of the althelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after applying beneficial herbs until they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the alchatim, it will be more helpful.
of a bad wound
When the patient cannot tolerate a wound or incision, we will tell you in your place, if there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by fire cautery.
When a vessel is broken and there is an opening and moisture and corruption, if you make a small hole in the place where it has broken, and keep the hole open, and heat the fire cautery that seems sharp to you, and pour it into the hole according to the quantity that the hole has entered, and then start again with the fire cautery as long as the corrupt and moistened flesh is burned, once or twice or according to the quantity of the need; and guard against touching the nerves that are there, and do not make a cut except in the boney part, and think that it does not persist; after you have healed the place until it is healthy, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place has been completely healed; and if the matter has not been removed, know that the place is threefold, and the bone at the bottom is corrupt; and thus as one of these that we will tell you in its place.
Regarding the rest of the text, I can only provide a partial translation as the content appears to be incomplete or missing context. The sentences seem to be related to medical treatments and procedures, but without the full context, a complete translation is not possible. Please provide more context or the full text if you would like a complete translation. For pain in the kidneys and from strong wind, and does not take a woman's talent, then it is necessary that you make cautery on the kidneys from both sides with the clavicle cauterizing that we have before mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be 2.3 cauterizations in a line, and they will be of greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and vulnerable to cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then apply fire cautery in the area above the bladder, where the hairs grow at the base, and on both sides, each as long as a fingernail; and below, apply fire cautery along the spine, where you feel need for it; and make the cauterization nail-shaped according to the form described above.
of the mare When the mare is cold and moist, so that it does not conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and come late, and when they do come, they cause great pain: therefore it is fitting that you make three cauterizations around the udder, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and three cauterizations along the spine; and make the cauterizations nail-shaped, as we have said.
of the hip
when the viscous moisture descends into the hip box, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is farther away than the other when it is measured together; and the places of the department are found, so that you cauterize the patient on the hip box at.i. a fire cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the place within the box as it comes back into its place, so that the box is within the circle; and if it is such fire cauteries as those with which we have cauterized the stomach.
And if this fire cautery is not present, do three large olive cauteries, and the cautery is also perfect as all the others; and the cure until it is healthy.
of the pain of the hip When the pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of that which we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of the large humors with foul pills, or other bad-looking pills.
After the fire cautery, and the manner of the cautery is according to .ij. manners: that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to much of manners, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the hip joint .iij. cauteries triangular according to this form, and make it deep and broad, and between each cautery put the thickness of a coin, and let the cauteries be olive; never do you make a cautery in the middle on the top of the hip chief, for there are .iiij. according to this form:
And if you see, if the cautery at the cautery of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but make it a circular manner so that the circle contains all the hip, and all the space of the cure is burned.
And this is the manner that we do in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach up to the thigh or leg. And if it comes only up to the thigh and leg, then make .ij. cauterize at the place where the patient feels the pain, and .i. cautery above the ankle 2, two, a little at the part on the left foot; and let the cauterize be knife-like, and let burn the thickness of the cure; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the two toes or near the ankle, then cauterize at the place where he feels the pain 1,3,4 times with the «cut» cautery.
And if you are a barber-surgeon, do this more; and if he says that the pain is coming from the hip to the thigh, make him a fire cautery with a scalpel or circular tool, and give him good care for all his tools so that you do not let them down even a little while the cautery burns the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient more great harm and contraction.
And I have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it so that the leg was all swollen, and the toes too, and it was perforate and rotten all the toes. After a solution of the abdomen in which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cauterization in each one, according to this manner. // And the sages said in the cautery of the hip, from which it is this way, make a nail of iron and let it be at the top as well as a thumb of a finger or less, and let it be between the intertraches and also between the intertraches, each space like one knuckle; and the intertraches are on both sides, and they are also like knuckles, and there is a nail of iron made well; and this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and hot, and then put it on the hip's box, and let it turn around on two sides of the coast; and the cauterization once a cautery reont and leave for three days; and then make an ointment of wax, and leave the open wound long; after the cure of ointments until it is healed.
Albucasis says that we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its taste, and few who use it; but this is a good cautery which can bear it, and where it afflicts.
of two pains
When pain comes to the back, or from touching or percussion, or from too much evacuation, or from the appearance of spread-out cold matter, none of these appearances are worth of remedies, except that which comes from cold-water infusion.
It is appropriate that after the patient has voided any foul pills or other appearances, that one make a remedy on his back where the pain is, three lines of three inches long; and in each line, use the cautery which is called "poins" according to its virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and if you see, do 1.3 or 2.3 remedies with the clavicle-type cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l'encomencement si est qu'il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l'apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.
When you see this and you want to cure it, cauterize it with fire according to this form.
So that the fire is equal in color to each part of the spine; and if you see it, cauterize with burning fire 10 or 12 lines, and let the pricks be close together. After curing, let it rest as long as it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cauterization in gibbosity which is in the spine of nerves.
of the joints
When the joints are sore because of moisture that spreads to each limb of the body, and when pain comes from below, which the people call "rheumatism" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured by medicines, it is cured by cauterization in this way: Make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this form:
When it is necessary to hold on the foot's face, make the fire cautery all around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this form: And if the pains spread to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, make the fire cautery on each knee.iii. cauterizes or iv. cauterizes of each part, of all the olive oil; and if you need more, do more, but don't hold your hand firmly except when the pain is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make iij. lines; and if there is still pain in both, make fire cauterizes on each joint and on the hairs of the hand; and if the pains come up to the neck or shoulders, make cauterize each part, and let the patient have good government and take medicines. For if you do this well and you purge the fever, he will be healed with the help of God.
of the rupture of the syph
When the rupture comes in anger, and the bolus descends as coions and is newly born, so it is that when you look to heal him, he does not damage himself that day; and that he uses things that leave his belly, so that the end falls from his belly; after which he sits down on his back between your hands, and orders him to dye his hair as long as the bolus is repaired, and brings them to your hands, and signs with one hand the rupture over the bone of the knuckle, and makes a sign that is like half a circle above the chest; then heat the fire where there is this form:
as long as it is white and it drips down. Then bring the bolus to its place; and the minister dyes his hand so that he does not turn back; and well closes the legs of the patient, and sets a.i. cussin and a.i. sergeant on the legs, and a.i. other on the foot which dyes the hands; then put the fire on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, continue again another time until you come to the bone; and take care carefully that the bolus does not move when you make the fire; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or any other evil.
And know that when you come to the bone with the fire, your efforts are worthless. And it is necessary that the fires of children be subtle according to their measure, and of adults also great according to their measure; after iii days cure the place of the fire with butter until it is heated; after which cure other things until he is well, and lay the patient on his back for xx days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his nurses be satisfied for a long time, so that the bolus does not move when he goes to bed.
And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, a good bandage is brought to him and changed every .xl. other day; and let there be good rest, that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and too loud raising of the voice; and when he has done this teaching, he will be completely healed. And I will say here after the cure of the barber in his chapter. Of a rupture from the abdomen
When ruptures come in other abdominal areas and are recognized, and you see that they no longer grow, give it 3 cauterizations with the cauldron according to its quantity, and let it be burned on the third; after the cure according to what we have said; and no one of the ancients has said that it should be cauterized at 3 angles according to this form:
But the first sign is the top of the navel and make a line across the width of the rupture, and another one from the back, and with your hand spread all over the cauldron. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more gentle.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, or from a fall or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medicine treatment is of no help, then it is necessary that he be treated with the fire cautery, which is called 'poins', and let the cauterization be done according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location from torments and its pain. If he is healed with the first cauterization, it is good; if not, then make another cauterization on that one, for the usual custom is that the fire must move towards the limb that is closest, so that you should keep making the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
of surgery
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
And if the wound is everywhere sparse; and it appears clearly, so that you cauterize these cauteries that we have said at the head, namely: one cautery in the navel, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and seven cauteries on the spine of the back, and one great one on the crown, and one other wonderful thing, and two on the shoulder blades; and two on the knives, and two on the ribs, and one each joint of hand and foot, and in the pits of the hands; and guard against those that are behind the heels, so that you do not burn them; and make no cautery on the bone of the knuckle, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more I make cauterizes, the more I make help, and the profit is greater; and know that the patient does not feel pain at cauterizing as healthy people do, because the whole body is already corrupted. And it is necessary that cauterizes are large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the shape of iron. After this, cure him with flour made from wheat with honey and other cures until he is healthy.
of flor
When inflammation grows in any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, and poultices, it is not yet well, then the fire cautery must be applied to the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery go a little way into the flesh of the cure; then treat with ointments until it is well. And never do a cautery except by hand or foot or back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, so if inflammation comes from there; and yet there is no harm in doing so as long as one knows the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
I cannot translate this line as it contains non-ASCII characters. Please provide a valid English translation for me to work with.
When the disease that is called "albaras" is resolved, and the medicine prescribed for it is worthless, then apply a fire cautery of perfect purity according to the quantity of flesh around the cure until the blister is raised, and its color changed; then treat with flour of times and lentils, mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and wormwood and almond juice, each in equal parts; then mix them together, bind them with a cloth, and apply them to the affected area until it is well.
For the cure of the sore by cautery:
When the ulcer begins to form, and you stop up the eyes, if you cauterize with the fire which seems a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer. And certainly those who are knowledgeable say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer; and certainly this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will become ulcerated and decayed, and I have never wanted to do so; and a more righteous thing is that it be cauterized around, with the fire which is called "circular", as we have said in many cauterizations.
of the inflammation that cannot die
When one has a disease that is called "adubelati", and it hesitates to die or because of the excess of the fever, or because of the age of the patient when he is very old, and there is little blood, or because of the heat; then cauterize him around with many small cauterizations, poking in; then leave it like that. For she will hasten to die.
And if you pierce her at all the cauterization, let the cauterization be very hot:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubalati" as long as the cauterization has taken hold and is such that the patient feels a distance from it in this way that the course of the corruption is chosen. After the cure, until he is perfectly healed.
The cure by fire with iron
Another disease that is called "corrodens," and is nothing other than a putrefaction of the members, for it corrode the members as much as fire dries them out. If you see this disease in its early stages, which can be cured with iron, then heat the irons slowly and carefully, according to what is appropriate for the place where the disease is; after the iron has been heated, apply it all around until all corruption is gone, leaving nothing behind but what is corroded. Then leave it for .iij. days, and put oil on the burned spots until the burns from the fire are healed, and all corruption is gone. After the oil treatment for .iij. days, if health does not return, then repeat the iron cauterization on the affected areas. This putrefaction cannot be cured with just herbal medicine; however, fire cauterization is of great help, and I have already described how to treat putrefaction with herbal medicine based on its stage. Use herbal medicine as needed.
Pores that come from the feet
Mouth of times has come that the piez by defuers naist a disease that is called "clos" according to our intention, and is a large thing that is grown that bleches the foot. And the cauterices of this disease so are according to .ij. ways. That is to say cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. Cautery of fire if you heat .i. cautery like also as it is a pen of vault, and is made of good iron at the measure that he can porpenre the nail from all parts, and that there are subtil margins; after he puts all chaut on the nail, and returns your hand all entor the nail until he comes to the root; and leaves him so .iij. days until he begins giter putridity; then you make an ointment of wild roses crushed with silk, and leave the ointment on all night, and the nails cherra and will be deracined from his roots. Then cure the lea of ointing injanrant care as long as it is sanez.
And if they are converted by defuers the cors, and many times has come and in hands and em piez, if it is necessary that you i amenistres cautery of hot water; and it is in teil manner: take a string of rain or iron, or a pen of vault, and put sus lou clou and the althelul, that is to say porrelz verrues; and put the string sus so that he porpreigne all entor, then i put a little d'awe hot, and holds your hand well, and presses your hand in turning so that li marge of the string comes at the root of the nail, and may find the hot water way parfonde jusc'a the root; and leaves him so, and he will be deracineerd all to all his roots. Thus you make one after another, until you esraiches all these who are in the cors, then cure the oignemens which generate care.
And li cure of the tremble
When some shiver with cold or with fever, quarter or other, if you make them .iiij. cauterizations or .iv. on the spine of the back, 1. a cauterization between each spine; and 1. a cauterization at the feet, and 1. on the stomach with olive cauterization; if they will leave the trembling, and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
with pustules that puff up
No times does the body seem to be infected with pustules that puff up, which come from large corrupted matters. If it seems to you in the beginning when they appear that you make cauterization on each head of the pustule: a subtil cauterization of thyme wood, from which it is taken in fire, or of root of aristolochia far away, or with the lenticular cauterization. And no times are the cauterizations made at the beginning when they appear according to this way, and they cannot grow pus any more, but are broken; but it is fitting that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut off Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l'artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l'incision de l'aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d'estenchier.
Often, there is a great pain in the artery that is torn out into the wound, which comes to the edge of the incision of the abscess or to the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is very painful to smell. And however, when this happens to one, if you quickly put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it as much as the pulse is quietened by your hand, and no drop comes out; then take fire, the olive oil cautery, many small and large ones as much as it is all red; then take 1 .i. , or great or small according to the wound and place it at the edge of which you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the pulse is stopped.
And if it burns when you lift your finger off of the vein, and the cautery is put out, quickly take another cautery that is on fire.
And do not cease to make the one after another as long as the pulse is stopped; and be careful that you don't burn the nerve that is delicate, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when the artery is cut short, it cannot be well stopped unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction if it has not yet been treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines put on it which have the power to stop pain; and bind and strain firmly.
Whoever will administer the treatment of a tight bandage with burning things upon it, or other similar things, if he does not benefit from it, then he must not do it.
And if this does not happen to anyone and he has neither mirred nor presented medicine, then he must put his index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well over the wound and over the vein; and do not move him, but moisten him with cold water often so that he is chilled and thickens and remains; and make incisions in front of the one who needs cauterization and medicine.
This begins the second book on the treatment of injuries. Here is a translation:
And so, since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary, oh you who listen, that you learn that there is more danger and fear in this chapter of the treatise than in the first chapter on cauterization; and for this reason it is necessary to exercise greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to attempt such things. For in some cases, people who have engaged in such practices have died easily because of the foolishness of their behavior with regard to their disease, and because of its severity and wickedness; and from this you should be afraid. And from those who have such a reputation, one might say: "I am dying"; and the disease is deceitful. It is not right to consent to such people who have this manner of behavior, but rather you should place greater trust in your honor than in your desire, and not open yourself foolishly but carefully examine who comes to you; and use divination and indication in the treatment of your patients so that salvation may be converted; and if he helps you to acquire a good reputation, glory, and a memorable name, then he will help you attain it.
I pray our lord your understanding and rectitude; and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
I have ordered you this ointment in considering the various types of ointments, according to what is before you, that is, the ointment for the cautery, which I have devised from the top up to the tip, so that you may find it easier than that which you will need.
the head full of water
It is known that this disease often occurs in children from the age of infancy and when the baby cries too much, pulling hard on the head of the child; and it is never known for what reason this happens, that we know.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those whom I have seen die quickly; therefore it seems to me that I should do less harm with the use of fire cautery in small children.
And I saw a child whose shoulder was sore and swollen, and the head of the arm would not bear weight; and there seemed to be so much moisture that he might die; and this moisture having entered between the bone and the skin, between the clavicle and the bone; and the fire having been used in such a way that the moisture is between the clavicle and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should cut into the head of the arm with a large incision; and keep it as far away from me as two hands' length, so that the moisture runs; and note the shape of the splint:
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is between the bone and the skin, and the signs that you see are that the joints of the head overflow on either side, and the liquid jumps out when you press it with your hand from the inside, then you should make three incisions according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all moisture. After removing the drape and powder, pour wine and oil and leave it there for five days; then take it out, and cure the wound with linen and oil, and let the head be drawn out equally, and give the patient dry meat to eat, soaked in a little moisture, until the member is comforted and healed.
And another way of incising is that you consider the opening of the anus, and the gathering of the arrow; for it is never in front, never behind, never on the right, and never on the left.
So cut there where the anus opens, and the arrow fills it, and do so according to your ability; and be careful not to block the artery; and bring forth blood, so that the patient dies from the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
In summary:
When there is a disease called catarrh that affects the eyes or the nose, and this disease is old, and the medical cure does not benefit, then the following cure is appropriate: cauterize with fire using those who cover the .ij. arteries.
When the eyes are covered with pus, let the patient put his hand over his head; then rub the place of a rough cloth as many times as the arteries appear, and then extract the patient's tongue from all the cloth; then look at where the vein bites, and the bases of the two ears are apart and are reopened; then mark the bases with a sharp knife, and cut each one in half with a sharp blade, as far as the bone comes, and this is done by the side of the head.
And if you see it, cut off the spatumile from the artery and cover it with a cloth, and cut it like two sides with a sharp blade.
And when the vein is covered, let the fire burn continuously.
Et se li artere n'apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l'espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d'enche et fent jusc'a l'os; et ceu qu'il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l'artere; puis regarde la plaie: s'il remaint sus l'os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n'i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d'oignement tant qu'elle soit sanee.
And if the artery does not open when felt, then you should measure the quantity of space of .ii. dooz, and then sign with your finger and feel up to the bone; and as for what blood should be taken from, it is 5/8 of an inch, and by chance a little more or less. according to what the patient can bear, and the swelling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone without pain, if the cope that covers the abscess does not come off, then strain the wound and bind it, and the cure with ointment until it is healed.
When the old sinuses come and catarrh is acquired, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and ancient sore and similar things, and is medicined by methods of medical treatment and all that does not benefit it, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient should re-grow his hair on his temples, and hear to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is hardly refilled except in some men who are too cold; and if it is refilled, then the patient's neck is extracted from some sheets, then rub the place with any rough cloth, and raise the place of hot water until the artery appears clearly; and then take the spatula of which this is the form:
Then peel the skin lightly until you feel the artery, and then turn it upward like plucks, and thoroughly remove the cloth from each part; and if the artery is thin, then turn it to the point of the hook, and then cut off that part according to the quantity of 2.75 inches. For if it is not cut off, it does not at all leave without injury in everything.
And turn the blood of 2.75 inches, up to 1.75 inches; and if the artery is large, then you should tie it with 2 strong double threads of silk, so that it does not come forward before the piercing of the wound, and flows back from blood; then cut off the surplus which is between the 2 threads at that moment as well, and then, if you see it, then cauterize it with fire cutellaire up to the bone as soon as the chiés are cut; and this is the operation of muedre oevre, if the patient does not have a fever and he has a hot complexion.
For the cautery is help to end the moisture: for this is more great help against the moisture. For in the extraction of arteries it is good to fill up the place with well-made cotton; and when you shall separate them, then are cured of dry medicines that make a great char, and of tents, as long as they be healthy; and if without cutting off the artery, as you do, you hasten to cover it by cautery, or you employ the place of vitriolic, and strain it in your hand, so that the blood be strained; and if you have not this present, then put upon the place your finger, keeping it till the blood be congealed, and raise up the place with cold water, keeping it till the blood cease to flow, and is drawn out as it should be; and that which is bloody and lighter in the extraction of the artery is this: that you cauterize the vein in two parts, but let the cutting part be very strong that it may keep longer against the heat. For if the instrument be too soft, then it keeps not its heat. And must have between the two tools one inch of space, and then when you have cut through the two veins, and you measure with the sharp edge over so much as comes to the bone, and cover the vein in two parts; and let them be separated between the two joints because it is not softened by this cautery everywhere; and this is the form of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears of the eyes fall down from the veins that are on the forehead of the patient, and he does not benefit from any medicine that is used, and you see the face of the patient grow pale, and feel a movement like tremors; and if they are kept wet and moist so that the hairs of the eyebrows fall out, and the eyebrows are scorched by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary to use this cure.
And they called it the "old cure", and that is what you do to the patient who has hair on his forehead, then make .iij. incisions evenly along the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions should be like .ij. two all the way down to the nose, and the others .ij. two each on either side of the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the .ij. mandibles, and each wound should have .iij. dosages across the joins;
For the incision that is to be made from the temple up to the second incision; and skin all of the hair that is between the two cuts right up to the bone, then make another cut from the first incision up to the other second one, and then remove this scalpel completely.
If you cut into the first fracture with the instrument called "scalpell", and is very well sharpened on one side, and on the other side it is soft, not sharpened, and this is its form: And place the chisel-like instrument towards the back at the end of the fracture, and the chisel-side is soft towards the bone, and cut it as far as the middle fracture. Then skin all of the hair that descends from the head up to the incision being continuous up to what opens at the end; and then do the same in the middle fracture up to the other end; and then remove it evenly, and press the wound; and then place cotton pads in each fracture, and moisten them with wine and oil and honey, and keep the apertures clean; and on the third day, bind him, and instil great amount of water, then cure with basilicon ointment made with oil and rosewater, and other cures for wounds, until it is healed.
Then remove the hair from the head up to the incision being continuous, and what opens at the end; and then do the same in the middle fracture up to the other end; and then skin it evenly, and press the wound.
When none of the following come to mind: and you see the hairs thin and short, and blurring the vision, and burned papers; and the hair falls out, and where it falls there is great pain, and the patient sneezes; then know from these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come from a few veins, and the medicine that is used for them, if this is so, then that is right.
And tell the patient to rub his forehead, then make a large cut down the middle of the forehead, and another wide one. Start from the left temple to the right temple, cutting to the bone; and keep your hand off the nerves that move when he sways to avoid shaking; and when the bone is exposed, if you soak all the blood with a sponge, then bandage it between the .ij. lips of the cut and put cotton wads, and cover them with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, and be careful not to incise the cheek; when it is exposed, if you rub the bone until the char starts to come out, then cure with dry things, which cause chapping.
In this manner: take .ij. parts of wheat flour, and three parts of colophony, and make an ointment out of them; and apply it to the wounds in order to cause chapping everywhere.
for the sticking up of the ears
All who carry ears are one of the .iiij. things: grains, beasts, or small stones or similar objects like iron; seeds, as beans, peas; fluid things like water and air and similar things.
If it chimes in the ear, stone or any other kind of object that does not fit into the ear, do not insert it into the ear, but hold it towards the sun. If you see the stone, distil a little purple oil or seed oil; then perform an extraction. And when he does this, let him sneeze and stop his nostrils when sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool behind the ear; and raise the ear above. Many times a force comes from this cure; and if it does not come, extract it with subtle pincers, so that this is the shape:
If it forces itself out with the pincers, it is good; if not, extract it with a small, double-bladed scissor; and if it does not force itself out, make a chain of air and bottle the end of the chain or the opening of the ear very tightly, and stop up that which is inside the chain with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the chain; then let him go on, for many times it comes forth as we have said; and if it does not come forth in any way, take glut from the ears, and put some cotton in; then press the glut upon the stone or whatever it is, and force it out. And if it does not force itself out with any of these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear so that the hot steam comes and twitches; and the way in which you split the head is so that you make a small cut at the base of the ear according to its measure of virtue, then place the ear between your hands and turn it upside down, and split a little cut at the root of the ear with fat or oil; and let the cut be as if it were a moon, until you feel the stone; then twist it with your power, and suck it gently into your mouth; and the cure until it is healed. And if it is grain that is infected and swells, extract it; and if it cannot be extracted, make a solution of this substance:
And make an incision in that grain. But do not do this if you think the grain is moist due to moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them carefully and gently, as we have said, so that the extractions are careful.
So that the patient uses sneezes first, and wads the ear with old cotton. And let it sit in place for a while; if it is not enough, take many small pieces according to the length of your finger, and heat them slightly by the fire; then put one of these stones into his ear, and pull out another stone from the other side, and make a hole in the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop until all the air comes out, and thus it will come out completely; and if you see this, take 1 joint, and bottle one of the ears, and the other head with fire until the bigger joint burns; then remake another joint and so on until the air comes out completely, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the best, if it is a small worm or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large one that can be felt, use the incision of the tweezers; and this is the lightest thing to extract from the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and where we treat the distensions, and if the cure does not benefit, then you should look at the ear towards the sun; if there are no worms, take a thin pin and see if it feels like hair; and if it doesn't feel anything, take the shape of the ear.
And be tight on the bottom and wide on top. And squeeze the tip of the ear according to the amount of pain the patient feels, then suck it in shape; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they don't want to come out, push them into cotton as I said about stones; and if they don't rise up as we have said, administer distensions that the old ones have tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where we have treated distensions; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all these instruments, from which this is the shape as you see:
And be tight on the bottom and wide on top; for distilling, and to press in for distillation an instrument of silver or gold; and to press inwards the distillation with a well-made silver instrument so that you can see, and if you see, wrap it in cotton at the tip; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicines you have in the cain (ear canal), and let the cain be in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand with temper so that the oil is distilled or trickling from the ear; and smell the patient's breath within, and let the distillation be slightly heated by the fire as we do when we distil it in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the ears
No child is born who does not have a piercing in his ears; and this same thing happens to men by an impale of the ear, or by a charne (a kind of fish) inside the ear, and it never comes into perfection in the ear unless one can see it; and there is no such thing as the piercing of the ear, and he sees well.
This one therefore that comes into perfection unless one can see it is of great benefit in many dispositions, and in this one it is good that you put the ear of the sick in the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the work has all this spittle of which there is this form:
And be it forward and behind all plain, so that it does not blister the ear; if the operation is a charne or a korse of the ear, if he holds the pinches subtly, and the copes lightly, as long as that charne is all ossified.
And if the earwax is completely dried up in the ear, take .i. a fine sharp razor and heat it slightly and then put it at the entrance of the ear. If you feel the wax that the patient feels itching to hear, pierce lightly and be careful not to injure the eardrum; then place in the ear a tent according to its size of the perforation, and moisten with Egyptian ointment.
Do not do any work until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle it with vitriolic broth; and if you see fluid escape from the ear, cover it so that you remove the tent and take another tent moistened with rosin made of rosewater and wax, until the discharge is stopped; then treat it until it is healed.
And if the discharge of blood comes, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that treat the discharge of blood which are or treats with distillations.
of the paper
Here is the text translated into English:
"And if not cut out, then the fire cautery with the subtle lens-shaped cauterizer, and the cauterizer after the incision remains must; and many times they repair, as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and never come back."
"of the hair"
"Many times come in papers things that seem like gresle in their form and hardness, and for this is called "grandine", and is a gathering of moisture thick in the paper above and below; the ovraiges are these: take care if the grandine is silent of one part and of another, and it is a light thing to know; cut the large, then the scorch of each part lightly, then take it to pinceures, and cover. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the break is large, so gather it into a stitch, and heal it as long as it is healthy; and if it is small, do not force it, for the oignons will soon restore it and ruin it."
And if the ear aching goes up to the inner part of the ear towards the top, then turn the paper over, and place the aching in a pair of pincers, and press on either side; and if the paper is moved by the incision, it does not hurt anything; and when the aching is pressed, let the salty water oil out, and cure the hole where the aching came from until the patient is healthy.
of the fat of the hairs
Exinch is a fat that is produced in paper webs, and this happens more often to young children; it hurts their eyes and makes their tears flow; they cannot look at the light of the sun because of the exinch in their eyes; and when they lie down on their faces, they sleep, and their papers are wet with exinch which opens and changes its appearance into oil. And when you press the hole with your fingers and feel the exinch coming out between your fingers.
And the method of application is that the patient places his head in your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and set up a tent-like structure in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinch contained in each part, and put it on top of him; and press with your fingers from both sides, so that the exinch is gathered together in the middle; then make a cut in the center of the circle with a sharp instrument, not larger than the wound made at the opening of the vein; and make the skin round in perfection until you come to the exinch; and in many dispositions the exinch comes out of the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Take then from the whole a piece of linen cloth between your two hands at the back, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread out; and be careful not to move in the tear, so that you do not come to all the spittle up to the oil, that you do not smear it.
And if it does not open too much in the narrowing of the tear, so that it opens lightly only a little; then take it out as we have said, then soak the cloth in water and oil, and put it back on the place, and draw out the threads.
And if there are such men who grind silk and put on it to corrupt that moisture which is dried up. Then the cure until he is healthy. And if it comes to the base of the apophthegm, so the cure with embalming powder soothing until he is healthy.
of paper
When the hairs grow on paper, they are different from nature, and become dry, if they harm the eyes, and cause diseases such as tears and softening of the papers and albugine, until it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to .iiij. ways: either by fire cautery together, or by medicine ague according to what it is before, or by chapistre cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cutting, according to what I will say.
It is fitting that you put the head of the patient in your healthy hand, and then hold the paper away from your eye; if it is turned, it is good; but if not, pour an needle into all the .i. thread on top; and let the hairs that grow out be taken off these hairs, to all the thread on top, cutting with a razor; then make in the middle part of the paper, taking off the hairs that grow there, taking all the spatumile aside, from the great tear until the little one; then remove the thread, and hold the paper back with a little bit of cloth and draping, and sign on the paper a figure of an eye, as much as a marjoram's fruit, and it is fitting that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised for all.
And if it is necessary to take a large quantity of the paper according to what it has been softened; then make in the middle part, starting from the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the great tear until the little one; and let it be like the root of a marjoram, then pour an oil in one of the two angles of the corner, then scorch it all; then join the two lips together with a thread made of a needle at all the 100 threads of fine wool, and wash the blood away, and blow off the surplus of the threads on top of the two sorcels until there is nothing more; if you can do this; and if not, then leave the costure and the threads for three or four days; then cure the wound with dry and constricting things, because the paper softens at the touch of the wound and its assembly, but the costure is wet (as the old say), and it is work without pain.
and if in another way: and it is that you take the paper of a shape which is also like the bulb of mirth, as we have told, at .iij. one-thirds will be done according to the form which is here:
then take this who rises with small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and the thing is not equal, then take an needle where there are  .i. threads, and the bottle up the figure; and bottle  .i. other thread of your choice, and let it down with great tear, and the second thread of your choice, and join them together evenly; then lift up your hand evenly, and lift up all the skin where you have signed, as we have told, then assemble the  .ij. lips of the wound by sewing, and the soothe with cerote and similar abdomations;
and no time goes by that the hair of the paper is converted: so it is that you use what we have said of the incision; but the stitch in one and in the other is more artificial.
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
If it delays, if the cover forces, then cure it as long as it is healthy; and when the wound has healed, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and large:
If it delays, if the cover forces, then cure it as long as it is healthy; and when the wound has healed, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and large:
And if it is chased, treat it and the hairs will not come out with it; pull the chase from all the thread that you have ordered, as long as the chase comes out of the hole above and you see it through the vision of oil; then, if you pull the chase and the thread, and close the oil and leave it closed .21 days or 23., until the hair is rooted in its place and grows well; and if the hairs are small, accompany 1 long hair of the natural chevroids, and carry it with that which you leave, as long as they are stretched out and then let them down.
of the oil
When this disease, called "aleacrati", comes about in oil, there are two ways it can occur: one is natural and the other is unnatural. It also occurs suddenly due to wounds, cauterization, or similar things.
And the method of treatment in this case is that you split that wound, and free the lips from it, and put linen cloth inside, and let it lie as long as it heals; and you should not use any remedies that dry and constrict. For if you do so, the disease will come back worse than before. But if you use things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the rose water or alcohol and linseed oil are cooked, and olive oil is added to one of them, and it is wrapped in a cloth, and is cured with it.
And the treasures of your cure, be that you guard yourself that it does not harden according to the form that it was before; and these remedies that we have said are only valid after having treated this disease, that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
of the oil that comes from sheep's fat
This disease, which is known as "axacrati," is natural and accidental. The accidental nature comes from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things; and the path of the ovraige in this case is that you insert a double-edged needle, and then pierce it through the left lappet to such a depth that the thread reaches the 1/2 chiés of the char, and then pull the thread up to all the spatumiles.
And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is fitting, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make 1/2 cuts or costes within the paper; and let the chiés of the 1/2 cuts be at the 1/2 angles of the incision that you have copied, and let the figure be as that of a letter which has not 1/2 grooves; then cut off this char, according to the quantity that its costes are sharp from that which follows the paper, then add the 1/2 parts that have been cut off, and the threads of another wool; then apply the softening medicines and tenting, as long as it is healthy.
And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a plain cut between the hairs of the paper, and according to what has been said above; then remove between the .ij. leathers of a tent, as I have said; and the work should be done according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the master healing tools are not able at all to bring back the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what he needs to do work and instruments in various dispositions.
Of the paper
When this paper-sealing has come about in a certain way that the paper above is sealed with oil from the white of an egg, and cannot move or do its work naturally, then it is necessary that you push in the point of a razor between the paper and the oil, and lift it up; and spread it out on pinceaux, until you have taken what is above the thin spice which is not too sharp nor too fine-cut, so that the oil may not be cut by the too-sharp spice; and let your incision be, which you shall make when you remove the assembled paper, lightly, so that the paper comes back to its natural form; and let all that is assembled be well washed in salt water, and lifted with sweet water, and of colier; then put between the paper and oil a tent of linen, and put on the oil a wet woollen cloth; and after three days use of the collar and things sealed with such things until it is healed.
Of the egg yolk
Saiches that the nail has two appearances: one is nervous and resembles hard syphylous matter, and another that is not nervous but resembles frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and tended to pins and needles, can not be felt; and both types of appearance begin to spread towards the great tear, and grow larger and larger until they obscure the whole view, all the light, and all the movement of the oil.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your lap, then he opens the nails; and hold paper in your hand, then coil the nail into small twists with a pair of tweezers, and lift it up; then take an needle, and i put 1. j. hair of horse, or of she-goat, or of cow, and 1. j. strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and pierce it through the nail, and tie the nail to a thread and lift it up, and peel off at all the root of the nail which follows the skin and silk to the hair just to the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the tear with very fine scissors so that by the incision does not come the blood as usual; and never tie the nail to the oncined thread and string, as we have said; then peel off all the silk.
And keep so that the silk does not touch the raw cloth and tear it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision pour in oil a little bit of tar, and put on the collar made of lime, and leaves until the next day; then heal him of whatever he needs until he is healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the nails cannot enter, many times this nail-like medicine is cured; and they come out in the same way as I have told in the division, and if you cover it up, so that oil of evil comes out, and take the light tar according to this form:
And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it is not shrinking at all and the root is pressing down, then distil from your mouth into oil made of tar and red ointment and white wine, and stop the oil until the next day; then begin the other work according to this method, until it is all bone.
If nothing is contrary in the oil, as you would do with an abscess, then drink milk, and first cure the abscess that it may be healthy, then begin the work as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of the meat of the arm hurt in the oil by great harm, so it suspends for a moment, and distills one part of it and not all of it, so that tears do not come; then distill into oil of red collyrium, which is made of tar.
the horse that was born with a mane of hair
Of some men is born a horse red, and covers the prunell, and holds back on the papers and turns them toward the wind, and appears like a rose of balast; and the work is such that the patient puts his head on his chest, then he twists the hairs, and twists all this mane with suitable hooks and supports it by force; then chop the first mane, and go all at once to the razor until the end, and be careful not to cut the oil on the work; and let the incision of the spatumile that we have said in the incision of the nail and small forces of which one holds the sebel, as the form shows after this chapter.
and when the incision is completed and all the hair has been removed, then put on the oil of tar or you distil red wine and similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton with the oil of tar to the wind, with the use of oil; so that it is secure against infection; and if he does not wait, and the horse walks over him, and you doubt a hot infection, then leave the oil and cure the infection with cooling medicines; then return to your work until it is healthy, and in this way do all the mane is ajostee in the oil by this appearance.
But it is necessary that you adjust the cure of each weak oil by natural way; and of the accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that the members are suffering from that work.
the hairs
are red and covered with oil, and tolerate the treatment well; their vision is weakened. So, first of all, when you look at it, command the patient to put his head in your lap, then suspend those hairs completely according to his wisdom, and be careful not to break them; so let them hang down slightly according to this form:
And let there be two haircuts in three degrees according to this form:
Then cut the hair carefully with a sharp razor, and wash it away every hour or so until all the hair is gone; and be careful not to burn the oil with the sun, and do this work before noon; and when you have finished doing this, distill into the oil green and red wine to corrupt what is left of the hair.
And if you do not have the power to bind all of these in that hour, so make a paste on the oil of soothing things the pain of the hairs, and leave some days until the pain is calmed and is assured by the aposteme warm, then begin again according to this way that is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of forces:
of the fistula of the oil
are treated as follows: when you cure it with fire cautery and medicine as I have said above, and it is not yet healed, then cut through the aposteme, leaving the bone exposed, and drain out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and blackness, then remove all the instrument of what it is; and it is called "aspre chief", and let it be made from a sharp edge as in the present form:
And set it on the right place of the bone that is rotted, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little while you know that that corruption is removed; and do not repeat this, but restore the place of medicines that dry up.
If the socket is tight and the hip joint does not move, and the bone of the hip is tight, and remains so for a while, and there is no abscess and no bad odor, know that it is healthy; but if not, then except that you bring the fistula to the hole of the testicles according to this form: and is that you uncover the bone the second time with iron, and with medicinal hot things, and when it is uncovered thus then take it away. I will tell you how to do this:
Then put it on the bone's top with oil for a little while, then turn all the way until it pierces the bone and feels by your hand that it comes to the testicle, if it holds its hand on its testicle; then restore the place of medicinal dry things as I have taught you, and when the hip joint is strong and hardens the bone, the matter goes into the testicle; so this is a lighter thing for the patient.
of oil
When the hairs are completely removed, and there is no risk of infection, then let the patient lie down; then place the cupping glasses so as not to hurt him/her, then put on the oil .i. the ointment made of nettle and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the oil, and plaster it onto bandages and drapes; and the way to do the drapes is that you squeeze the bandages enough soft, and double each 3, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity of hair needed; then strain it through a hard bandage, and start the cupping again so as not to hurt him; then remove the cups and leave the oil strained day and night, and if the bandage is loosened, so you should strain it more; then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see that the oil has returned, it is good; if not, then start again with the ointment and drapes and bandages and cups until he is well.
With the removal of the silk-covered cloth
When the silk-covered cloth is removed, it reveals a texture like grain of resin, and may be seen; then if you cover it with a cloth, the treatment is such that you pierce an needle at the root of the part below, then pierce another needle where there is  .i. double thread from the part of the wound; and let the first needle follow the disposition; then tie one end of the double thread to the other, and strain it well, then remove the needle and put oil on the moisten cloth; and leave it until the thread chices with the silk, then treat the oil with confortable things until the wound is healed; and never restrict the wound with a circle of cloth from each part, until it is healed.
And if the hairs have reached a great length, then pierce them with a thin spike that comes out perfectly from the oil, and draw off the moist, white pus and trim the hairs, and cut it short; then remove it until it is healed.
of the bowl of oil
This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is only a bowl of oil that seems to be water but isn't; and the manner of its appearance in this chapter is such that you make the patient sit on his back and straight, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and press it as much as you see the oil rise on top of the hair; then let it fall, and don't draw it up again until it is completely dry, and don't let the light shine on it, and look at the patient's hair so as to see if it has grown; and if it doesn't grow, know that it is water, and the rising of the oil from the bowl isn't like what we have described. If you make the patient sit with his head between your hands, then take the thin spike and pierce it into the scalp skin at a slight angle, until the oil comes out perfectly; and when it has come out, let it be cured by any other means until it is healed.
of the oil water
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
After rest for a short time, and let the arrow go up the second way, put on the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly stuck and does not go up, take out almagda lightly by turning your hand back and forth; and then put in the water a little of the gem oil, and leave from that oil within. Then put by defu
If almagda cannot enter the oil because of its hardness, because there are some men who have too hard hairs, it is necessary that you squeeze the instrument which is called "alberit", from which this is the form:
And so then separate the conjunctive together, and do not make it too perfect but make it soft, then pour in the almagest, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient "the coming forward one," that is, let him sleep on his back in a dark place; and let him be free from all movement, and eat light food, and do not move his head either to the right or to the left, and let him be tied according to his disposition until three days; then take it off again in the same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put it back on until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you stretch it out, because the liquid rises quickly.
And so then separate the conjunctive together, and do not make it too perfect but make it soft, then pour in the almagest, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient "the coming forward one," that is, let him sleep on his back in a dark place; and let him be free from all movement, and eat light food, and do not move his head either to the right or to the left, and let him be tied according to his disposition until three days; then take it off again in the same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put it back on until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you stretch it out, because the liquid rises quickly.
And so then separate the conjunctive together, and do not make it too perfect but make it soft, then pour in the almagest, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient  "the coming forward one," that is, let him sleep on his back in a dark place; and let him be free from all movement, and eat light food, and do not move his head either to the right or to the left, and let him be tied according to his disposition until three days; then take it off again in the same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put it back on until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you stretch it out, because the liquid rises quickly.
And these are the appearances of the shape of the almagra, so that he who does not know them sees them; and they should be made of pure bronze:
And let the head of this middle subtlety be made of these two waters, and behind it in three angles.
of gold over the neck
And no one is born or neis chars different, of which there are none that seem scorpions at the mouth of a pie; and if there is any such thing or has an enchaining of fuxes in color, and so a char souef in good color. In this case, when these chars that are souef come into contact with the sun, you should make the patient sit between your hands; and open his nostrils, and pour this char onto those chars, and let it flow; then take what you have poured, holding it to a subtle liquid of one kind on one side, until you know that this char is all bone.
And if there is nothing left that can't be covered, but if the cut goes through all.i. of the fine, light instruments, so that it doesn't stop anything; and without you go up, or an abscess is choked, if the cure is like this; and if these are malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them as soon as the swelling stops and all the pus is drained, then pour or spray easily and acutely or wine.
And if there is an ulcer, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that he is well; and if the moisture perforates as it should, know that there is pus trapped in the bone above, so the instrument does not cut properly: therefore, it is necessary that you put a piece of linen thread about half an inch thick, and tie it with your hands, and place about each knot 1/4 inch or less; and let the patient hold the thread in his nose at one end, and the other end in his mouth; and frequently turn the child over, and this is a light thing for him who does it; then hold the nose that comes through the thread with one hand, and the mouth that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and feel each one apart from the other as we do with the thread; Do this until you feel that the knot has been destroyed, then turn the thread, wash the ulcer, and dip it in Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the nose as before; Do this for three or more days, as much as the ointment corrupts what is caught up; and then put a plug of plaster into the nostril after a time until he is well, and if there is need to use dried medicines, do so. And that is the form of the instrument for purifying the nose, with which one distils oils and medicines into the nose:
And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, as a plug, and conduct it also; and if you see, then make a closed plug, and let the instrument be flat for purging the nose; and have one always at the nose to hold it when the oil or any liquid is heated.
of the chest over the neck
Many times the chest over the neck brings about a disease which is called "telul," and grows and becomes great indeed, so that it is visible to the eye; and for this reason you should chop the head at the beginning, and burn the bone all over, then put fire on it; and if you delay it until it is very big, be careful not to touch it with iron, because it has a bitter color, poor sense: but if it does not hurt when touched, and has no bitter color, and you see that it can be burned completely, so empty the patient and chop him without fear, and cure the place with drying and restraining things.
When the neck is cut and chopped
When the neck is cut and chopped
The manner of stitching so that you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we have said in the stitch of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
of the lips
With a hand held firmly, the skin of the lips is tightened and made to appear like grain, smaller and larger; so then you should return the lips, divide each one, and tie it tightly with string in each part; and then apply the vinegar cutlet there, until the wound has healed; and then release the ligature, and treat the area with dry things until it is well.
of the teeth
Maitre often naist sur les gencives charres ajoutees, que l'ancien apelent "albulus"; s'il convient que tu les maintiens avec des tenaillees, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse couler le sang ou la bile; puis met dessus le lieu vitriole broie, ou autres poudres retiennent et dessiccatees; et si celle charre revient apres l'incision, et souvent arrive, s'il la Cope la seconde fois, et cauterise; si ne revient mie apres le cautere; et ces sont les formes des estrumens pour coper.
Here is the translation of the text:
"Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faisses seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu'il n'i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu'elles soient mondees; et s'on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c'est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d'estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et ces formes et autres soient avec toi apparées."
It is necessary that you heal the tooth of its pain as soon as possible, for it must not be delayed at all; for this is a very high substance until now there is no excuse to delay pulling it. So it is necessary that you heal the tooth of its pain as quickly as possible, for this must not be delayed at all; because this is a very high substance until now there is no excuse to delay pulling it out. Now when the patient is forced to pull it out, you should be certain about the tooth that needs to be pulled; often the pain disappears from the patient and he thinks that the tooth is sound, and he has it pulled; and yet the pain does not go away for this, as we have already tried with these patients; and when you are certain about the tooth that needs to be pulled, then you should scrape around the tooth with a sharp scraper very well in order to ward off the gums from all sides; then place the tooth between your two fingers or small pliers at one point and another, as long as it is firmly held, then tighten the pliers well; and let the patient's jaw rest on your lap, and keep it still.
Then pull out the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and push it in from each side lightly, and move it as you did before. And if the root is broken and bleeding, then fill it with gauze, where the break is; and if it is pulled out gently with pliers, then there is no need to worry about breaking it when pulling it out; and it is necessary to cut the gum very carefully around the tooth.
And do not worry that you will break it, and leave a part of it, and make the patient suffer even more from the root than before from the first; and be careful that you do not do as the ignorant doctor does, who, because of his haste and arrogance, often breaks the cart without any thought; but he brings about greater disease by the roots that he keeps back, or by the cart that he breaks, as we have often wanted to tell him; and when the root is pulled out, if it is a strong one, wash the hole with wine or water or salt; and if it bleeds, stop the bleeding with vitriolic water; and if this does not work, cauterize.
The forms of the instruments, so that they do not mute the teeth first, are to be long and thick, so that they do not double up when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And let them be of thick limbs so that they do not bend when you pull, and let them be of good iron, and let them have teeth to hold the musings.
of the root of the teeth When the root stays in place when pulled, if you put cotton moistened with oil on the spot where it hurts, as long as the roots are soft, then the nails that are called 'algefri' seem to be a saw; and let them be made inside like a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out of all these claws, then you must uncover the whole bone around the root, and put the instrument that is called 'al-thalī' (that is, a claw), so that this is its shape:
And be careful and strong so that it does not break, and the root jumps out through this (that is good); if not, help yourself with all the instruments, from which the shapes come next:
And if you help yourself with this instrument that has .ij. (such as) 2 1/2 inches (this is its shape):
and other iron instruments that are in front of the teeth of the jaw, and of this instrument which seems like a large claw  (this is its shape):
And be this instrument not such that it can break; and know that many of the instruments from inside are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the master sabers carefully try themselves with their own instrument, according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are many diseases where the old did not teach an instrument for the variety of them; and if it does not break the chariot or other bones, where he will lie down, if he seeks the instruments that I have told you about, and help with gestures, so this is the form: And be large and good to hold the bone so that it does not escape but can hold it and remove it; and then restore its place with medicines suitable for him, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then the cure has all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to nature's form, and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the root is beyond the tooth, and is not in its right place, and cannot be sewn or filed: then the treatment; and if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is given here, which resembles a little beak, and is made of iron:
And the cap fits well and well-handed for the hardness of the tooth, and for what you can move the others, and if it appears that you can file it, then take a file whose form is given here:
and is also like the lime which we use to make needles; and in a lime the tooth pokes and pokes in the hand lightly every day so that it does not move until it breaks; then the flat at the end to any sharpener, and the edge is too dull and it bleeds the tongue, so it is necessary to sharpen the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the word.
When the tooth loosens
When the tooth starts to loosen, either through pounding or chewing, and the patient cannot press upon it without causing pain, and you have treated it with restringent medicines, but it still does not respond; if you can restrain it with a gold thread, because silver wire turns green and rots, but gold wire never moves; and make sure the thread is neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice any pain, carefully cut off the thread and start again at the other side, stretching the hand gently and carefully until it no longer moves; and if your grip slacks, or the thread comes loose, tighten it with another thread. Let it rest in this position as long as it can, and if it relaxes, or the thread comes loose, tighten it with a different thread; if it takes time, it will serve for that length of time, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the adrecement of the 2 healthy teeth and the 2 missing, as you see:
and when the tooth starts to fall out, either through pounding or chewing, and the patient cannot press upon it without causing pain, and you have treated it with restringent medicines, but it still does not respond; if you can restrain it with a gold thread, because silver wire turns green and rots, but gold wire never moves; and make sure the thread is neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice any pain, carefully cut off the thread and start again at the other side, stretching the hand gently and carefully until it no longer moves; and if your grip slacks, or the thread comes loose, tighten it with another thread. Let it rest in this position as long as it can, and if it relaxes, or the thread comes loose, tighten it with a different thread; if it takes time, it will serve for that length of time, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the adrecement of the 2 healthy teeth and the 2 missing, as you see:
of copper the ring of the tongue
No time is lost for the ring of the tongue or nature, that we do not know; or by accident of a sore blister; and the ovraiges are such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and have his head in yours, and pull out the tongue; then cut off the nerve on the side, as long as the tongue is disconnected from its place, and if it is painful or not, and this is caused by a sore wound, then bite with your hook and cut off the nerve on the large side; and keep that the cut does not become too perfect, because of the artery that is in it; and when you have done so, lift up the water from rose-color and thus, or from cold water, and put desoz the tongue with a patch of linen; and wash li malaides every night, that the leach may not set. And if the fever comes away, then put on the vitriole broiet; and if it does not come away, then cauterize it with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then cure him with other cures until he is well.
and if you see red or black or hard stuff in it, so that the sick person does not smell it, nor touch it, for it is a cancer; and if it declines toward blenchor, and there is moisture, then pour the oncine, and make the cut with a sharp knife, and deliver it from one part to another; and if he comes away to your ovraiges, so put him on vitriole broiet until he is well-healed, and then return to your ovraiges as you pull everything out; then lift up the water from ail and seil, and cure him with other cures until he is well.
the abscesses of the throat
No time comes from inside the throat biles that are called "godath", and they call them properly .ij. mandrels, and when you cure them, if as we said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care: it is an abscess of small size and pale color, do not touch with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch with iron either for its pain or; but leave it until it dies, and then you will remove it, where it would break by itself; and if it is of white color and the root is thin, you have prepared the instrument to cover, but first look that the abscess is hot and calmed down. Then put the patient in front of the sun, and his joints be on your side, and he opens his mouth and holds his sergeants between his hands, and press the tongue back to all the instrument, for this is the shape; and be of silver or thin gold as our knives:
Then put the tongue back on all this instrument, and you will see the abscess, if take the hook and put it in the mandrel, and lead it up higher than you can; and do not tie anything with the threads, then cover the instrument, for this is the shape, which seems a force; and yet the head are corbe, and one place another, and they are very sharp, and is made of iron where or of anvil:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cover it with pliers, for this is the shape:
And be careful on one side and the other; and when you have cut off one of the mandrels, if you do the other according to this same manner, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot, and hot and easily, and run away from the blood if it comes out, if gargarize the patient with water, or extracts of pomegranate seeds, or leaves of myrrh, and similar things, until the wound is healed; then treat him as long as he is healthy; and do not let there be in the throat any other abscesses than the two mandrels, if you cut them off in this way just like the two mandrels.
I treated a woman with an abscess that was stuck inside her throat, which is to say, a small abscess; and I shut up all of the throat so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway that had been blocked, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if I had not worked on her soon enough, in one day or two days. The abscess was so high up that it had rained upon it for the two rain-pits from where the abscess had come out; so I worked quickly, and put in a scimitar, then drew it through, and put in another in the other pit where the abscess had come out, and pressed her mouth shut and her tongue; after that I put in the scimitar in those abscesses, and cut off some of them, and only let out a little bit of blood; and thus unblocked the passageways in the woman's throat, and she began to drink clear water and then wine, and did not stop cutting off that abscess for a long time; and the abscesses receded, and filled up the space that I had emptied, until it was very large; so I sewed it up, and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it stopped growing; and I left those parts, and there was only God who cared for them afterwards.
from the wine
When the head is separated from the body, and it is distant, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called "ove". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the apoplexy of the feet is calm, and it is thin, then it is appropriate that you cut it; and that which is round and gathered together and is not distant; and it is bloody or red or black, then it is appropriate that you avoid the incision. For there is great danger in this disease. Therefore, when you see it, according to the way I have said, of its blenchor and distance, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue to the instrument which we have mentioned above; then insert the scalpel into the "ove", and turn it round, and cover it with.ii. instruments that I have spoken about in the incision of the two mandrels. And it is appropriate that you do not cover more than the surplus that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, it will grieve the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two mandrels, and cure until it is well. And if the patient has a fear of covering, then you should use cauterization with fire, as I shall speak about later. And the way to cauterize is sharp water. And that the patient put his head on your body, and then press the tongue to the instrument which we have said or the fire cautery chapter, and bind it together with sharp water, so that it is not too thick or too thin; and use this handle of this instrument, from which this form comes:
And let the head have a mane where one puts the medicine, as with a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine on the  "ove"; and let the patient lie on his side so that he spits and his saliva runs into the medicine from his mouth, so that it does not go down the throat and hurt him; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the  "ove" for half an hour, until you see it begin to turn black and the medicine's taste is gone; and if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and put the instrument on all the cotton in the chain above, until the cotton is wet all over; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and clean after 3 or 5 days. And if you need to renew the medicine's cauterization, then renew it, and after the cauterization rinse with cold water, and cure with gargling until it is well.
This cure is safer than the incision, or the cauterization; if it is cured with fumigation according to this way, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and alyssum and similar herbs, and put them all together in a pot, and pour water on them easily, and boil them; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and place the pot on 1 instrument according to this way: And be it of silver or gold, and be one of the shoulders crushed in the mouth of the sick person until the steam rises from the vein by the cane, as long as the vein is dead; then begins again often, until the vein dries, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the coming of the abscess, for many things come there; and do not make this but at the decline of the abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put it in his head a hook of air, so that the mouth of the sick person has too much heat; because the hook of air does not allow the steam to burden the mouth, and this is a good cure together for salvation.
Many times he rises in the throat of a fish or nothing; so it is necessary that you take what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing; and that which does not open to you and is put back in the throat, it is necessary that you make him vomit so that his meat is cooked in his stomach; by chance if this thing is forced out by vomiting; or he swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or i. e. bread mold with mold; and put a string on the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to light, it will rise, and then draw hard; and if she does not come out of this which we have said, take an instrument of plunger according to this form:
And let the instrument be bent at the end so that it can enter more easily into the throat and has the head lifted up; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that no one comes to him, nor put the bone in; and move that he drink the instrument, because he moves or the thing is forced; if he swallows the bottle, or he draws it all together evenly, until she comes out.
the blood from the throat
de la sang de la gorge
Here comes the first sentence to translate: de la sang de la gorge
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nous avons dit, si subfumige le malade d'asefetide, à l'instrument que j'ai dit dans la fumigation de l'uve; fais-le souvent, car elle cherchera à tousser. Et la méthode de la fumigation est telle que tu prennes un pot où il y ait des charbons visibles, et soit le pot placé dans un couvert perçu dans le milieu, et en celui perçu soit la tête de l'instrument; puis tu y jettes ta fumigation, et le malade met la pointe de la canne dans sa bouche, et la ferme, de sorte que la fumée n'en sort pas, mais vient jusqu'à la sansue ; et la sansue maintenant cherchera, et s'elle ne tousse, si recommence la fumigation par de multiples fois ; et fait soif au malade, et mange des choses salées et astringentes, et ne boit point d'eau; et ensuite le remède qu'il soit dû selon cette conduite.
the chapter of the abscesses
The mouth of a sore is, according to what is said in this book from one thing and another, and it is diverse in perforation and in incision; and this is in .ij. ways, whereof the one is in its own shape, and this other is because of moisture. And the second way is for the joints where they are at the core. For the abscess at the head is different from that at the base, and the abscess at the charn of the joint is different from that which comes in the joints; and each has its judgment in the work.
And if an abscess should not be pierced, as long as the bowel is dead according to its completion; and if of such that it is necessary to pierce when it is crut, and does not die according to its completion, as in an abscess which comes from a joint; for when an abscess comes from a joint, and you leave it to rot inside, perhaps the ligature and nerve of the joint are corrupted, whereby this causes contraction in that member. Or if an abscess is from the principal limb, and you delay the perforation as long as it is dead, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is from the base, if you pierce it without having a complete digestion, lest that which is from the base does not rot completely, and be along inside, and come out as a fistula; and cannot heal in great term.
And you should know the time of piercing an abscess that is dead according to completion, and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of the fever, and the decrease of the pain and redness, and the argument and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where it is most dependent part of the abscess, and where it opens; and let the perforation be in a long way through the core, and if the abscess is at the hand or at the finger, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all its parts equally, where there is no pus.
Here is the text translated into English:
"For those who are bleeding, treat them according to which limb is affected. And when abscesses are present and painful, if they hurt so much that you must leave the piercing until it has been fully digested, as we have said. For if you pierce before this, if you do not extend the body from its source of coming, and it is full of dirt; and perhaps hardens the lips and deepens it. And if there are abscesses where a large part of the body is pierced according to the width of the body, treat them accordingly. It is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small perforations; and in large ones, large perforations, and many slits according to the appearance of their size; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to stop up and cover, when they have become hard as a cloth, and are deadened, treat them in the same way as one does with pustules: and if there are such where they are split in three angles, and there are others that are covered like the skin of mirth, as abscesses of the neck; and if there are those where one makes a round incision, and other sizes and an appearance of being covered.
"And if there is a sudden fever due to the opening of a vein, treat it with cold water and quickly, and dip 1 drape in it, and place it over the troubled place many times. And if the fever persists, treat it with government and medicine, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is an internal fever, and the member is very nervous, you should put wet tents and drapes on it made of wine and oil; and if it is an external fever, and the member is tender, you should put wet drapes on it made of water and oil, or wine and oil that is cold, until the third day, as we have said; then wash off the abscess and clean and cure it, as it should be, until it is well."
And this is known everywhere in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how one should go before treating abscesses, and here is the paste.
abscesses
And this is known everywhere in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how one should go before treating abscesses, and here is the paste.
And this is known everywhere in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how one should go before treating abscesses, and here is the paste.
of the scrofula
Several times the abscess is at the neck, and it seizes the arteries, and it does not come to another part or the body, and it is cold, and it is infected with the color of the flesh. And each scrofula is properly inside its rib, just as the nodule and the abscess at the base; and the appearances of these scrofulae are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not want to obey health. So when you see that it has a good appearance in the chest, and it resembles the color of the body, and it is silent from both sides and does not move, and it is not deep; then it is necessary that you chop it from above, and scorch each part, and there are the two lips of the chest on either side, if you need them, just as we said in the base abscesses; and cut little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor is it too deep, so that the hand does not escape, and do not look too far forward, lest you cut what you should not.
If you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to sew it, then put vinegar in the wound, or some powders that stop the bleeding, and squeeze out the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and you begin to rot. And when the root of the scrofula is well-healed, if it does not hurt you to cut it at its base, but tie it with a strong double knot, and let it dangle by it; then dress the wound with dried wool dipped in unguent, then cleanse it.
If you cut the whole scrofula, then you should sew together the two lips of the wound, and close it now, and do not let there be any overflow because of the size of the scrofula. If it is necessary that you pull out the root of it, and pull hard, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulae that contain excess fluid, pierce where it opens; and pierce it in this way, and put there a plug of unguent, so that it corrupts what is held back from corruption; and when the wound is well-healed, then you cure it with unguent applied by touch, until it is healthy.
of squint
the throat
to those who have squint, it is necessary that the fender of the throat (epiglottis) be removed; and no aid should be sought from anyone because all the veins and the pulse of the disease are at the apogee in the mouth or in the throat or in .ij. mandres. When the disease is in the channel of the pulse, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so that the blockage that comes from the strangle does not happen.
It is fitting, then, when we want to split the epiglottis, that we do so with a split of iiij. circles or a small split through, between the iij. circles or by the quantity of the split in the cartilage;
and those who are suitable for the sectioning of the epiglottis that there is no cartilage, and the vessel are long of it.
And if the master is afraid, it is fitting that he extends the skin of the throat to its entirety, then split the cartilage as far as it comes to the larynx; and avoid the vessels of blood, because you will see nothing, and then split the cartilage as we have said.
and is shown by the section of the flux of the larynx that jumps out through the place that has been broken, and by the absence of voice.
and leave the wound open for a piece.
And when the hour is passed where one doubts strangulation, join together the .ii. lips of the wound as far as the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote healing, until it has healed.
Albucasis says that one should not do this as long as the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the deficiency leaves it. And then cut on the epiglottis so that the patient cannot die, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is preserved from death;
and so the senior doctor should leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in iii days or in iv days And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw; I saw a damsel take a knife, and put it in her throat, and ran to the forest by the porch;
And I was called to cure him, and I found him as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and I saw well that it had not cut a vein nor gone deeper than the throat, and the veins were running with blood through the wound.
I hurried, and sutured the wound, and cured it until it healed;
and the girl was only red in her cheeks, and returned to her normal state;
for if I may ask, why are you afraid of surgery on the epiglottis?
of the large throat
is called a "hernia of the throat", and is a great hernia in the color of a yellow, and is very common in women;
and it comes in two ways: by nature and by accident; for there is no device in nature.
And these accidents are according to .ij. manners, of which one is similar to fat coming from us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess coming from us from an artery. and he has fear, and does not come to operate fire only in that which is small, and tries and searches at all the intermission: if you recognize it as well as fat, and cannot do anything at all, if the cap, and as we cover ourselves, and try to cover all our heads, if there is any point; and search well everything, and cure it so that it is completely cured.
of the head
There are many ways to treat this condition, which I will describe in detail.
and it is necessary that I make the distinction between what we have and what is a result.
I say that the issue is fiery and hot, until the fever and chills have passed, and then it is completed; after which the fever and chill rest.
With the new food there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains .i. cure, which is his own sack and according to the color of the body, and begins also like a kernel, and becomes large;
and are according to their appearances, or fat, or moist, and most of their colors are as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the new food, that you test and question first all the instrument which is called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or the paste which follows.
And the way of the questioning of the abscesses of the new food is that you squeeze or more moist water that you find in the abscess, and turn your hands little by little, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the cure, then it should be according to the size of the abscess;
Then remove the intruder, and take care not to hurt yourself.
If the moisture runs quickly, that it be colored, so do with it as I have said of other abscesses;
and if after the intruder there comes no moisture, know that it is fat, so do it in a crossway, and take it between the fingers, and peel it lightly from each side, and guard the crotch where it lies that you may carry it sound with the nut;
and if you cannot bring it sound, take it in pieces so that nothing remains;
For if I don't wait, he comes back to us many times;
and if it takes a little time, and he doesn't grieve you, then employ some corrosive water powders on the wound, extract the wound, and put something soothing on an abscess, and treat with other remedies until it is well;
and if we give him a lot of money, then cut the .ij. lips of the wound, and treat with what causes swelling;
and if it is against him or another place, then hasten and employ the place of vitriole, and leave it there .ij. days or 1.i. days, until the wound is sore, and return to the copper where it is delayed;
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line:
And they are also like the needles used to pierce sorcery, and they are of yellow gold, or iron, or silver, and those that are black have been tested more for punching through the skin to encircle the hollows of fistula.
And they are of three sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the width of the opening.
The forms of the needles are of various sizes, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are also three quarters that have three forms each.
and if they have .iiii. corbiers, and are also of .iii. manners; and if they have .iji. corbiers, and one corbier only, and are of .iii. manners; and all these are necessary in their places.
The head of these two is sharp, and some of them cut only from one side, from which we scrape the nose, so that the vein or nerve is not damaged;
and these introucers are the alems inserted in many places, so that the patient does not lose his sight at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of  .iii. manners: great, small, and medium, as you see;
and do not use more than one fire at a time except in the case of a burning bed, like legs, arms, breasts, shoulders and similar parts;
and do not make any other instrument small, resembling to scurs of fists, according to this form, lest one should be burned up.
and do not put it on the part that heals with the help of veins, and arteries, or according to this great form:
and do not blow up the breasts of some men when they are inflamed, so that they seem like a woman's breasts;
and remain lame and swollen, and who will cure them, so it is fitting that according to this form of the line from B: until: g .: then peel the fat, and employ the wound with medicine of tar, then join together the 18 threads of the wound to stitch it, and heal it as long as it is healthy;
and let him swallow the clean water, and is softened by his greatness so as to be like women, if he does it with two threads above, with two similar cuts; so that one holds the other at the end of the one and of the other, so that the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, from the line B: up to the line G.: Then scorch the skin that is between the 17 lips, and remove the fat, and I will instruct you what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not completely made, so that the patient does not rest, or because of the loss of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton wet with corrosive ointment; and leave it until the remnant and fat have cured, then treat it until it is healthy.
the abscesses of the elbows
The scarred are handled from hard leprosy or there be ribs, and if there is moisture in them.
And those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B up to line G: And when all the bowels which are in the aposteme are voided, if employ the wound with cotton wool, and leave it up to the other day, then remove all the cotton, and cure with ointment until it is well.
And if the aposteme is like scrofula, so make it as we have said in the cutting of scrofula, and if the wound rents bowels, so apply the fire cautery as we have said before.
from the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the flesh above it is tightly stretched, many blisters and boils often form, as well as a pus-filled abscess and an infected wound.
and if one knows how to recognize it when it is the artery, then the blister will be long and fully formed. and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel pulling; and when it is the vein, if it seems to move away.
and it is madness to heat this apothocary, and most of all when it is dislocated at the shoulders and at the arms and where the neck and mouth are wet with other leers, and is very large. Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and that which is at the head also needs to be avoided, and in that which is inflamed with an artery, cut above the skin. long;
Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and that which is at the head also needs to be avoided, and in that which is inflamed with an artery, cut above the skin. long; then operate on the waist as one does, and carefully separate the artery from the veins, as much as it is uncovered;
then put an awl through it, and make it pierce up to the other side of the flesh, and strain the artery out of a double thread in iij leuers, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the iij arteries which are in the temples;
and then mark the place which is between the .ij. joints of an intruder as long as there is a bridge there for it, and loosen the aposteme;
and then arrange the cure that causes bowels to move, so that the ligature does not hurt; and then treat the wound with ointment coming from the wound, as long as it is healthy;
and if the ligature is the size of the vein, so that you have to hold it with your hand where you can get to the skin of the apotome; then pour the liquid out of the tube that you hold in your hand, and let it run, and there is .i. thread twice, so that you pull it from the other side; then bind the abscess, as I told you, or with a string of one of the two parts to the two heads of the thread;
and if you doubt that the string is not strong enough, then put another needle on all i. string of the whole abscess to the incision of the first needle, and pull out the strings in four lines;
then cut off the surplus until it comes out, then cut off the surplus of the string and leave what is left;
Then dip it in .i. wine and oil, then provide it with the cure of camphor and spices until it is well.
of abscesses of nerves
And also come in the artery and the vein, come abscesses to the nerves when they are sore, or by too much work, and similar things.
And this often comes to the shoulders and arms and in all of them or it has joints, and that is 1.i. grief abscesses, and its color seems the color of the flesh, and is in many dispositions without pain;
and when they are held in place, if the patient feels pain, and it is not fully healed, but let it continue;
and be quiet on all sides, and do not go forward or backward, nor above nor below, and the one who is in joints does not come together with iron: perhaps there will be a contracture;
and those who are at the head or at the forehead, dip the skin in the spatumil. If the apophet is small, if it has a nail, and copes it at its root;
and if it is large, if the sunburn has occurred, and then the skin is stripped off, then the bone is exposed and the wound is sewn up, and let the healing proceed until it is well.
large mouths hanging down No time has come to the belly and not in any other place the lulu, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" by appearance of mold, and is the subtle root, and the big tree; and there are small and very large ones;
and I saw. I. home who had .ij. or bellies that were more similar to mushrooms than any other thing, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had small roots, and they were split open, and ran moist.
I found these two: one weighing 16 ounces, and the other 2 pounds, 3 ounces. The work of this incision is such that you see that the patient is moistened, and the color of the arterioles is pale and moist with a fine root.
If the cut is deep with a wide knife, and may be in your presence, hold the fire cautery. For many times the wound will hemorrhage too much if left untreated, and so go to cauterize quickly.
And if you see the patient becoming weak and fearful of the fire incision, take a fine thread of flax, and tie the arteriole as we have said, and leave it for 2 days;
And then hold it back, and do not stop pulling out the thread until it has cut the arteriole, and feel for work through it; and if the roots are large, so take care to cauterize them by themselves for the belly, but you can well cauterize half of them,
and then cauterize so that it does not return; then heal the wound, and be careful not to cover the turd which is of foxy color and poor smell and of rancid milk.
For it is an abscess which has become inflamed, and I will come to the treatment of leprosy hereafter.
When the meat is firm
As the appearance of the meat comes out by fire cautery of wound or incision of syph, and is on the belly and there are some of the bouez, so as it had in other routes, or of sanc which cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of ventosity;
and if it is by the rupture of the skin and by the exit of the bile, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the heart, and it is a light thing without pain, and opening of various exits. And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then there are many things, and when you press it to its two sides so that it returns and then comes back again, and perhaps so that it is tight and expands greatly at the entrance to the bath and for great work.
And if it is by moisture, then it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not hold back; and if it is by blood, then open it according to a quantity.
And if it is by wind, then it is hot to the touch, and the work is that you observe its appearance, which is for blood from an artery, or vein, or wind. If you should leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you, with the use of the paste for abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the boil, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to comb his beard, and be stretched out completely on his side, then sign around all the body. then he orders him to go slowly between your hands, then he goes into the place that you have signed with all the body, then is half of the abscess above all the long hook.
then spread half of the abscess onto the thread, and with your index finger, press the intestine; if you find yourself caught on the thread, then release it, and press the intestine away from the navel;
and if you find the boil, if it takes hold of the hair, and cut off its excess.
and if the artery is against it, or the vein, if you go hard inside, then return to your work and take 15 needles, and bind them with 15 threads, and bind the 15 needles around what you have done so that you made pierce;
then stretch the abscess in 3 inches above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the hole open until it putsrefies, and cut off the dead part by itself; or you cut when it is soft and putrid, then treat it with what is right, and shave the abscess as we have said;
or you cut when it is soft and putrid, then treat it with what is right, and shave the abscess as we have said; And take out the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the place of what it touches, and bind it up.
and the gangrene
We have spoken in the division of the appearances of gangrene, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should cure it with iron; and we say that gangrene begins in the limb or where it is, and requires great care in its treatment, and the old man says that when gangrene is in a good place, or can be cut as gangrene that is in milk, and in cuices, and in similar places, it should all be cut off when it is in an onset; and when it is large and old, you should not approach it, for I have never healed any before me.
And the ovraiges, when they are in a place where they can be cut, as we have said, is that you never purge any black blood; then make it well, if it has manifest repletion, then afaited the blood.i. good place for doing the ovraige; then pour on the blood or gangrene, and shave it all over, and the bone too, leaving nothing; and let the blood run freely, and press hard with your hand or anything, and if it is opposed to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize as long as the blood is staunched; then cure it with other cures until it is well.
For hyposia For dropsy Raise the patient straight up on your hands, and the ministers press his belly at the lower part of the body, then take the spatulum with thorns according to this form: And be it cut from both sides. point, and moreover never so deep that it can come up to the intestine when it is put in, and cannot be hurt; and
and then look if the dropsy is caught up towards the intestines: it is necessary that you cut through both sides. two right down on the knuckles; and if the dropsy is due to the liver disease, so is your cut at the left of the bouge 2 three; and if it is due to the mucus, so it is at the right, and it is only necessary that the patient lie down on the cut where the superfluities do not run to the weak one; then
Here is the translation of the text:
Then pour out half or one-third of the medicine because if you empty more than that at that time, perhaps the patient will die from the loss of his spirit due to the weapon, or he will faint, or approach death;
But pour out the medicine according to its virtue and according to what the dispositions of the patient's pulse indicate, then treat the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the degree that the wound closes which is on the medicine, about which I spoke, so you pierce according to this way; then restart the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering from that, and treat with a little quantity of water:
Do not do anything today, and protect yourself from the wind as little as possible until there is some rain. And if you have any doubts about the patient, and you leave some water on him, let it be dried by the sun or heat or bath, and let him drink a bit of wine; and let medicines that dry things be used until he is well, and cauterize his stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the water as I have said before.
of the stoppering of the urethra No child is born with a foreskin, or if it has one, it is small, or is not in its place. If it should come to pass that there is no piercing of the foreskin at all: then make a very thin tube from skin, and fasten it on, and leave it there for three or four days; when it wishes to urinate, take off the tube, let the urine flow out, and then put it back on. And perhaps he will not notice anything, because the urine that comes forth is not kept by his foreskin. Those whose foreskin is small should use a very thin tube of skin, as we have said before, if it should come to pass that there is no piercing of the foreskin at all: then make a very thin tube from skin, and fasten it on, and leave it there for three or four days; when it wishes to urinate, take off the tube, let the urine flow out, and then put it back on. And perhaps he will not notice anything, because the urine that comes forth is not kept by his foreskin.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et li maniere de l'ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d'une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s'il avient, si l'estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu'il soit sanez. And many times come the wind in the vagina, and it is a appearance of bad smell; and there are evil and not evil ones; so that you take them at .i. oncine subtle, and clean them and all, then put cotton wet with unguent Egyptian in anointing; then cure with unguent diafinicon as long as he is sane. And if the wind is evil, of color and stinking, it is necessary that you bring to it fire. When you have cleansed it, and the wind is in the vagina, and there is part inside the hair and part outside, it is necessary that you take out the wind that is inside first; and when he has been closed, if he cure himself away. For when you cure it all together, if it is not assured the root of the vagina that it does not get infected, and comes blackness and corruption in its la verge and where coion; it is necessary that you save all what is black and corrupted, then put on the plaster of honey and flour which is made from the skin of pomegranates and times, then cure him with other cures as long as he is sane.
Et s'il vient un mal de sang, alors administrer le cautère lunaire selon cette forme: les cautères ainsi aident aux neuf dispositions ensemble: c'est à dire, au mal de sang, et à la corruption; et si la tête du pénis est corrompue et rétrécie, alors il convient que tu fasses bouillir ou conduites du lard de porc, et pisses le patient; et quand la pelure s'enroule autour de la tête du pénis qui arrive à ceux qui n'ont jamais été circoncis, ou il y a une plaie ou un abcès, alors il convient donc que tu l'escorches avec un instrument en forme de cheveu, tant que les ligaments soient desserrés et que le pénis soit libéré de tous les côtés;
And if it is a great thing to discuss this, then you should scrape it with a spatum at the tip of the penis and the skin; then untie firmly between nine and ten, and put a thin linen cloth wet in cold water, so that it does not burn again.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not different from other wounds; however, when we perform this operation out of our own will and especially on children, it is necessary that we do it in the best way possible and with the least effort for salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their laws; we have only this to go by, which is our experience.
For I have wanted the greatest part of the masters and the most esteemed who made circumcision in the middle of the leg, and with force, and with all newness; if one did not cut off that which was above, perhaps he would not break that which was below.
Or if it is covered over again, and the pain is double, and the purification which comes from the middle of the leg is not sure; and in the purification of the nail, perhaps the iron has escaped, and damages the work, and often there is no need for purification, and I have wanted it.
On the Washings which are made on all the body I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut as well above as below.
For when you squeeze your hand, cut it evenly all around; but the thread must be well wrapped around the skin; and the way of the first work is that you make the child think, if he hears, that you do not make him tie the thread tightly around the bone, and then let it rest in all ways that you can; and and then put your hand on the bone straight, and point the forces between your hands or your toes that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then blow your hand on the shaft and breathe or blow, and turn it upside down as far as the head of the shaft is; then wash it well with the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie it with another liien; and then hold it between the 2 liiens, then move the keur gently and turn the top of the shaft;
and then put your hand on the bone straight, and point the forces between your hands or your toes that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then blow your hand on the shaft and breathe or blow, and turn it upside down as far as the head of the shaft is; then wash it well with the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie it with another liien; and then hold it between the 2 liiens, then move the keur gently and turn the top of the shaft; then let the blood run little by little, for it is the blood; and put powder on it and on the powder 1.drapeil coated with a little flour of oven dried rosewater, confited with oil of roses and fresh garlic, and leave it there until the next day, and cure it again with another cure as long as it is healthy.
The form of the force for cleaning if this is: the two shoulders be soft and be cut, and be the shoulders also large as to the main one evenly.
The error of the purification if this is when the cure within escapes through incision; therefore, you must extend it to your fingernail so that the leach makes an abscess; and make equal, and you do not keep him in your nail, but hold him with clamps, and then make equal.
And if he pass three days, and that which is on the stalk is inflamed, so you leave the leach until it has calmed, and you burn it lightly; if you can move it, and keep back from the part of the stalk, it will not harm him.
Cure therefore the powder of hard things wound with powder, which we have said is a powder tratior, and if you cope too much cure, and it goes to the top, it will not harm him; cure him therefore as we have said until he is well.
To retain urine
to retain urine is to be affected by stone, frozen blood, bowels, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the division;
and if the urine does not pass, and you see the retention because of a stone in the bladder or at the neck, so that the patient is bent on his knees; and let them place their feet on their back, and extend their abdomen from above their back, and restrain the patient to lie down as much as he can; and then force the neck of the bladder up to express the stone above, so that the urine passes out;
and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, so that you administer extraction with all the instruments called 'syringues', which has this form: and let it be of fine lightweight silver, like the feathers of a swallow; and let the cane be of a length of a palm and a half, and let it be lightweight at the top.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take .i. a double thread, and tie at the end .i. a little wool or cotton, and bottle the end of the thread into the syringe; and cut off the surplus of the wool and bottle it up to the end of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit down on .i. a chair, and raise the bladder and penis with oil moistened with olive oil and water.
Then lightly bottle the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then double the penis over towards the scrotum; then bottle the syringe up to before the bladder, and let the urine come out in front of the hollow thing, and if this is not done according to this order but is done so that where you are taking it goes twisted or not; then the thread is all tied up with the little wool, and the urine follows the wool, and it is taken out, and the urine runs.
And start again with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and make the patient sit down.
For diseases of the bladder:
When scorbut comes to the bladder, or pus is collected there, and you see water and medicine being distilled there, then do this with all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and it is like this:
It is closed, and if it is .iij. pertuse: .ij. from one part, and .i. from the other, as you see; and let the hair grow by which the medicine drops so that it stops well the vein without addition, if one can draw out the moisture, and throw when it is necessary.
And when you see the medicine go into the bladder, put the tip of the syringe in the moisture, and draw while carrying it along; if you draw the moisture to the syringe, and then throw it strongly forward; if it will enter into the moistures and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the form of the subtle clepsydra with which one distills the bladder: if it is like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;
And it is of silver or iron, and this head is higher up; and desoz in .i. breast or the liens chiet; then take a bladder from a sheep and put the moisture on which you wish to distil the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts formed by a good double thread, and heat .i. cup of that moisture over the fire; then bottle the head with the distiller in the pole, and strain your hand over the bladder all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that that moisture has come to the bladder;
from the stone
We have described in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction together medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone broken into raindrops, and all the signs, and why one should work in stone; and in the bladder, and in the verge; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is in the bladder often comes out with children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtility; and it opens it, and grates the patient's penis, and it does so many times, and then it becomes red; and because of so many jumps the foundations are destroyed; and the recovery of children is light until they are 2.iii. years old, and it is very heavy in the elderly, and it is moderate in those who are between youthful and elderly; and the cure is lighter for those who have great stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, if one first purifies the patient by enema, in order to remove all the matter that is in the intestines. For it does not often seek the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and move him up and down until the stone comes out completely from the bladder's top; then make it sit between your hands, and his legs are dislocated, so that the bladder is all facing downward; then examine and touch it from behind.
Then if you feel the stone in space, now quickly cut it from the bladder' s top; and if she doesn't slip at the touch of all, moisten your index with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young, and press down on its foundation, and examine the stone, and when you feel it with your thumb, if it's at the neck of the bladder; then press up with your thumb, and bottle it at the end where you felt the cut.
And command the minister to squeeze the bladder by hand, and he commands that he extends to his right hand the coccyx up, and with his left hand oste the skin which is over the coccyx in the part where one makes the waist; then i pour the sputum copping, of which this is the form:
And make between what is between the coccyx and the fundament, not in the middle but at the cost of the left side; and let it be straight on the stone, and your two be together or at the fundament, and the waist go over so that it be wide from one side, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big.
For adventure the press so that it does not work; and know that there is a part of stone or it has angles, and edges: if it is smooth to come out; and if a part is souzy, similar to a jewel, and round, whose issue is light.
So that the cell where there are angles and edges, make the size larger; and if it does not come out, then you must squeeze it on the claws which are also like a file at the tip, so that it comes out without cutting; or you pour upon li.i. subtle corbé at the tip; and if you cannot grasp it thus, then l’estrainche of vitriole;
and if it is more than one stone, first bottle the largest at the neck of the bladder, then chop above, and then cut deeper, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are any. And if it is very large, so that it comes out all at once, and causes great pain, then make a larger wound; for two things happen to the patient: he dies, or his urine comes out all at once because the bladder cannot hold it; but nevertheless you should try to extract it whole, or in pieces with pliers, as long as you are doing this.
and when you have finished your work, rub the wound with ointment and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put on top 12 pieces of wet cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to calm the abscess; then remove the patient's bandage by the third day.
And when you remove the bandage, make sure to clean well with oil and water; then apply the ointment of dyafinicon and basilicon until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses come into the wound and corrosions of blood in the bladder, and if this urine is retained in some way so that it does not flow out with the urine: then put your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and make it run.
Then raise the wound of water and ash and tar, and aid it in all ways that you can, as long as it is healthy; and it is necessary that you tie the two legs together, and collect the medicines at the site.
If the stone is small, and it is located in the bladder, and cannot pass, and you cut it many times as I have said above, then you must excuse yourself from cutting because of this treatment. I have already experienced this way.
Take .ii. foreth of iron according to this form, and be inserted at .iii. angles, one in .i.
then take 1.i. file and bind it about the root of the penis at the stone, so that it cannot come back to the bladder; then insert the file into the penis lightly, until it comes to the stone; and turn the file in your hand a little at a time, until you can pierce the stone; if it comes out, then press your hand against it, so that it does not come out of the stone. If it is broken, and jumps out with the urine, and is healed from the pain;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that harm him, then tie 1.i. string on the stone and another over, then make the staff between the two bones, then pull it hard, and as soon as the bone comes free, and clear the frozen blood that is in the wound; and heal until he is well.
from women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s'il aviant quelque fois, si est le cure grief, et est défendu pour 3 choses : la première est que par aventure la femme est vierge ; et la seconde est c'on ne peut trouver femme bien sachant qui se descuevre aux miroirs, même s'elle est mariée.
Et la troisième manière est que par aventure on ne peut trouver femme bien sachant en cet art des mains ; et la quatrième manière est que le pierre de la femme si est plus ém parfait que le pierre de l'homme, pour lequel il convient faire plus profonde taille, et grande peur y a.
And if necessity demands it to a woman, if it is necessary that you press a mare well knowing, and put the needle on, and if you don't trueve, not even if she is a subtle cast-mate; and present a ball well saige in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and commands her to make the mare that you command from the inquisition of the stone;
And look well if this woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to put his finger or foundation and seek the stone; and if she trueves, then bind her finger, and reminds her that she put her finger or with the disease, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder formed.
If she trueves, then it is necessary that she moves her finger from the entrance of the bladder until its root, so that it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone in the middle part where it is moved, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your finger above or below the stone, and make a small cut at first.
Then pour on the oil in the thigh, if you feel the stone; and know that there are many kinds of stones: it is small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and some have rain. If you know their similarities then you will know the outcome.
And if he doesn't come to you, let him put the vitriolic broie on his wound and keep it for an hour until his wound is stained; then go back to your work while the stone is far away, and have the tools I told you about in the extraction of the stone so that they can help you in your work.
And if he doesn't come to you, and it is an artery that has been cut, put the powder on the wound and extract it with twine and ribbon, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and don't extract it, except by chance the patient dies; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided, and the limb can be moved, then return to your work, as long as the stone is far away.
of hernial pain
Ramie water is not another thing than gathered white mold or yeast, which is the cure for the diseases of the joints, that the egg contains; and is called "yeast", and never properly in the egg's skin if it is considered that this is .i. another egg; and this is the meat of the joint between the white yeast that we have said; and that does not happen to be a hole.
And the generation of this ramie water is of weakness so that it comes to the joints, and this material is spread.
And it never comes from impact on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it is declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or white water, and this happens more;
and these are the signs of this assembly, because if it is or white yeast that we have said, it is the reons of the aposteme, i.e. a little long if it resembles the shape of an egg, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture all over it.
And if there is moisture in the own cloth, then are the abscesses with a part of the egg, and for this it is thought that it is another egg.
and if the moisture is between the leather of the testicles and the white fat, then he feels it well; so that when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all the inner member because its form is as follows: According to this, who comes after the member, judge who is inside.
According to this, who comes after the member, judge who is inside. And when we treat it with fire, if it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the repletion of his body; then let him lie on his back, on a high thing, and cover him with drapelets;
Then sit on your left side, and command the attendant to sit on your right, and extend the staff to one of the ten ribs on the back of the cow.
Then take the spit and skin the cow's legs among them all the way to the knuckle of the hand, and make your cut straight while skinning the leg until you reach the white flesh, and peel it carefully according to the thumb.
Then pierce the flesh plain of water at one inch wide and large hole, and draw out all the water, then put your hands on it, and draw up the water upstream; and don't touch the leg's meat, but peel it alone piece by piece carefully so that you don't draw blood; skin it all or separately by pieces one way or another, so that if you don't peel it well enough, the water will come back.
And if the flesh jumps away from your work, then you must reset it in its place when you have finished working on the skin; and then join the ten legs of the cow together at a seam, and wash it just like the other wounds until it is healthy again.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you lay down the chains that are suspenders, in doubt of the decay of blood; then take the egg out from all the suspenders, and extract it, and treat it as we have said.
And if the water is assembled in two parts together, knowing that these are two branches; then take the other part as you did with the first one, evenly, and wash the blood, and put in the other wound wet with oil of roses;
and put elsewhere another piece of wool wet with wine and oil, and put on the two eggs, and put over the double blankets, and lay it up all along this form:
Then take 2 blankets, and fill them with wool according to this appearance, and are sewn together in the neck of the pants, and one of the two heads rests on the foundation up to the back, and the other on the part of the grip; and the other two heads rest on the 2 arms, and all is assembled in the loop of the trousers;
and no one time is this medicine of the ring of fire in place of a iron saw, and it is that you press .i. ring fire fine, and cope the leather of the loins, and be heated as we said, so that the white remedy which contains the water is uncovered;
if you take the fire ring according to this form, and pierce that remedy of one side, and scorch it with that fine fire ring:
And the leather cover in all ways that you can, until you have removed everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and keep guarded from the damage of blood, and do as follows for the work of a saw:
and if anything contrary to you does not exist, or incising an abscess or other pain, so treat what contradicts you, according to what is said before.
And if the sick man is afraid, and does not want to wait for this work because of its horrible appearance, so as to pierce it, as I told you, then it is necessary that when you are certain by the meanings that we have said that the liquid is there,
if you sit the sick man on .i. a high seat; then pierce the abscess in the part of the nose to the whole spittle broad, and place the perforation of the long neck; and make the pores large so that all the water runs out.
then put cotton in the place, bind it, and let the rest of the water run out, then treat it until the wound is healed;
and if the bleach cloth does not let the water run out in the mouth of the wound, then you should put in it a pen or an instrument that collects the water from the drops, so that its shape is as before; and widen 1/4 the wound, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after 5-7 days or so, and when it is gathered as before, and thus the sick man spends his days.
of the appendix
That in this chapter with fear I see many things, so that it seems to me better to leave it.
and I will tell you the work and the appearance of the appendix.
I say then that many appendices come from the navel, and most often from the intestines; and it is by chance.
This is the translation of the text:
and the color of the abscess according to the color of the flesh; and does not try for pain, and is an abscess of grief;
and by chance is an abscess of fearful and painful pain, and of flux of color, and never comes out of an artery, or swelling of a vein.
As for coming out of an artery, if it is by the position of the abscess that you press with your fingers; and it is not necessary for you to touch him.
Those who are made with the inflammation of a vein are known by its position to the expression of the touch of both hands.
and can do well with the size on this appearance, and on the other characters; and is that you make a deal with the king of coins, then put on top of it, and the trail clear white salt, and deliver the suspension from all sides of the top.
If the egg is already hard with these newly hatched chicks, then it is necessary that you take the egg, and crack it open.
If it is in the air, or inside the shell, then you must deliver all that is within, and break it open carefully.
And if the head of the chick is behind, then you must break it open completely, and take out the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is finished, employ wool soaked in oil and wine to clean the wound, and then apply other remedies until it is healed.
of the apostume of the testicles
This is an account of an apostume wrapped in a wrapping resembling .i. a bun, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans with pain when he goes;
and the treatment for this disease is very cautious as described above,
and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the old made.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on .i. a soft bed, then pour the poultice over the disease at your two sides, and all the vessel which are near to the penis, and wet them with the poultice, and extend them formly;
then cut with the spatula the vessels in a large traver place where they are uncovered, until
and then peel off each part, as we said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then I stick an needle or it has .i. thread double, and I tie it to the first place where the vein has come out, and I tie it quickly to the other head; then cut off mid-way, correctly according to the length of the body, and remove the rotten moisture;
then treat the wound as you would any other or if one of the joints begins to rot, so that no vessel is infected by it;
For by this no evil comes, and all the vassals come alive, so it is necessary to draw out the semen from all the vassals. So that the horse does not lose its strength by incising the vassals, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
of the routure of the syfac The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and this rupture is where the syrup, or from its extension, and come these .ij. ways of moisture of causes: or percussion, or leap, or bleating, or removal of grief made, and by similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension of syrup, if it happens that there is a little and a little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscess is even up to the end, so that the syrup presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the section of syrup, that it brings about sudden pain, and the abscess appears diverse, overlying the skin, and this is for the exit of the intestine and the body at the end of the syrup.
And never let the bowels be drawn with the intestine, and it is kept in, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is squeezed.
In these treatments of iron and fear, so that it must be avoided.
And the method of this treatment is that you command the patient to keep the intestine in his hand within the wound if he can bear it; then take a cloth and wrap it around his neck between your hands, and gently tie the bows;
Then let the cur be placed above, and cut off all the skin of the legs from the long ones; Then pour in the liquid into the belly of the dog according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that it can be poured out easily;
Then peel off the skin of the legs completely until the flesh is white all around;
Then pour in the liquid with your middle finger according to what has been peeled off the leg, according to where the flesh is white that is next to the skin, and between the second;
and remove what is behind the ear, and put the scalpel between the second and third fingers; and when moved in the hand toward the right knee, put the white scalpel higher up on your left hand, and move the ear toward all the scalpel around the waist. and command the assistant to extend the ear above, and remove what is behind the ligature;
and ask your two assistants if there is any hard or white scalpel-like substance wrapped around the intestine, and if you do not find anything, pour it into the abdomen;
then take a needle or thread made of thick wire, and pull it through the back side of the scalpel, which is behind the tendon of the ankle; then cut the threads that appear from the thread, until there are three; And put them together one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind them tightly with a strong knot of two parts. And wrap the heads of the cords, and tie them together with two parts so that no vessels that feed them can enter their ears, where the abscess has not come out. and place the strong thread alongside the first long thread of two parts, and after these two threads leave a loop of the same size as one of the threads;
and after all the rest according to the round of the arm that the horse carries; and wrap it around the part that is over the skin of the arms, so that it does not move, and the bow, as we have said before;
Then prepare the wool with oil, and put it on the wounds, and I will prepare the bond that we have said. And never is cauterized with fire the white part of the flesh that we have said, after incision, by doubt of decay of blood.
For this often happens, and leaves the bond as long as it seeps through itself; and if it delays in seeping, let hot water be poured on that which we have said, until it seeps.
then treat the wound with other remedies, until it is completely healed.
Of hernia of the abdomen
In this recipe I have never seen anyone who attempted to use fire for treatment.
And the ancient ones said that it is made in this way like the ramose thing which is joined together, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after cutting on the outside lightly on the oss;
Then cover it well, and treat the abscess of him who has operated, until the vessels bleed; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
No time does come rupture in the entrails, if it is as we have said, and open them up; and do not let any of the intestines drop out, and if some do drop out, it is little, and repair every hour;
and anyway if he stays too long in this place, so the wound or the pus believes, as far as the intestines drop out;
and this happens because of the extension of the pus that is in the entrails, if it is as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and inflated and opens up;
and the cure if it is by cautery, as we have said before; and never is cured by iron in this way:
and it is that the patient lies still on his back between your hands, then spread the place of the rupture with a width of .ii. inches.
and then remove the scar that is under the skin so as not to tear it, and then take a thread and put it on the place that appears of the scar;
and then press well to the belly, and sew the .ij. inches that appear of the scar on top of the thread, and sew both;
and then remove the thread, and do not cover the scar or extend the thread any further, as I told you in the cure of the bile of the intestines;
and then heal by the healing of wounds. And when you sew the thread, if the wound is healed and healthy.
The healing is necessary, and has no appearance in the cut, and the cauterization is damp in that place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the leather of the joints
Many times the leather of the joints becomes soft in certain people, because the charcoal that is contained within them is softened, and it can be seen; and it is a craft, when you cure it, to make the bad go up on its back, and the leather that is softened on the natural leather; then assemble the  .ij. lips at one stitch, and cut out the superfluity of the leather that is softened at 1.3 stitches or 2.3 stitches firmly; then sew between the stitches, and the cure as with the other wounds, until it is healed, and tie the thread.
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
"With fire cauterization, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base..."
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
"With fire cauterization, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base..."The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
of the poison
Tenting is a poison that is applied to the natural part, until it is too ugly to see; and no woman has ever had as much skill in applying it as a master, and it is the cure. You should take care to burn off the excess of the poison on your hand or foot, and scrape it lightly; and do not cut it completely off, for there will be blood, then cure it with another cure until it heals; and with another tooth that comes out at the mouth of the womb, and use it, and perhaps it will spring forth, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and therefore they called it the ancient "cow disease". If you should scrape it, as we have said in the case of poisoning, and cure it until it is well.
of the errant
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as  .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. Dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, Sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez. Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancarit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.
of hemorrhoids
Here is the translation of the text:
Here is the translation of the text:
Here is the translation of the text:
of childbirth
At birth the child is in the mother's womb and you can see her pressing down; then the baby comes out quickly; so know that this birth is according to nature, and the delivery is through the head, and the second after it; and when you see these signs, then gently press her belly so that the baby comes out soon; for when it descends on her head, the second follows it, and the marriage is purified with good purification; and what happens otherwise does not happen naturally. For he sometimes comes on his feet, and comes on his neck or shoulders, and his hands, or comes on his belly, or often, and is turned by accident on his throat, and by other bad shapes; therefore it is necessary for the bailiff to be wise and skilled in these things, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes how he should be helped.
If the baby comes out through the head by its own nature, and the woman gives birth with a cry, and the virtue of her is weak, then let them sit on a saddle, or let the women support her; and pour oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then pour the bailiff between her two feet the little sputum from which this shape comes. And split the second, and wrap her finger up to where the moisture is flowing; and pinch the belly of the woman as much as the moisture comes out quickly; and if it does not come out, then let the woman sit on a saddle or let the women support her; and pour oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then pour the bailiff between her two feet the little sputum from which this shape comes. And now, if the baby comes out through the head by its own nature, and the woman gives birth with a cry, and the virtue of hers is weak, so let them sit on a saddle, or let the women support her; and pour oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then pour the bailiff between her two feet the little sputum from which this shape comes. If the hands come out on their own, then you must gently pinch them; and if they cannot come out, then put the woman on a chair, and let her raise her legs; then turn over the chair on the ground, and grasp her, so that she does not stand up; and if the hands cannot come out, and the baby dies, then wrap the hands with the knife that is here prepared, and pull out the child, and cut it even.
of the birth of a child on its feet When the child comes down to the ground, then it is necessary to raise him up. and then turn him over and over again until he is even.
and then massage.
And if he jumps just as high as his legs, then instruct him to grip it tightly, and the leg will tremble from the pressure. If you jump, may God help you.
And if he doesn't jump as we have said, if the turn is little by little, as much as it is according to natural form. For then he becomes light,
And if he does not come as we have said, then take musk of alder, and oil of sesame, and gum boiled down, and grind it all together in .i. mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and out this ointment, then let her sit in warm water until her flesh is soft;
and when she is moistened enough, let her make a chain of myrrh, and put it on, and leave it for an hour; Then make her sit on .i. a seat, then make her sneeze and squeeze her throat and nose, and press her stomach lightly, for the child will come out now. of the baby's coming out between her legs When the baby comes in this way, if I put my hand on its bottom little by little;
of the exit of the child who comes wide one hand during It is necessary to devise bringing back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, let the woman get up and go;
if she cannot walk, let her sit on a bed, and make her stretch her legs out straight;
then arrange the muscle massager that I have described;
and if she does not conceive, then put her on a kind of seat, and then study to bring the hand back; and make the child according to natural form, and let her shake, and command that she sweat as long as the child is conceived.
of the issue of the child on his neck, and has spread his hands, and his face turned toward his mother's back then bring the hand closer to him, then turn it gently and lightly; and he makes it go round and round, and the hand becomes light;
and when it is even, if he puts on the natural muscled skin of ewe and oil, as we have said, then he orders that she moves little by little;
and when you have done this, if the fire is set on .i. seat, and he orders that she strains; and the fire is shaken. of this same manner to all the second part
of this same manner to all the second part and when it comes in this same manner to all the second part, if you cut off the second finger, as long as the moisture is empty;
and if he falls face down and head first, so that the shield breaks from his body, let it not be held back, and he dies.
then put the child inside, as far as you have placed it as it should be, and order the woman not to move at all:
of the exit of the twins. It is known that good things are often born, but never born once; or twice, and this is not a strange thing, nor does it often happen. Two are a strange thing, and do not live if they are few;
I know that when they are multiplied, and are devised by the wise physician who is hidden, who is in the heart;
and never born naturally as all of us do, as we have said.
And if there is a grumbling, as we have said before, and the ball is subtle, and quickly and lightly do what she does. and make it so that it is worth more to save. of many children
of many children No one is born with a degree in medicine. I.e., either one or two or three or four or five or six or seven children, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorieous,
and he knows that the ball is able to do all of this, because, by chance, similar things happen; if it is done according to what should be done.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman whose child has died or her womb is empty, as I said in the division, and if it does not work, and you are forced to use fire; If you know that her wife is of sound health, and has no accident where she might die;
If her back is stooped and her shoulders are hunched, and her legs are raised;
and the minister treat her of .ij. parts, so that she may be treated at the end of the child's pregnancy;
and then rub the mouth of the woman with oil mixed with musk and castor oil and flax seed, and then anoint her hands with these oils and these muskils; Then put them in the jar lightly, then wants i. e. the wine or she puts the onions that are suitable for this,
and take care so that he is not equipped properly so that it hangs down on his head; put the onions in his eyes or in his throat or in his mouth or in his palate or near his teeth or near his sides,
and when it hangs down on his feet, he puts it or pinches it and breaks it at the sides;
and it is necessary that he blacken the ash with his right hand, and put the claw between his two left hands, and lightly hold the ash, and place the ash in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
and then place between another ash, or the joint is there as you need, so that the extractions are even;
and then extend evenly from one side to the other, so that they move out, and the ash teeth are held in place, as it is shown in this form:
And if a part remains, if he applies oil to some of his joints, and pours it on that part, and draws out the other part;
and if there remains no part, if he sets this oncine or higher up, and does so until it comes out all at once.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back by the tightness, then cover him with a cloth, until it comes out completely;
Then wrap the bandage around the joint of the foot or ankle, in this way you must do the same on the other hand, and at .ij. feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or its hair is tightly gathered together, then you must push the spine-like sperm between your two hands and draw it out, pulling the sharp head out; or you put on the instrument that is called "almidah", from which it takes its shape with the instruments or paste that comes after this one;
and so it will become stronger by nature itself; then pull out the bones with pliers,
and then the head should be cut off and pulled out by force, if it is still alive, so that the moisture which is inside comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces with a knife so that you can get at it;
and if it inflames in the belly or seizes the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture flows.
and if it seizes his feet, then the traction is light, and we bring it to the mouth of the mare, which is light.
and if it seizes in the belly or in the breast, then you must hold it with the right hand wrapped around the left; and pierce the belly or the breast, until the moisture that is running;
and if any other bone is broken, and the shoulder remains immobile, if he puts his hand on a horse's back completely at the base of the palm, and follows the horse to its mouth; then pour one drop into each eye, and follow it with another drop;
and if the horse's mouth tightens due to a cold sweat that comes to it, so it does not work; is dry and cold. and the patient is treated with plasters, and cut in water and wet with healing substances.
And if it is on its back, and you put it down flat, then treat it as we have said with the live child;
and if one has no power, then let the trayer work piece by piece, and leave nothing of the second;
And when you have done this, bring the one who has said what we have said in the appendix to come to the mare's udder.
and if the blood flow comes, then it is restrained with water and brought to others treatments.
And I saw a woman whose belly had been opened and the fetus was killed, then she was cured. Another was killed on her, and she was cured from that too. After a long time, the appendix became swollen and started to hurt, and it began to cause great pain.
I was called to treat it, and I thought long, and I could not close the wound.
I put on plaster with great attraction, and in it I placed a bone, and after a few days another. I marveled much, for this belly has no bones.
I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I wanted to heal the wound, with my bare hands, until the woman was better. and waited for the woman a long time, and it was slightly warm at her place;
and I remembered this chapter only because once, when the master tried an unfamiliar thing, he knew how to help.
to bring back the wife to her place
And this is the first line of the text: Nevertheless, the shape of the pressor should be thinner than that of the restrictor, and it can be made from ebony or boxwood;
And its handle should be 12 inches long, with two fingers' breadth wide at the top and a palm and a half in width; And the two joints of this very same fust should be closed on themselves with a length of half a palm or one more;
and these two supports are pressed into the mouth of the mare to open when they turn .ij. horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made from ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of the claws; and has .ij. supports, as you see, from a long palm, and .ij. two in width;
and when you see the mare open to all the instruments, so that the woman lies on the 1. bed, legs spread and feet hanging down, and then pour in the 17 ingredients together into a jar, and hold the handle of the instrument away from his crotch; and then move your hand around the whole instrument, as you did with the nails evenly, according to the quantity that you judge to open the mouth of the jar, until the bail moves in the desired way.
This instrument is completely mounted, and its parts are multiplied for its appearances; and when you see that the parts are arranged, then the work is faster, and higher for its quantity.
If I don't use this instrument because you haven't arranged it, it isn't excusable due to its necessity.
When the second is held back from childbirth, you must command the disease that she retain her pillow, and then let it be shaken by condition, and hold your hands to her mouth and nose; and if it jumps because of this, then good.
if it does not, then take it, and make a pestle or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, if as calamus, rugositas, aniseed, chamomile, cassialine, and centaury;
all of these herbs, or any of them, are cooked or put in water on the fire; then put an awl or pestle in the pot, and another in the mouth of the mare,
and the tinea as long as the vapours come into the marrow; then make it shake, as we have said. If the second is delayed too much. And if after this cure it does not heal, and is not well, command to the woman that she dips her left hand in oil of sage or in muskeg of alpine [mushroom] and then pour it over himself.
and want the second one; and when she has found it, if she grasps it and extends it little by little properly, so that the marrow does not break at the extraction; but it is necessary to move lightly from side to side, and then draw back; if it comes and then dislocates itself.
And if the mouth of the wound is small and narrow, we have spoken of the cure of shaking, and of vaporizing herbs;
and if it is not from all that we have said, be careful that you do not go astray when drawing back;
but it is necessary that the one who is at the mouth of the wound should bind it to the cunt of the woman, then wash with four-fold ointment;
If the patient perspires and his temperature rises, yet when he gets sick, there is a bad smell from the stomach and head that hurts the sick person.
If it is appropriate to do fume-baths suitable for this: no one has ever experienced fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument that one uses to fume the woman at the retention of the flowers and the secondine is this:
And it is like a dog's head, and one puts the top of the head in the form, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
and let the fumigations on the coals, and the tinea until it is spent, and begin another.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who have not yet had their foundations pierced, but there is a subtle and delicate remedy for them. If, therefore, at the bath it is necessary that he who pierces should pierce him with his finger, and does not pierce him with a sharp instrument, and guards against touching the spot where he should pierce,
And then dip it in wine and oil; then the cure for wound care until he is well.
And if you doubt that it will not mend, then put a splint on it and let it be moving, and have it set by the time it starts to move in rooms.
And there is no time for sudden healing of a wound or an abscess; if it comes to cover suddenly: if it is treated, as we have said above, with the splint.
of the fistula from the foundation Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodations, and growier than those which come from the fundament depart, or in the space of the 21 parts,
If there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodation is old, if it is opened, and again moistened with a white or subtle powder, or
and these fistulas never persist; and they are known by the person who has an emission or a wind when the patient makes an emission, and sometimes towards an arrow.
And if there are fistulas that pierce only to the bladder, and only halfway up the shaft; and they reach only halfway up the thigh, and only a little way into the crotch.
And so know how to recognize the fistula penetrating to the fundament, and not penetrating: and that you stick your second finger or foundation, and stick a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if there is tortuosity, if you stick a little string or hair of a horse, as long as you feel the string or hair on your finger;
And if you do not feel it, and there is no vomiting or wind, as we have said: That it does not pierce him, if you hurry to heal him.
And if the fistula is piercing up to the bladder or up to the urinary conduit, so that urine jumps out of it, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it is piercing up to the junction of the vulva, if you are setting it on fire coming up to its place; If there is no twisting and the pain of entrance, if it is already set in place, and worth not by medicine or by feeling;
and in these fistulas persist no cure but work, and vanity of foolish mirth that entangle them.
in that which is neither persistent nor old, there is hope of health by fire, as I have experienced,
and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and let the legs come up to his knees, and let them be bent at the knee; then pour a tent of water, or of mud if there is tortuosity, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient has pain at the base, then you must put your second finger.
If you feel the tickle of the pin, and you can feel between your thumb and the syringe or the hypodermic, then you know it is a good hit. if it does not hurt, then the patient will not be cured.
In general, we can say that there are some cases where one can successfully treat certain conditions, but in most cases, it is difficult to do so effectively.
and the aid that one makes, if it is to heat the fine cautery according to the largeness of the fistula, as has been said before; and fill all the way in the fistula until it comes out smoothly from the bottom; and make this 19 times or 23 times, as long as you know that these needles made are burned, which is similar to an owl's feather;
and then the cure for moist tents will be soaked in, until that needle comes out, and then the cure for injury by cutting and binding it together.
If it is like this, it is good. If not, it cannot be healed;
and if it tries to go through, and doesn't pierce until the top which is at the bottom, and between your two fingers put a thick cover of cloth or linen, and you will see the fistula at the end of the cover where it comes out. if the patch of the beginning of the fistula, and stop it together before trying to go through, and then apply the fire after, until it comes to the top of the tent;
and the tent will be delivered and set up; then make a cover that looks like an owl's feather, and there will remain nothing of it.
And if he goes without you, and cuts between you and the work, then apply fire or medicinal poultice.
For fire cauterizes 20 things: that is to say, the burning of these joints, and the drying of blood and the removal of moisture.
Then heal the wet tents by drying or burning, until the ground is dry, and set fire to the burnt joints in the ground.
Then heal the sore patches of dried up soil that burns the ground, and let the medicine dry out.
For once it is healed, then it is healthy and does not return again.
And if a fistula comes just to the foundation, and is distant from the heart, you bottle it up at its base, and investigate that.
If you feel the pulse, and it is between iij and iiij, the wound or the ulcer or the sore, where it is ready to burst, there is only a way of hope and promise through the administration of one of the iii. ways:
or if you cauterize it as we have said, or if you cut it just to the base, or if you poultice it and apply a remedy as first.
and do not cut too deep at once, so that you do not cover the base where it hurts; and let the opening come out by itself. and then heal him, as we have said;
and then heal him, as we have said; in case he recovers, or remove that covering and mud it over again before it has completely healed at the roots, or with a tent or any other tool placed there; then burn away the flesh from that wound as well as you can;
then study to restore the wound, and delay the fistula in the part away from the root: this will be lighter on the patient.
And there are no fistulas according to this way: but when you stop the tent on the fistula, and it is or costs the bottom of the leathery skin above, if one takes a tent pierced at the top according to this form: And I put .ij. threads tort in .ij., and stop the tent on all the threads in the fistula as long as it is at the top.
If it is persistent in the margin inside the foundation, then extract the thread of that piercing, so that you stop your two or foundation;
and tie the head with thread, and bring together the .ij. shoulders together, and hold them apart, and leave for one day or two days.
and do not restrain it once, until the thread catches these joints that are between two, and rub.
then heal the wound as long as it is soldered and healed.
if the fistula does not penetrate, if you pierce it in all ways that you can, so that it is not too completely enclosed.
For it does not seem good to me to make a ligature so tight, and then treat him, as we have said, until he is well.
The form of the spinous spur that one makes for a fistula if it is dry and a bit sharp, part and trenches; and on the other hand not, because one should not make a tight ligature, as you will see below:
Oint burns are according to the following ways: when they are in the foundations, also like grains of resin, and there are little ones and big ones, and cut them in equal parts. And if they are one or more, and they are out of the foundations and at the top of the foundations; but those who are out there have little moisture.
and then cut them with a little water or blood, and they have the color of the skin;
and the treatment of those who are in the foundations, so that you command to the patient that he breathes with a cloth over his head until the foundation is gone, and they perspire; If you hurry, and hold it like a trap, or if you hold it with your fingernail, then cut it off at its roots.
and if the uncerteined roots cannot be held in place because of their moisture, take them by .i. a towel, or a piece of cloth, or an animal skin; and pull them with your two hands, then cut them off, and powder them with any hot powders that are available for cauterization; or if you use the fire cautery as described in the chapter on fire cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;
and if the foundation cannot be extracted, then blister the patient with a blistering agent and make it sharp so that it can wash what is in the foundation, so that it can be extracted freely;
and if the patient's flesh is blistered, and the strings of the foundation are very firm, then the cure is light; and you should squeeze them with your fingernail or pliers, and cut them off, then heal them as we have said, until they are healthy, and do not cut them with iron.
If it is necessary that you bring the stitch in this way: take a twisted thread, and put it through an needle, then draw the thread over and pierce the needle from the other side, and tie the two ends of the thread together on top of the needle. and if it is big; and stretch the thread then tie it, and pull out the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave there i . i . to run off the excess blood;
then put on the foundation  . i  . dip it in oil or resin, and put on the foundation, and instruct the patient to lie down;
and then leave it until it has passed, and when it is done, he will treat with ointment and other treatments until it is healed.
on the foundation   . i  . Many times there is drying out of the bowels, and by confinement of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is no good.
If you must hold onto the root of a spatula or your nail up to the skin, which doesn't let it get wet; then clean it until it is dry as if it were suited;
and if he can't be sueded, then start shaving more strongly than before, until it bleeds and is scorched; and then heal as long as he remains healthy.
He will sweat. is a small appearance of hair before the body, and goes well enough;
and it does not hurt at all; you can feel it like death sweating, and it comes to the whole body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
And the cure is this: If you take a feather from an owl's nest, or a feather from a strong vulture, and put that feather on the wound, as long as the purple circle envelops all of the wound around. then turn your hand over all the feather as you hold it against all sides of the wound, and put it on perfectly, and scrape the wound from its roots.
And if you see, so do this with a feather of air or iron according to this form, and be subtle and run over it:
do not pierce, for it must hold the two together, and press: And if you see, so cauterize the wound, as it is before or with cauterizing chaplet of cautery.
of the form of the clister No one makes a clister of silver or gold, or of melted arand or mail; and no one uses these small or large instruments according to the disease they are meant for.
These, therefore, that are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the clister is small and large depending on its width, or the stomach is tied according to this method:
and I say a distortion where the belly is tied up, as you see, and the sides are pierced through; and at one of the sides there is .ij. perforations, and on the other side .i..
and let the belly be filled with medicine from a bladder of wine or parchment, and let it be pierced through all around the small perforations,
and place between each perforation 1/4 of a space, then bottle into these perforations 1/4 of a strong thread of twisted wire in 10 or so around, and sew the belly together as if it were a sheep; and when the medicine is inside, if the head holds the instrument in front of a strong thread, then wrap it; and it is the shape of a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or linseed oil or some other thing, then pour it lightly.
and let the ministers spread it on his two hands until it is completely covered, then remove the linseed oil, and hold the patient's legs against the wall,
and let the medicine be poured out, as much as he can; and if he sleeps all night, then it is greater help.
And if you cauterize with fire due to a disease of the stomach, and the medicine is poured out quickly, then he makes it come out as soon as he can so that he will be healed.
And if hemorrhoids are at the base, or an abscess, then also the clitoris is as small as .i. a child;
and it is this form of the clitoris that is too small so that the skin is held back:
of wounds
We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the cures for hands and medicines, according to fulfillment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where they are made, and from this it is made.
The things that cause wounds are by hitting with a stone, or cutting with an axe or a sword or a spear or a club or a sledgehammer or similar objects.
or if they are made by hitting the heart, neck, head, pelvis, stomach, or liver, and similar limbs.
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds, because the reminder will come in my chapter on the topic.
I say that when a simple wound occurs where the bone is not broken, take care if it was from the movement of stones or similar things; and the skin is nonetheless torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly about an abscess: if the wound is soon healed from the head itself, but comes of blood from the wound, and is healed in the opposite direction to the part that was wounded;
and you should not drink wine or eat meat that is fattened.
And if it does not heal soon, and its meat becomes lessened, and do not drink wine, nor eat cheese.
and dip sore the wound, if an abscess forms, soak it in oil and salt, or with wine stinging.
and if there is no abscess, and dip it on the wound, if it is fresh to all its blood, and is not moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later;
and if fire has moved it, set some herbs on it, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like a sword cut, and the lips cannot be assembled by tendrity, if they are assembled by sewing, as I will say to wounds from the belly, from the sewing.
If the wound is exposed to the bone and dries up quickly, then cure the wound with medicine and return it to its hard state in place of leather. And instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as tested and baked wheat, also like poultry, and similar things.
And if you find rot on the hide, and it doesn't reach the bone, then cut it off completely, and throw it away, and then cure it;
And if it has an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be stopped with medicine, if you find the artery, and if you find the dislocation of a thread; and if he does not benefit from it, then cauterize.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the light cure is: and that you put this powder which hardens so that the fire moves it.
And the way of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood .ij parts; live coal .iij parts, and the powder finely, and apply the wound, and hold it firm, as long as it dries up and heals completely;
and then bind it well, and leave it undisrupted, if it does not swell, for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
And in no way should one use calamine powder if there is no burning or stinging, but the wound has not been moved by the heat of the fire.
And if the fire has moved the wound, even slightly, then one should use this powder;
but put on some soaked herbs or flour made with water and honey, as long as it is warm; And let him practice other remedies as long as he is healthy.
If the fracture of a bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with gentle tweezers;
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
of the wound in the throat
Here is the translation of the first line of the text:
If it is at the back, if there is no other problem than leaving the cure alone, and do not put anything restraining on it, because this hurts the neck and makes it retreat; and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the neck is cold and its blood comes with the brain, which is the highest member;
but make the medicine hot, as warm water in mild water, and mixed with rosewater oil, and boiled water too; and other stones from my body according to this way, and moist oils.
If the wound is large, then treat it with a bandage until it heals.
If the wounds are deep and filled with pus and blood, then pierce or cut deeper.
and if the artery is cut, and the flow of blood stops, then cauterize with fire.
and if it is blocked by a tickle in the throat, so that the drink goes down the windpipe, if the cough is high in the throat, and does not touch the throat but sets it back to its natural position; and then let it come forward again gradually, and leave it for a few days, and then treat with oil until it is well.
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then probe it. and if there are pieces of bone, if you can bear it, and those that you cannot have, leave it until the wound putsrefies, and let it be sewed up and tied tightly;
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder that I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in my chapter on the chapître.
of the wound from a spear or a sword
If it is from a spear or sword and the wound is deep, then examine the patient's skin carefully: for thus you will know that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep and the wound is fresh at its entire length, then do not apply powder to it yet or bind it so as not to cause pain until it has healed completely. and turn your attention to the patient's body, and check their pulse. but I have a painful itching, and lie down 3 times a day;
and if you don't have an itch, put wet cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
and let the patient lie on the wound for .iii days, or more; if there is no pain or tremor in the body; And when you see the good arrangements, know that the wound is safe. Treat the burns and other cures, as long as he is healthy;
And if it cannot heal, and if a fistula forms, then know that it is a fistula; and if the cure is done as it should be.
And if the wound is from a knife or a sword, and it is simple, or deep or at the back, then know that the cure of what is before;
s'elle est grande, de couture ; et s'elle est petite, de poudre, et s'elle est pressée en l'os, et en a copié des pièces, si vous voulez la plaie, et les tratiez fers s'il sont désévrés; and if they are not dislocated, then let the wound heal on its own, and then treat the extractions.
and for other wounds on other members, this is the judgment as we have said.
and for the rupture of the womb
The belly's rupture is big and wide and small.
Of the great wound, none of the intestines escape, or the intestines are intruded by wind;
And the stitch is worse and less effective than the small wound compared to the big one,
For if we do not quickly put back the intestines in place, if we do not put them back together piece by piece; for this reason the intestines swell so that they feel the cold, so return more to the needles
and for this reason the middle wound hurts so much, so it remains in place that the others .ij.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to .iiij. manners:
the .ij. common stitches have in the stitch of the belly,
and he sews the other wounds of the chest and .ij. other proper sutures are common to other wounds;
and all ways they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and I will declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine out, and good thing is to put it back, this is done in one of the 2 ways: Ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, Or por the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or that the intestines are swollen with cold.
And when it is cold, heat it in some way: moisten an sponge or .i. wet cloth entirely with warm water, first Here is the translation of the first sentence: and the intestine grows larger as it becomes ostemy."
and never does this wine restrain itself, and becomes sourer than soul because of the fermentation."
And when you see the fermentation depart, if you add water or wine to the intestine or cooked herbs, For by this reason is the entrance to a few things.
and if it cannot enter, then make a small hole in the wound with the instrument with which one copes the hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is to cut short that which was long; that we do not cut short unless there is great necessity;
and this is the instrument for splitting:
if it is cut inside the core and does not spread out, and see the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, if it is returned to its natural position in its own place, Here is the translation of the text line by line:
When the wound is wide and in the lower part of the belly, if it is appropriate that you make the patient lie on their back, and set their legs higher than their head; and if it's in the lower abdomen
and also if it ruptures the abdomen in one of the lower quarters, if the navel is higher than the other pelvic region,
and thus one must treat what I have said here regarding large wounds and pain.
For small wounds but this that you are dressed,
then put your hands together and place the minister of piteous who covers all the wound with his hand, and gather the lips; and this is the common way of sewing.
and this is the common way of sewing. and you should hold a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave two inches at the top of the wound, and thread a needle with good strong thread; and pierce the two joints of the skin with the two ends of the thread;
then strain out a double thread through the needle from both ends, and then join together the .ij. pieces of the wound in advance,
and then leaves .i. two of space, and I put another needle; then lay the thread out so that it is twice as long as you did for the first needle, and do not stop doing this over and over again according to what you need with the needles, as long as all the wound is closed.
and let the needles be sharp, between fine and thick, for the fine needles will go through all the cloth, and the too thick ones cannot enter well. For this reason it is necessary that they be sharp.
and do not put the needles too far from the edge of the cloth and leather.
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;
and then chop the heads of the nails so that they do not hurt the patient while he sleeps, and I put tents or drapes over the heads of the nails so that they may be kept in place, and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this method of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, for it requires a needle or .ij.
The second stitch is common, and it is made and they are sewed together with a strong thread on a needle or with a very sharp and when you have put together these four things
and when you have put together these four things if I return the needle to the place where you have started, in the way that one sews threads;
and put a space of the thickness of a smaller thread between each stitch;
this stitch should be made by a man;
and I sewed an honourable wound where the belly was.
which had been cut with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in width, and it was made from the intestines, which were well
and the wound was in his belly. I brought back the intestine; then it had been 21 and a half hours.
and the wound was sewed up, after 15 days, and I healed it, and he was healed.
And the miracle was that he did not die, and it was a miracle.
and do not cure it with ointment, for I am in a place where there is neither any nor any medicine. and put cotton wool on it nine times a day, and wash it with honey water until it was well.
or I will tell you the nine proper ways to sew:
take the needle, and hold it from the outside toward the center;
When she feels the pulse of life in the right place, then let the chef de silphac or costure or you have pressed the needle,
and pierce it from another part from within to that spot;
and listen to this stitch from the seam as the skin-cutter does with fur; and leave the silphac in place on one side, and repeat it on the other side, until the stitch is complete.
The second method of sewing, which Galen explains properly,
is so that as if there were a thread, which binds the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the chief drugs to the other chief in this way:
insert an awl or pointy drug nearby, and pierce it slightly and leave the .ij. shoulders of the sick person. then turn the needle and pierce it from the outside toward the center. as .ij. shoulders of the sick person;
then pierce one and then the other from the outside toward the center, in .ij. other shoulders of the mirror that are on the other side;
and this is the mode of suturing and the most common.
Galen said so, and no one contradicts him,
one should sew the abdomen with .ij. needles, or there be thread in each;
and one should insert one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew with corroded needles;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly then the stitch is greater than those of other parts of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as that of other wounds:
and when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it. If you reset the intestine, and cut it; then put the powder over it, stirring.
If you reset the intestine, and cut it; then put the powder over it, stirring. and if the meat moves, then put it on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound is open; and cut the fillet, and let the syrup and mirabille be. Then treat the wound as you would others, until it is healed.
and if you do not have medicine, put on it, as soon as it begins to come out, cotton wool, and stir it .ij. times a day until he is well.
For you do not need other medicine in most cases when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will not communicate with the main members, if it is necessary for you to wet another light with oil of thyme or rose oil, and put it inside the anus, and wash the buttocks.
and if he feels pain or irritation in the bowel, and many times happens, if the black wine soothes, and sometimes it comes to the intestine;
and the perforations within, and know that when it is the large intestines, so is it lighter to heal than the small.
The intestine called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is torn. and it is because of the structure of the veins, and the subtility of the whole body, and the nearness of its nature to that of the young.
And if the wound jumps from the skin, so reset it backward as well as the intestine, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and turning towards black, that you lay the place which is black, from which blood does not come, for there are veins and arteries;
then cut who is between the lien; and place the .ij. joints hanging from the side of the wound to the other side so as to facilitate the extraction when the blade chimes, and the wound opens.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, if one can restore it in some cases,
for I have seen some honourable men wounded or slain by a lance.
and the wound was on the right side of the abdomen, and it became an ulcer and a fistula, and there was discharge and windiness;
I treated it according to the methods I knew, and I kept applying the treatment until it healed, and I sewed up the wounds.
And when I saw that it had healed, I doubted that the disease was still in his abdomen; and there is no harm, but delay in better arrangements, and eating and drinking;
and they said no experiments that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he must be bound in some way: take some large testicles, then join the lips of the wound, and when the testes have opened the mouth, so put it on the iij. lips,
then meet .i. other in the same way before, until the wound is completely healed;
and count the wound. If they are burning inside the intestines, and do not cause any harm to the patient,
and can be tied with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
in this way: take the end of this thread of intestine that has been removed, and then place this thread on .i. fine linen thread that is twisted, then pull the thread through the needle, and cut the intestine, and tie it back at the suture;
and this method of sewing frets is only good according to the path of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, most especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there should be no dirt, otherwise subtlety.
of fistula where it is is that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is called a "fistula" universally and most commonly when it has been cut and then mended with sutures.
And the fistula is according to the green nutrition hard and white, or one does not feel pain, and is also like the feathers of an owl;
nor does it jump clearly in a bow, nor does it jump heavily. ne jumps at all, and sometimes jumps strongly.
and I have spoken about the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no cure, This is the translation of the text:
this is to say, by the small amount of blood or corroding matter; or because of its mischief; or because it has hard skin and on the lips, which does not allow them to grow; Ou il y a trop de bowe; Where there is too much bowing; and the material is of bad quality; Where the medicine is not good for the cure; Where, because of corruption, disease is a manner of pestilence; Here is the translation of the provided text: "Or, if there are veins or bones:"
And I have listed all of these causes, signs, and remedies for medicine in the division."
"Or, tell you how to cure fistula, which is done by hand work."The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
It is known that the fistula occurs in all limbs of the body. For there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the surgeon, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or at the spine of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this way are of great difficulty, and there is only toil, and ignorance;
and if there is no fistula that does not come up to the level that I have said, and you have already pledged to heal it, and if you see it clearly, take a piece of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, then try;
and if the fistula is twisted, if the probe of a subtle tent is dropped, for the plunging folds in the middle due to the curve;
and if the fistula is pierced by hand and you cannot properly probe it with tents, then the cauterization by fire through one of the openings,
for moisture is too short to cut from one hole to another, and it cleanses.
and then question it with your touch, that you know if there are bones or nerves, and it is shaved completely,
and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you squeeze his hand, and the spot where he feels the pain;
and when you know for sure the spot where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein; Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Here is the translation of the text line by line: "and the bone was broken and the rotten frames that were within; "and then the cure until it is healed,
"and its incision is very deep on the right side, if it goes as well as you can chop it perfectly, as much as you can, then I wet them in medical alcohol, and poured it up to the head of the fistula,
then I wet them in medical alcohol, and poured it up to the head of the fistula, as long as the medicine corrupts the excess that is held back at the base;
and then I put on garlic extracts mixed with holy water, as long as it is healthy;
and if it is not healed by this, then the fire cautery as we have said,
and if his nose is corrupted by the fistula, then let him not use it. For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
and if his nose is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, if the king is waited until the corruption is all bone, then let him not use it.And after this, do not use things that are corrupt, as long as he is healthy;
and if he is not well, and returns bow as before, for you have not yet come to the source:
so that you discover and seek until you are at the source, and bone all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if he is healthy here, then this is good. If not, know that the corrosion is too complete, so you can't come in; if there is no other device than to rely on nature;
and if there is a small bone that is rotten, and you can pull it out with pliers, If he is stripped to .i. an instrument convenient for this,
and if he has a maint oss, if the tree is tall, do not leave one behind;
and if moisture makes it difficult, and there is no error or fear; if fire, moisture, and wind, and delivers the bones.
And if you don't remove them within an hour, then put something on the wound that causes pus. and leave it until the pus is between the bones
and then, if they are healed more quickly, the bones will be lighter.
and if it's a large bone, like a leg or thigh, if you treat only the corruption until the blackening is all bone, then repair the wound;
and if there is much corruption and it comes to the bone's edge; if it is convenient to cover all of the corruption and then repair it until it is solid;
and I will tell you of a fistula which happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take an example and help in your work.
There was once a young man who had a pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body,
as the matter came to his leg, and was escaped by a large abscess, and had no cause to produce it by opening;
but the mirror due to madness has spread so much on top of the abscesses. and when they corroded with substances, and became a fistula, and it came to such a breach that all went out of the bowels and moisture from the body;
and many I have cured in .ij. years, and there was no cure for me in the art of hands,
For as long as I was called, and I saw a leg and the medicines with which it was cured, and who runs through small openings with great speed; and his body becomes red when he is young, and has an orange hue.
I built a tent in one of these openings, and then searched all the openings
and I found that one came together with the other on both sides of the leg.
I therefore hastened, and I stabbed one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone. and I found it rotted and rotten, and the rot extended to within the bone;
I knew who it was that appeared to me from the rotted bone, and I took care that there was no other corruption than what I saw; for fear that this one should rot too.
and I began to restore the wound with sodding medicines for a long time, and could not bind it;
and then I began, and uncovered the bone as before,
and I found continued decay in the bone, and the decay, and then I held it, and leaned over to mend the break;
but I could not hold on to a palm of the bone, and the pull was too great for its length; then I healed it with medicines; and it was healed and mended well,
and it is not necessary to recommend more the work because of the weakness of the disease, which cannot tolerate, and for the fear of death that I had for him. For in the evacuation of blood there was often, but he was completely cured, and
For in the evacuation of blood there was often, but he was completely cured, and and gave birth to a hard child, and was of good disposition and had no harm or opposite in all things, nor in health nor in sickness.
and set the head, so you pull the cart ruined from the wreck, and uncover the cart on the ground where you see hay, so that the hay does not damage the cart; and put .i. fire or a torch under the wheels of the cart to heat it up and melt the rust off the cart; and it is necessary to do this as often as one can see and feel the corrosion, and do it another time too.
And if his nose is corrupted, and does not open any more, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover the chest entirely; then put
and then unpick the corruption from one part to another, and let the pickling liquid reach the length of the corruption as described before us;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the joint off, and pick the bone or what it contains from the other part;
and if corruption is in the continuation of the .ij. joints, then there is no other pain than that of the cup.
and if corruption is where it is poked by the hand, or where it is poked by the foot, then this thing is very painful, but you must also inquire about that corruption, how it hurts you; and clean it in all the ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not make you contrary;
and know that the incisor and the sutures to cover these bones are many, according to the seat of the bone and the appearance of teeth. and their size and subtlety, and their height and smallness, and their hardness; and for each type of work they need to be equipped with the right tools;
and know that the work will teach you the tool you will need, according to the knowledge of this craft, and the evidence of the ways of diseases; if he uses the instrument that you need, according to what is appropriate for it.
double the head may be dislocated due to density or due to distance;
and when you have medicine, this corrosion by the remedy of medicines, and it does not benefit at all, if you cover that member to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes from death, or from evil, which is greater, of the failure of the member;
so that the patient escapes from death, or from evil, which is greater, of the failure of the member; and the signs are that the members become black, if it seems that they are burned by fire, and then after the blackness, then it goes those corruptions of a member to another, and take by all the body; if you hurry up taking the copper,
and if it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and worm and similar things,
then the corrosion is at the head of the shoulder, if it is struck, and give it no space to come up until the hand.
And if it comes just to the hand, so that the splint is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come just to the arm.
and if it comes to the arm, so that the splint is at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no need for more than the amount of its virtue;
and as soon as the corrosion comes where it should: if it comes to the first joint, so that the splint is after the other joint;
and if it comes out, take all of the foot. and if it goes up into the leg, take at the knee joint;
and if it comes out above the knee, there is only one other thing to do but to kill the patient;
and the way to wrap or sew the member so that you bind it above and below, and extend two ministers one downstream, and another upstream, and you remove the wooden beam that is between the 15th and 17th liens to the wide 6-inch span, until the bone is uncovered;
then the cloth or silk, and place from each part a 6-inch piece of linen, so that the silk does not touch the joint surface, and bring to the patient another injury and incision in the cheek.
And if the blood flows when you work, then cauterize the place well. or you put on certain powders that restrain; then return to your medicine as long as it is completed,
then wrap the member with a convenient bandage, and treat it until it is well.
and I will tell you that there was once at home in Somerset:
there came a blackness which seemed burned with fire,
and that corrosion first came to his foot, so that it stained all the leg;
And when the honourable man saw the corruption, he struck off the foot with a copper axe, and was healed;
and long after that, the corruption returned to his hand, and came to me;
and I put it on things that reflect after the purification of the body, and cannot stop the corrosions;
and he told me to cut his hand, and I didn't, that I had hope of reflecting the material; and I doubted too that if I cut his hand, he would not die; For the virtue of the man was weak; and he despairing, returned to his land; and he held his hand off the copper, and was healed.
I have nothing more to say except that one should do other things if necessary.
Now come to the chapter on the leech, and delay it so long that it makes a great assembly of bowels; and then it tears and perforates, and the leeches jump out, and delay the leech's vision, as our vassals do; and the leather which is above it is also very thin like a silk drape nor do they hurt as much as bone or nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy".
but if it is very long and comes up to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula".
and cook it so you cop the leather all around, and most especially when it is thin, as well as our drapels; and do not burn it for fear of its decay.
And if you have pledged that the leather should be burned, and corruption is not complete, and the leather is hard like a shield, if you cook it with this method:
regardez si sa poitrine est grosse, et le bouton qui est à l'intérieur a une odeur nauséabonde, regardez donc s’il y a du gonflement dans la poitrine, et si la zone enflée a une odeur désagréable, prenez donc du sel, de l’huile et de la litharge, mélangez-les équitablement et mettez-les à cuire dans un vase au feu, tant que la médecine soit rouge et ait une consistance épaisse comme du miel;
and then take from this according to your need, and the composition is in water and honey, and in cauterizing the chest, and extract the hernia; and leave the medicine on for .ij. hours, then remove it by squeezing;
make this juice from five times, until the breasts are red and swollen, and the milk comes out;
and never is clisterized by water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you squeeze ashes from a vine stalk, and pour water on top,
then let it drip, and clisterize it, until you know that the ash is well mixed;
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither can Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes; If the ointment is made of water and honey or a little bit of lime powder crushed. Or you make the ointment with honey and wine, that honey has the property to purify and wash, and the wine brings heat to the body.
and when you have done so, and you have vowed that the breasts are purified, If the cauterization of what makes a horse give birth causes him pain,
and is that you squeeze plastron until it dries, and dip it in oil and wine; or you cauterize it with certain medicines and herbs, of which I have spoken in the treatment of herbs;
and if the wound is small, and the cautery hole does not enter, If the iron is too large for a small bit, put it under an Egyptian-style tent. or large bazooka, as long as it's enlarged;
and if the wound is too wide, so that the bullet can enter with enough space; I leave it or the bullet can enter,
and if the hole that the arrow makes is above, so that the cap or base is lower than it; For when the bow is in perfect form, if it does not slip. and if you cannot cover the loins with a sheet as you see fit, so that the bow runs to the lowest point it can reach.
and if you cannot cover his back with a cloth as you see, so that the bow does not move down and leave anything of the bow; and take consolidate medicines to put over the back;
and are on a linen drape that covers the whole back; then cut away the flesh as much as possible from the chest. i.e. make it larger by cutting out more of the first. then put on poultice over it. i.e. another piece of cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and place it over the chest wound to hold it in place, and do not remove the large cloth for a long time.
and one on top of the chest wound, often removing the cloth to examine the wound, and know what runs from the bowels, whether it is poison or pus or enough or undigested or indigestive;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when the medicine has extended in some way and you see the nature that rises from the navel, if you know that the breasts begin to swell, and bring the sanitude;
and then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, if you change.i. another cloth, and renew the dressing.
And if the breast becomes swollen after many days, know that the breast does not hurt. And if subtle poisons last a long time, so that you do not despair of health,
For the holy water is close. For there are men whose late healing of their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and he gets a fever after many days, because his sinews do not hurt;
and his sinews are late to heal, and are swollen, so that he can use such medicines as are dried in substance but moistened in virtue, and if he takes a drop of it, for there is much vinegar, and this is the last medicine;
Take a piece of chalk, and the paint it with rose oil, and dye it with equal-strength red wine.
Then bake it and apply it; and that same ointment, when well-cooked and thickened, is better. when the initial ointment is not present,
or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it over honey when it is taken from the fire; and then in glue .i. a cloth, and it is placed under the breast, and never administer any medicine or aromatizer long, and roots of licorice, which is also like flour of fennel and centum;
and roots of licorice, which is also like flour of fennel and centum; and in the use of simple or compound medicines: grind them, and make a powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it; and if the cure is long, and is not cured by this cure,
and if the cure is long, and is not cured by this cure, Then you must know that corruption is perfect, and it makes impressions in the bone, or hard members, or limbs. if the surgeon for the cure of fistula, if as we have said above.
of the nail of the toe
is a nail that grows out from the side of the nail bed on the thumb of the hand, ou dou pied, ou par aventure nayst en autres dis;
and when he is broken, and one does not take care, so it comes. I. abscesses between the toes, and they cut and grind so that they corrent the root of the nail, and by chance they corrent all;
and the corrosion comes up to the bone, so that it comes a painful stench, and the two bones are wide apart, and the color flees.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, if you cut off all the surplus that has been held back by the nail, and then cauterize the wound after. The fire cautery is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
and if the finger presses down on the char, and begins to prick, and burns it if you put the cure on the finger that pricks the char and pour it up high, and softly and lightly pour this fine char and put on the remaining char burning and corrosive medicine to burn everything away;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and burn it, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the corruption of the flesh, cut it off as well, as it is said above: and treat with garlic until he is well.
and if it is wild, and bloated, and it hurts a lot, then you must first save him. then cut the nail of the little finger with a knife from one side to the other,
and be careful that the cut does not go too deep into the nail, because if the patient feels too much pain, he will not be able to endure it.
and if there is something that can soothe it, put it on.
The two joints that sometimes arise in the hands of some men are all flesh. and by adventure they may have either bone or fingernail,
and some of them are born at the root of the joint, and in others the birth is at the end of the two bones. Whoever is born without a right hand or left, shall not move them. and whoever is born with a right hand and a left, may move them.
the size of that which is charnel so is light, in such a way: the size of that which is charnel so is light, in such a way:
He who is born with a dislocated joint is difficult to treat; if you hold him down.
In those who are born or should have their derrieres turned around, it is necessary that you first chop the hip completely round until you reach the bone. then chop the bone with an appropriate chisel for this purpose, and then heal it as long as it is healthy.
The two joints that come together by nature, by the assembly of a wound, or by fire, or by similar things.
If you believe that you can take this sulfur, so that it repairs according to its natural forms; then put between two tents or drapes wetted with oil rosin, so that they do not stick together; or you put between two thin pieces of leather, until the leaks are stuck together, as it is necessary.
The sulfur must be taken so that it repairs according to its natural forms;
The vils
Illuminations are full of excess melan콜iousness, which comes from the members of the body.
and more is found in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, compared to others.
Therefore, you should not administer any purgatives for the purpose of cleansing the bowels, and then heal him from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l'une est c'on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; And the other way is that you let the vein stand and then pull it all out.
The cut should be done according to this method: raise the first leg with hot water strongly, until the large vein is thin. Then strain the leg of the sick person from above the knee up to the joint of the foot; then cut the vein at a length of one, two, or three inches, depending on its thickness,
then remove and squeeze the black blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient can tolerate;
and then bandage it, and instruct him to bathe his wounds with black coal water;
and then repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are clear, and massage the patient.
The fire cautery treatment involves instructing the patient to maintain long and even hairs; if the hairs prick at their base, they should keep their eyes fixed so that they do not move until the hairs grow. This treatment is often associated with blood evacuations during procedures such as opening a vein or incising an abscess, treating wounds, extracting arrows, cutting into stones, and similar processes. There is a note of caution here regarding doubt and fear, suggesting that many people have died due to these treatments. When a shoulder dislocates due to moisture, it cannot be reset and the resulting dislocation and misalignment of the limb cause great pain and injury to the patient. Then dip it in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red, and swell the veins;
and if you don't have a bath, heat it on the fire, and then put it in place at the hip joint, or at the part between the ankle and the knee.
Then soak the skin in oak bark, and scorch the veins from each side, until they feel as hot as you can stand.
and it is red and black, and when it enters or leather so seems as a white cord;
then pour the wine of sour fruit as long as it is lifted from the leather, and then dip it lightly in onyx,
then pour the wine of sour fruit as long as it is lifted from the leather, and then dip it lightly in onyx, then pour the wine of sour fruit as long as it is lifted from the leather, and then dip it lightly in onyx,
then cut another size, or more if you need it, then make an incision, and join it to the two feet.
then traint and cut down to the second size; then extract it size by size until it is all gone, then cut it.
and if you cannot draw it out and lift it up, then fasten a sharp needle to both ends with very strong thread. then cut and traint it, and fasten a string to both ends, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it is all gone; and keep it from breaking, for if it breaks, neither can it be pulled nor lifted, and thereby causes harm to the patient.
and when you have finished treating it, place wet wool covered with wine and oil on the wound; and mend it until it is well.
And if it is twisted and bent and wrapped together, and is not straightened, as we have said, then you should split it open, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
then you should split it open, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The form of iron from which one makes a hook, if it is bent, and does not cut at all, but hooks the vein.
and it is a large hook, for if it were thin, it would hook the vein, but it is large as we have said, and this is the form:
of the civil vein
This vein is found in the legs, in warm areas where there are no herbs or trees, and in the ground where there is no moisture;
and in case of accident it may happen elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the porridge that comes from the skin.
if it comes out of the body coiled up and spiraled, wrap it between skin and cloth.
And if there is a sign of the onset of this disease, that is, if it comes in the leg, then a great inflammation will occur. then the legs change color, and the disease begins to spread, like the roots of a plant.
When the head is open, if you wrap a piece of flannel around it from one Z and a half to two Z., and tie it up,
and leave the flannel in place at the leg, and every time that there is a point to it on the outside, if the wrap-up of the flannel and the new one; and if it is too long, take a part of it, wrap up the rest, and do not cover the root entirely, until it is all wrapped up; for if you cover it, if it enters into the pit, and brings about abscess and putrefaction or where it is, and causes a bad disease;
By this means, then, is it necessary that this thing be treated little by little up to the root, and nothing remains of it or of the corium.
and it is not once a vein when it is treated with long palms, or of X. and ten fine hair came to me, to which it was cut from X. palms long, and when you cut it, if it is a little raised or damaged, and pierce it up to the root,
so that all is removed; and let the material which is inside be emptied, and introduce into it medicines for corruption any day, then treat it as you would an abscess.
And no hand should touch this vein, nor especially when it opens at the joint of the foot, or where the foot is. and it comes out broken, and from which it bleeds; then cure it as we have said before.
Of worms that come between the hide and the skin
This disease is called in our land "beef sickness," because it often occurs in cattle,
and it is a small worm that was born between leather and saddle, and goes all over the body, going up and down. And it smells of the member to member so much that it rips the skin where it goes, and jumps far.
And it is infected with some kinds of humor, such as come from venereal diseases, snakes, worms, and lice.
And there is doubt about its malice, because when it goes through the body, and it climbs to the head, and comes out of the mouth, For by chance they return, and destroy the oil; and this happens many times.
When you see it healing and extracting, you can only do so when it goes:
so that it may be placed with a strong, narrow ligature:
then place it on top and extract it thoroughly, and it will be perfectly in the jar, and you will not find it: If fire cautery is applied, until death.
and the greatest harm it causes is if it corrupts the oil, as we have said;
and if you see the head of the shoulder near the oil, then hold back the skin firmly, and then cut it off;
and use medicine solutions to clean out the bad humours that cause disease;
and sears of meats infected porridge.
of pain which comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that affects certain limbs, and it spreads from one member to another; and I saw this very one."
I was called to treat a sick woman; she revealed some of her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the vein under the arm.
and after that, he saw it grow like a worm in the shoulder, faster than anything else, as if it were alive and silver when it cuts from one place to another;
the pain leaves the body part, and it enters into the shoulder,
and then a little later corrupts all the body, until it came to the other breast;
then he told me that she twisted all over her body, as I saw it.
I marveled at how she moved from member to member, for I have never seen such a disease in this way. Nevertheless, I have seen many who have had great pain that has gone from one part of their body to another. but I don't want it, if I saw it in a woman;
and I thought that's why the woman had a narrow chest, and the veins exposed, and for that reason she seemed to have a constricted windpipe;
and don't appear to be affected by this reason in those who are delicious, and who have moist chests and exposed veins.
And when you have treated this disease, and the patient feels this pain, if it opens as we said, If the ligature remains in place and firmly after surgery, and then hold it with such a strong grip that it does not move at all; And then cauterize the wound; and if you do not see blood coming out of the wound,
If the cure for this disease, as it comes out of the wound, is like pills that are foul, and pills of serapin, and similar others.
Of arrows
The arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the place where they come from.
There is diversity in their form: some have large points, others are small, some are feathered, and some are welded. and some have three points, and some have tongues, and some have pieces that move. and those who scratch in any member so scratch according to .ij. ways: or in member principal chiefly scratch,
as the brain, liver, pancreas, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs. When she scratches in any of these places, and the sign of death, which I will tell you below, appears: If you wash yourself from the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after many preparations; and when there is no sign of fever, and the arrow is not fully embedded, if you pull it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the skull when the arrow bites and pierces the bone, and the medicine that is on the skull, is when stiffness and soreness and twitching and rash in the eyes, and inflammation and rash on the tongue, and spasm and confusion of thought, and vomiting of food; and may be absent from the nose or ears; and may lose speech and voice; and jump out of the wet wound white as pulsing blood, and also as if burned by fire;
and this sign indicates to you if you hold back from treatment, and treat the arrow if it is not in.
the sign of the arrow when it pricks or hits, is that it is near the left breast, and also seems to be stuck in something hard, not hollow; and perhaps the arrow becomes silent like the pulsing blood, and in black curd blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: Therefore, there is death from doubt.
And the sign of an arrow is that there is no pus in the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's skin changes color, and he breathes heavily and shivers with cold.
And if the arrow pierces the skin of the back, it will feel very painful and cause great pain and gasping; and all the limbs will move.
And if the arrow pierces the belly, perhaps there is no blood in the wound from the digestive system.
And if an arrow has penetrated the belly, and by reason of the intestines there is no hope for the cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow;
And if an arrow has penetrated the bladder, and by reason of the urine there is no hope for the cure; know that the wound is fatal.
The other member, if it is the case with the face and neck and throat and shoulder and aid and spine and chest and legs and limbs, are safe according to many dispositions. When the arrow is in the neck or artery, and it is not poisonous, so as I will tell you that happened to me, do otherwise.
A man had an arrow stuck in his thigh at the root of his leg. I tried it, and I removed the fat from the ear on another side, and he recovered without feeling anything.
And I tried an arrow that struck him in the oil fat of the ear, removing the paper. and the arrow was recovered, and only its point was seen towards the forest. and this arrow is great of a turquoise color, so that it makes no sound between the ears; the game was healthy, and no bad accidents happened.
And I shot an arrow from the neck to a Christian, and this arrow was Arabic at the ears:
I knew how to shoot arrows, and I took care not to miss, and the Christians were healthy.
And I shot an arrow at a man, which went through his cheek or belly, and I thought he died;
and then he passed .xxx. days, if not he changed his condition; I cut into the arrow, and shaped it, and pulled it out, and did not have any bad accidents.
And if you see a patient with an arrow in their butt or leg, and the wound is sewn up;
and do not change his natural position, You will find no harm in any of its natural works.
And see another man, to whom an arrow struck in his face, and was seared with the wound;
and it suffered great pain; and many others like that.
And bring an arrow to the king of the nobles, which was lodged in his neck, and it was somewhat declining on the right side; and the arrow was all drawn back.
I was called to treat after it had been wounded for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I asked her to try several times, and I did not feel it. and he felt pain and a ringing in his right ear. I thought it was of the tip of the arrow
I put on him the plaster of the digestive tract, so that the leeks do not inflame; and I revealed to me the arrows.
and I revealed to me the arrows. I put on him the plaster every day, and quickly heals the wound, and postpones for a long time the disease,
As long as he felt the arrow .i. within his body; and he said it to me. I put on the wound the corrosive herbal medicine by hands daily, as long as it was opened,
and I tried it, and felt the head of the arrow which had become stuck at its place; then I applied the herbal medicine to the wound opening, as long as the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
and well mark the ends between .iiij. months,
and then I would cut off the claw, and pull it with a hook on each side, and it could not be pulled out;
then I would cease from subtlety and invent new instruments, until I took it with very sharp claws; according to this person whose form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I try, and restore the wound.
And I see that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I reset it then, and it was welded over the wound, and the patient was completely healed.
Or have you said the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you put your treatment on those whom I do not mention, for the books cannot include everything.
but the wise men compare few things together, and on those few things that are present and lacking. turn nine times, and nine instruments, for the removal of foreign things that come in this art.
I say that the arrows should not be fired from the limbs except according to the following nine ways: or through the place where they enter, or through another part;
and those that jump higher by the side where it enters, it is an arrow entering into their flesh, and does not jump anymore at present.
And if it does not jump now, let it be until the meat rots inside, and the exit is infected;
and if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, let it be for a certain time, and change the poultice every day;
and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, let the meat rot inside as much as possible, until the flesh around it is softened; and then treat it.
And if the arrow is put back in the head of the shoulder so that it cannot be seen, and I seek it with all my might; and if you feel it, and if you take it with any suitable tool;
and if you cannot by stretching out the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, and if there is no bone, nerve or vein, but only as much as the wound is large; and train the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place,
and train the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place, if you cannot stretch out the bone where the arrow is embedded by as much as your hand, and then break or rain the ears of the arrow, as long as you can draw it out.
and then break or rain the ears of the arrow, as long as you can draw it out. and carefully so that you do not break the arrow, but rather draw it out with great care.
And if you cannot draw it out at once, and if the arrow head has become stuck in the flesh, then draw it out, for extraction is a relief. And if the pain of extraction from the arrow offends you, then apply what we have said in the chapter about the fire cautery.
and warn against incising the nerve and the vein, and put forward no comment about how you might pull out the arrow without risk.
or toast or charred, or firmly or vigorously; and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow shot out, For this is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot do so, then let him follow the sign that shows you.
The arrow that comes from another direction, and does not open anything from it, or the leather is swollen in a certain place if we see it or feel it:
Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
If it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so that it enters into the bone and widens it, then remove it.
If it cannot be removed, let it rest for a while, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.
and if it is at the end of the arrow, blow on all of it.
and if it must be chopped, and you see how to administer an end, for he who administers it well will not lack an instrument, so that the point of the arrow enters into the cheek of the instrument; and then cut away,
and if the arrow is chopped, cut the instrument with a pointed end entering it, in order to make the extraction pleasant.
And if the arrow is touched, so that you cut all the thread or vein where it comes out, if you can, And then treat the wound as he knows how.
If the arrow enters anywhere in the chest or abdomen or bladder or ribs, and it is near, then you may cover it over, if you can;
and be careful not to cover the vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, this is the work. And then treat it until it is healthy.
The shape of the claws used to treat arrows is similar to an owl's beak; and thus it should be:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
the common veins of the body Veins from which one heals: .xxxi., from which there is a headache xvi.,
It is called: 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.19.20.21.22.23.24.25.26.27.28.29.30.31.32.33.34.35.36.37.38.39.40.41.42.43.44.45.46.47.48.49.50.51.52.53.54.55.56.57.58.59.60.61.62.63.64.65.66.67.68.69.70.71.72.73.74.75.76.77.78.79.80.81.82.83.84.85.86.87.88.89.90.91.92.93.94.95.96.97.98.99.100. and the 18 arteries that are in the 2 temples that appear. and the 18 veins that are in the 2 arms of the 2 hairs, which are called "sips". and the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the 18 veins that are in the neck; and the 17 veins that are in lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augeherich". and the 17 veins that are in the tongue.
The veins commonly mentioned are .v. in each arm:
the one is the cephalic, and it runs along the left side of the body, and it is called by lay people "voinne du chef". and the movement is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and basal parts, and they call it "vein of the corner"; and the basal part if it is on the right side, and they call it "vein of the belly", and it is on the light side, and this is the one that is mentioned, which opens clearly on the nipple.
And the small finger is the one between the thumb and the index finger, and if it has .ij. raindrops on it;
and in the leg and where the foot is are .iii. veins: one is at the back of the knee on the inner side of the left thigh, and the second one that is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side;
And in the other leg are  .iii. veins above those.
The headache from the back of the ears if helped by catarrhs, and migraine. and the qualities of the remedy, as I told you before, is that you remove the head of the disease,
and the qualities of the remedy, as I told you before, is that you remove the head of the disease, and rub the place where the veins are with an rough cloth; then tie the person's neck with a strap, until the .iij. veins appear behind the ears in .iij. lines depending on the head: Wanting to put two dimes together, and where you feel the pulse on your side, if it is slow, then sign of death.
Then take the lance and draw out the vein all the way to the bone, then lift your hand up towards the arm pit. and cut off the flesh and the skin and the vein very carefully. Measure two fingers' distance and make an incision as deep as you can see;
Then strain it out and tie it up, as long as it is healthy;
and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
The blood vessels that are in the two temples, if they cause migraine, and سود, and eye pain that is usual, and the tears flow freely;
and the quality of the blood vessel is as I say: and so the patient must extract his neck until the two veins appear open. and put your hands on each side of his head, and then sign to him to raise his chin;
and then place the tip of your little finger on top of his thumb, and dip the lance into the vein at the base of his fingernail, and then remove the vein, and the cope, just as you did in the previous two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
Then lay the patient down, and put your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
and then let them be until they are well; and we have already spoken about their operation and extraction, or beginning of the book.
The health of the vein at the forehead is as important as the health of the temporal artery for ancient diseases of the face, and for headaches and blindness.
and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears. and take the instrument which is called a chisel, whose form is:
And place the tip on the vein, and hold with your hand or another object, and let out blood as much as you see fit; Then cut the neck of the patient, and tie the vein until it is well and not a wide flame;
However, the flame should not be too hot; and the vein is cut across, because the bone is near, and the flame might break when it is thin.
The disease of the two veins that are in the two cheeks, if it pricks with fire, and with the tine, and with the rash, and with oil, and with the diseases of the face.
and the quality of their disease is that the patient pulls his hair out by twisting it with any string, as before.
then heal, and if the wound is deep, a little bit of flame, because there is no fire.
And if the flame is subtle, by chance so it breaks; then make run blood, as much as you need, and then hold it on cotton, and hold it well.
The pain of the birth of a child is great if it is with water, and sudden fever, and diseases of the face. as well as headaches and dizziness that come into the face, and even more so when they are old.
and the quality of the pain is such that the patient strangles his neck, then pulls his child by the hand with his left hand. and take a long, subtle flame, and burn it between the iij. nostrils, For the vein does not open well, and the blood begins to flow now.
and do not overheat it too much, and make the blood run according to your need, then lay it for a night, for it is quickly healed;
The fifth line is the treatment for:
and the quality of health is that the patient pulls out his hair from both sides, as we have said; and the master standing over the head of the patient, and the patient cuts with .I. a scythe,
then he washes the long vein thoroughly, then he treats the pain temporarily, or as much as is necessary;
then he does the same on the other side, then he pulls out the hair gently, and pulls out the veins gently, that the patient does not choke; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
Of the healing of the livings Of the healing of the veins of the lips above it helps to heal in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and splits of the lips, and of the child and entrails.
And the quality of the healing is to make the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said; and turn the lip, and look at .ij. veins, of which one is on the right lip and the other on the left. and know them by what they are black, and by that there are small black veins inside them. then turn both of them over, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt about it,
then turn both of them over, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt about it, then turn the larger of each over, and do the same with the  .ij. veins that are above and below, for it is the same way.
Of the salt water of the sea the tongue Of the salt water of the sea the tongue soothes after the salt water of the head, and is to the extraction of the throat, and to the diseases of the eye, and to the diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the healer is that the patient swallows between your hands before the sun, and he soothes the tongue, and looks at the outside with a black vein;
soothe then both, and do not become too perfect, for the veins are inside.
The veins of the throat, which are commonly treated, are treated in 1 way:
where you pierce with fire of thin olive oil; and it is called "anasil". and they are large and thin according to the width and the stretching of the veins. The shape of the fire of thin olive oil is thus named, and it is wide as you see it:
And it is a craft to open the veins of the head which are flat and filled with great blood and trouble. and this is the shape of the olive flame:
and it is more subtle in point, and it is for saving the subtle veins, or where there is subtle yellow blood.
The save of the basilica, which is one of these veins, so helps diseases that are cured from the throat, and where the neck, and where the breast, and where the belly;
and it is necessary for the doctor that he heal the bleeding, and that he bandage the artery that is dissection. And if he stops the artery, and the flow of blood comes, if it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I said; and must not be poked with fire, but cut off like an onion.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, if it is necessary that you squeeze it, and change one another. Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English: and wrap it in fire, as we have said.
And if you know the place of the pain, so that you can cut the arm, and touch the place while knowing the pulse. Then sign the place of injury, and then bind the arm, and wrap the wound in fire.
and guard against injury to the artery when you see the joint dislocated, for it is the artery: avoid then.
And if you see oozing up as urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is the artery: So hasten then, and place your thumb on it longwise, then open your thumb so that the blood does not stand, for it often stands:
hold your arm out, and leave it like this, and do not move the limb; and be on guard, and do not move it until it is well.
And if he is not stationary, and you go to him, and the medicine does not come to you, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of the shoulder is retained; and stop the bleeding.
And take a branch of fig tree, and split it, and take one half and bind it well up to the other day;
If the bleeding stops, it is good; if not, apply the powder that stops the blood;
and the application of the stop-bleed is not made in many places because of the small size of the wound and the ease with which it bleeds from the vein of the arm.
The patient's vein is middle of the shoulder, so treat with blood from the top of the head, and the heart's blood. For it is composed of the basilical and cephalic blood, as we have said.
And it belongs to the surgeon that he warm himself by the nerve which is in the shoulder, and if he cuts too much through it, and he tears the nerve. and it swells up and makes the patient sick, and perhaps cannot recover.
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man because of its subtility, it is necessary that you cut the nerve with your knife; and avoid the nerve to your strength.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
The healing of the head with fire, if it hurts, so that it does not move and the hairs are held back.
and it is necessary to heal with fire the olive or the merlin, because it is the most saving of all veins, because it does not burn the nerve or the artery.
However, if it is the more light weight one, then you must seek it out first time, and start again. and by chance it swells some men's legs, but it is not necessary to grieve the first time, but it does not hurt anything. The quality of the medicine is according to your understanding.
The first thing you must know about a doctor, is that medicine is only used to maintain health.
and to ward off future illnesses; and the doctor is made in one of the three veins that are there: that is to say, the temporal, facial and basal; and one must make the remedy in the beginning of fever, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of satiety appears;
and one must make the remedy on the first day or third day, after two hours or three days per day;
The doctor who is healthy after a disease has no set time for eating, but when hunger or thirst occurs, it should be met at any time and in all seasons.
And one should not wait until the child is .xiiij. years old, nor a woman except for four months after delivery until seven months. One should not wait to see the old man who has passed .lx. years.
And when someone is seen, in any way at all, if it seems that the world is made of light, If it has vomited up blood, so that the veins do not draw out the harmful waste matter which damages the main members;
not heal those who are too sore with meat, nor those who are bitter, as long as there is force in them, nor droopies.
and to heal those who suffer from colic, fever, stomach trouble, frequent childbirth, watching, fasting, and all kinds of pain, or by the weapon or the heart.
and then subtly the humours, for he becomes fat through meat, drink, and medicine, if you have any.
and then enter the bath, if anything harms it, to make subtle the blood.
and heal yourself of the wound on the foot from between the toe and the first toe, as we have said;
and protect yourself from work, from food, from lust, and from similar things;
and be tied and joined, and be healed higher than the one who heals you, and rub your arm .ij. times or .iij.
and then remove the ligature with care, for when it is too tight or too loose he cannot run without it.
and then rub the wound with his hands, until the veins swell and can be felt.
and then dip the wound in a pot of old oil, and then place his thumb of his left hand on that vein to keep it open a little. so that the vein does not close and can be cut. For there are veins that flow out like strings, and some such that they are plain with windiness. So when one puts it onto the flame, if one takes it off the flame, and cannot open the vein, then one is of those.
and if he opens the vein, if it is too tight a wound, so that the patient must be warned of such things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, if he continues to do so again either in hospital or out, if his legs are swollen.
And if his arms are swollen, and the patient expects improvement, let him lie for one or two days, and do not bind his arms. for there may come abscesses; do not bathe them again, but begin the treatment if they please you.
and if his fracture is small, or the bone is not very strong, and you doubt that it will heal as well as you see, so firm in the fracture itself right up to the flame;
and work on it a little, so that his arm is swollen; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
If you see the wound open, then don't recommend the remedy, and put a little of the oil on it, for it smooths the heart of the blood, and the oil is soft in this spot the oil that the oil.
and so administer the oil to each wound you heal the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and this too makes tripe and bowels soft when it is put on the wound; if it is too large, then make it smaller.
And if there is a large abscess, which often comes, most importantly when it is not healed properly except for this time when the opening of the vein is small, If you hurry, and put on the spot wet sponge in water and in twine a little warm, and hold it an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the flow of blood from a vein, and if it remains in place for several days without any black or green, then it does not harm him; and if you see, put on nothing of aloe or myrrh in juice of calendula, marjoram, or simile.
And many times incision and appearance to the health of the bazilica: put then your hand on, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, this is that appearance. So then you must not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance in the heart without the artery; but do so. I.e., apply dry plaster to harden the place, and then heal with other remedies until it is healthy.
And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it run until it is red; and if you see a lump, let it stand until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And for those who are sick and need to extract blood, make the wound larger, and keep the flames wide open;
and to those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to heal them little and often, and one must heal them by cutting across, not by piercing.
and this method of healing is preserved from the decay of blood and the cutting of nerves, and it is better than the long healing or the broad healing.
And to those whose bodies require healing, it is necessary to give them moistened bread made from grape juice; if they are heated, if the blood is troubled. Give three times or four times.
And if he is of a cold complexion, give him moistened bread soaked in musk syrup, or honey syrup infused with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
And if it goes to the head, after the exit of the wind of blood, it is necessary that it hums the brew of wine and sweet-smelling syrup.
and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of fainting, for the evacuation of a vein.
And if it vomits up the food in the arms, and sometimes feels pain, if it is weakened by great pain, that it heals little by little, according to the quantity of its continued virtue.
And if it vomits up the food in the arms after the first fainting, and has a strong constitution, then heal for .vij hours after the first faint, or after nine hours.
And who must be healed on another side, if it should be healed on the second day or third.
For he has blood fever within the body, which makes heat and brings on a fever; so that, if there is a large amount, it must be drawn off, and the wound widened as much as it can ooze. and then you shall treat all the conditions for healing, and put your hand on his pulse as it heals, so that death does not come from pain. and if this happens often, when healing is neglected;
and it does not fit when you see the arm disconnected, and make it come out with blood for the second time, and the hole is closed, that you press firmly on top; if it is twisted, let him extend his arm carefully, for that would be bad;
but let it be until it has healed the second time; or you point to the tip of the flame, until the blood that is frozen at the base of the arm comes out; and put a little of salt on it, and press lightly.
And if a vein has burst, let it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess is calm.
And if there is a need to drain blood for a second time, let it be done in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein that runs along the arm is to be used for bloodletting if there is a need to drain blood, because it is more accessible than the vein at the base of the neck.
And the way to perform the bloodletting is that the patient holds his hand in warm water until it turns red.
Then let there be a gentle movement, so that the vein appears well, then keep it safe now by going through, not too wide or too long;
and make the joint wide enough, and keep the joint well near the hand, and so cannot pull it out, then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood run in the water until you have enough;
and if it is cold, then do not dip the hand in warm water, for we put it in more when it is cold than when it is warm;
and the vein that has been saved is safer from all other veins, there is no artery or nerve;
The salve for the right hand saves from all liver diseases; and this is the method:
Draw out the hand, and bathe it in hot water until the vein has disappeared, if possible; and wrap it up tightly with bandages, and cut off all of its hair, if necessary;
and do not cut too deeply, for the nerves are very sensitive and can easily be damaged;
and then put the hand in hot water, it is frozen in the wound, and cannot be taken out.
And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, put oil and thread to bind it firmly together, and do this for each wound.
The surgery on the left hand should be performed first for the disease of the mouse, and do all the rest as I have told you about the right.
The surgery on the thumb should be performed first for all the diseases that are apart from the hand, If as diseases of the mare, and retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and cuisses and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his health is that the patient drinks some warm water, and rubs the vein until it stops. and on top of the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many reins;
For in this chapter, or more widely, at the rear, or at the ankle, that is how you treat it.
And if you treat it on the foot, beware of the nerves which are exposed, and treat it as you would a wound, and let the flames be quenched.
And if the person cannot walk, put the foot into water, and let the vein bleed well.
And if you treat it for the first time, start the second time above a little hole, because the blood is salty; do not doubt about the nerves, as we have said before, and thus do the same for the other foot evenly.
The legs of the sciatic vein are at the ankle, and its pain extends to the hip, when it is due to cold.
And the quality of this pain is that the patient gets in or out of the bath, and pulls it off the ankle .iii. two with turning,
For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, so that you can feel it in all ways, and by passing; and it is worth more than you can cope, for the leg is out, and she is very well returned to many men.
and it is worth more than you can cope, for the leg is out, and she is very well returned to many men. And if you do not treat it, unless there is a rain from him who opens or closes the foot, and towards the little toe, and keep away from the nails;
and make so much run of the blood that you see it, and then untie the ligature, and put on cotton and hold it fast; it is now healed.
Wounds from suction cups
are made of horns, or of glass, or of stone; and the suction is made in one of two ways: either by hurting and drawing out blood, or without hurting.
And this ventilation which is not to hurt, depends on 2 ways: or it is all fire, or without fire;
and 2 others in 2 coasts of the throat; and 1 below the chin; and the suction of the .i. shoulder blades; and the suction on the shoulders; and the suction of the .i. arms; and the suction of the .i. legs; and the suction of the 11th leg; and the wind-suction does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the chest;
and so that it does not afflict anyone, unless it is done like this, as it is done for a vein; and does not need to be cooked, nor boiled, in any illness that comes from overeating, until all the body is empty.
And if, because of necessity or custom, we cook it every hour at the beginning of the month or at the end, and in each month;
for there are those who, when they need to vent their food, do so gradually;
and if there are those who, after ventosing, have inflammation and pain in their face, and in their neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who vent a drop of blood into their mouth, and have fled the tongue, and seek blood. and if any of these people are sick, and see no blood nor vomit nor death nor similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is the third month of the year, we order that they be ventosed after.iij. hours of the day.
The surgeon of the museum should assist in the treatment of the disease of the head ... if there is pain and it does not come until after the whole body has been evacuated.
and this ventilation if it is in place of the health of the cerebral,
and it does not suit that person who is of a cold complexion to drink, or who has had a fever, because this does them great harm;
and for this reason it does not suit that person who is of a cold complexion to drink, or who has had a cold;
And whoever drinks this often becomes confused, and for this reason the fire cautery should be placed a little further back due to the confusion that results from drinking it.
The ventilation of the neck is located in the place of the windpipe at the base of the skull and for this reason it is subjected to stretching of the larynx. and at the slit of the channel of the throat, and all around, and at filling up;
and it is necessary to push it back, because if it holds too firmly, then in the jaw or stomach or somewhere else.
The ventilation of the neck is located in the place of the windpipe at the base of the skull and for this reason it is subjected to stretching of the larynx.
and is in the area of the saint's shrine; and it is necessary that you instruct the doctor that he express his hand to the patient, that he does not cut the artery, and does not cause bleeding.
The vents of the mouth bring about a disease of the mouth and a corruption of the gums and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is in the area of the saints' lips.
The vents of the shoulders bring about a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
The vents of the arms, up to three veins, bring about a disease. For she brings pain from these great veins.
and instruct the surgeon that he does not cut too deeply, for the bones are naked and there are many nerves and arteries.
The suction cup that is on the back so it is attached to the fundament, and to the glands, must be large, and of metal, for it has a task of good milking; and by chance, if it were too small, it would break; and it would make great wounds.
The suction cups of the legs so open, for they attract blood from all the body, and cause old pains of the kidneys, and of the uterus, and of the bladder, and bring forth fluids; and they are in place of the iij. sophenes, and the iij. chevilles, and altogether they weaken the body after long use, and bring about premature death in many conditions.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
"And if the skin is thick, so it is necessary to hurt .ij. times: the first time to soften the path of the large skin sore."
"And if the skin is very thick, so it is necessary to hurt the third time; and when we want to squeeze the small sore little by little, we must hurt once only."
"And if we want to suck blood, so we begin often; and if the skin is thick, so we should be firm, and the end should be that the piercing be heard suddenly,"
and cover with oil the places of the suckers, which are large and hard, so that they become soft; if it is swollen, with oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of cucumber seed;
and if it is hot, with oil of water-cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other kind.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take oil of amaranth, or of balsam, or oil of fennel, and other kinds.
And if someone has a sore that is tender and large, then one should not put any oil on it.
but it is necessary to wash after the windification with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or other similar things.
And if one has moisture, if it comes from there, or from water of Myrrh, and sumac, and similar things.
And if one has great excesses, they come from old wine, or water of fennel, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things;
and do not fit to be pulled by suction before the bath nor bathe, but after a bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after suction.
and it is necessary that he warm up when he should be suctioned and when he has been suctioned. And beware if the person being treated is colicky, and if the poultice is too hot or burning. if it is necessary that he consume cold things, such as pomegranates, endive, and lettuce, and milk, and similar foods;
and minced meat, and cheese of the goat, and wet meats.
and those with a pale complexion, if they drink syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and minced meat, and minced poultry and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day that they feel wind, if they drink more than they eat;
and it is convenient to give to some men triple or musk before the wind, or after, in order to strengthen the main members; and make it thin, but it only works for those who are hot from drinking.
The leeches that are used to sting are those that are put on the liver, and the mouse, and the podagra, and on the belly and the bowel and the rain and the hernia, because this member does not bear stinging on the skin,
and they are not done so much as to draw blood from one member to another, as we do with the mammary glands when the milk comes out; by removing the viscosity that is in the member, as we put leeches on the belly and on the bowel to reduce the member.
and bone the pain, when there is an operation or stone, if by its own virtue bone attracts the operation, or deserts the stone from its place;
and thus do so when you put it on the liver and on the midsome when there is repressed wind.
and these suction cups are empty only to suck up so little; and never are they together, fire, and never are there plainness of water.
as such diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way that the suction cup is filled with hot water, or with water in which it has boiled herbs suitable for this purpose.
The form of the suction cup administered to fire is thus:
And it should be 2.5 inches wide and a half palm long, and it should have or is at the center a small hole, as for inserting an needle
and let it be of iron, so that it does not damage the patient when applied to the member;
and has in the center a crossbar of iron or of metal, for the purpose of taking a candle grip;
and be long and short according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
For the suction cups of children are other than those of old people, and thin ones that fat ones.
And it is necessary to place this suction cup on the limb:
take the candlewax or .i. ointment, and put it in the middle of the suction cup at the root of the penis, which is placed on the middle of the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so it does not burn the patient.
and then place it on the member, and these two are at the top of the hole that we have said, so that when you turn it over, if there is steam, and heat the suction cup;
and take the lining as before, and renew it often, if necessary.
In the suction cup is now ready for the disease of pleurisy, in all water, has no verge or hole, and is prepared only when it is plain water, and placed on the member with such a little movement.
and this is the form:
are not brought together except in members or one cannot put the suction cups because of their smallness, as lips and gums, and similar them; and in the naked legs of a horse, as two or three or others;
and the quality of use so that when you find suction cups that are in clear water without danger, if you take them.
and put them in water for as long as they are familiar, and do not have anything in their bellies; and then clean from the vein and the wound, then rub the limb until it is red, and put the poultices on;
and when they are healed, and have cherried, if it is his or one that can be put a wound, it is put on because this works well after.
If not, raise the head in such a way, and then water, very well, and then rinse it out;
and let him lie too long after the heart of the sun, if moist. i. linen cloth in cold water, and put on, as long as the sun is wet;
and if the sun is multiplied, then put on vitriole ground, or gall, and similar things, as long as it is dried up;
or put on the ground half of peeled peas, and leave them until they burn at the ground, now it will be dried up;
and if you have more work, then take other veins.
And if the pus does not want to take, then rub the site of the wound with fresh blood, or put an needle in it as long as there is pus coming out. and then place them on, and soon as they feel the pain, so they burn;
and when you see that they are crying, then powder on a little alum and honey, or oak bark powder, or ash powder, so they will not cry anymore.
This is the beginning of the book about fractures
The chapter on cauterization is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Know, you wise person, that the wise man will pour this chapter on cauterization, which no ancient book or letter has ever mentioned.
And for this reason the science is strange to our land, for I never found any good book about it.
and I know nothing, except for the knowledge of the ancient books, which I have studied so much and treated about the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have shortened it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these 20 chapters above.
Therefore it is appropriate that we say in this book the sum of the words and the chapters where wisdom dwells, and delay upon truth, so that those who are tested may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or dislocates comes to someone, it is appropriate that you hurry to save the sick person from one side and the other, if there is no pain on either side, as in weakness of the body, or infirmity, or age;
or if the tendon is too tight or too loose; and mild drinks too often, that is to say, cold juices, and cheese and herbs, and do not drink wine, and do not eat any foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about the appendix, nor about the expansion of matter in the member; if the disease returns to its first governance which it has used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed with food that makes fat, or has viscosity like cooked bread, and rice, and beans, and pies, and cakes of milk, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For a slow healing reduces the break and makes it heal faster.
And know that broken bones of old people and the feeble cannot recover or strengthen themselves according to their nature because of the lack of blood in the limbs, nor those that are too soft, like the bones of small children;
but has no cure, return to the broken bone. large bones that join together the member, as much as it heals, and for this reason there is no need to feed it with large meat, as we have said.
And know that the breakers are various in many ways.
For the break of the head is other than the break of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks. For there is a break that goes to the root, and another in the joint, as when one cuts the hair with scissors.
For there is a break that goes to the root, and another in the joint, as when one cuts the hair with scissors. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break that is just a small crack.
And at every mode there is his own instrument, and his own tool for restoration, according to that which the memory comes in its place.
and is caused by the fracture of the bone by that which the lever is twisted and opened well on one side, and is pressed with the hand;
and when there is no torus or twist in it, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture;
but it can have torus, or crack, or small fracture. If it is not necessary for you to move it with your hand, but put on the medicine that comes next, and then hold it now gently.
And know that the break that goes in the arvolt, and are the three parts separated, it now seems to put them together evenly, so that the abscesses come out.
and if the abscesses come out, so you leave no time, as long as the abscesses are calm; Then put it evenly on the medicine that you can easily and thoroughly apply, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of that which has pieces; then hold it, as it seems hereafter.
And if in the bone there are pieces broken, and they are of .ij. parts, be it hand or foot, or at your hand if it is a small member, or at .ij. strings, or at a string and at your hand;
and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are healed, you will bring back all additions in their places by means of which you can, and keep so that your work does not cause the patient any injury or pain;
and set well the 2 joints of the bone according to the best shapes.
And feel well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if it is well put together, and do not strain it too much, do not press it as they do by their work of incising aching and contracting the member, as we have often wanted many times.
And when the limbs are at rest, teach the patient that he not move them, neither while awake nor asleep, nor while turning over, nor in any other way. and guard well that the limbs be so secure that they feel no pain. For when one feels no pain, then it is at rest, and one should put it in a position where it feels no pain.
For when one feels no pain, then it is at rest, and one should put it in a position where it feels no pain. and guard well that it be placed correctly, so that there is no twitching when it is reset.
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I told you.
You should know that broken members are various in size and length and shape.
For there are small limbs, such as breasts and toes and similar things: it is convenient to wrap sheets of soft linen around them;
and those that are thick, such as thigh and leg: it is convenient to wrap with a wide and sturdy linen, for the wide linen embraces all of the large member, and holds it evenly together, so that there is no gap;
Then he should make light blows with his fist, 2 or 3 times according to the limb, and hold back the hand a little from the joint, then go above the break and hold it back less, so that the break then moves a little way away.
and soften the joint a little and a little, until you press strongly on the sound side, then take another limb, and turn again above the broken place;
then go back to the sound side of the break and hold it gently, not too hard or too lightly, as we said in the first step about;
then put between the light threads of linen or drapes, until they are all even, then lay it all on top .i. bandage, and then put your well-made splints on, if there is an abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or abscess, then put on something to calm the abscess and keep it open, and let it remain so for some days;
Then extract from your bones, and let them be half a foot long, or a broad cane, or a palm branch, and be according to this figure:
But it is necessary that the bone that one puts on the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and be also long or short according to the size of the member;
Then bind them to the staves also as you did with the first hour, then lie upon one above a thread in the same way as on the first hour over the splint.
then bind them more tightly, less so; and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of linen;
for if the thread is thick, like the ropes of linen that they make into ligatures, and it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it is necessary that there be less than two inches of space between each string.
And if the patient is pricked by the joints of the staves after they have been stretched, then let them be padded with linen, or woolen cloth, so that they do not bruise.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the curative is broken, I will say the cure hereafter.
And know that it does not fit to extract all the members of a broken person the first day. For when the members are great, it does not fit to put on a cast before 2-3 days or more according to the severity of the injury to the appendix sometimes soon after;
and here is the method of the ancient plaster to restore fracture, dislocation and twist: and it is that you take flour that holds to the walls of the mill, and confound it with a lot of eggs, and put this confect, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring the fracture to several dispositions, especially for women and small children, because it is not too sharp or too frosty.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren Z abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. Z.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. Z.; alechil .viiij. Z.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.
Another way to make a plaster that restores breaks, dislocations, and twists: take mugat and vismalve, ana 10 Z.; myrrh and aloe, ana 67 Z.; acacia 5 Z., grind well, and confect with water or egg yolk, and administer.
Another way to make a plaster for joints and bones that have come loose from their places, and to soothe pain that comes suddenly, and to repair the broken bone: take fresh milk and thicken it slightly with boiled oil, and apply it to the affected area. This plaster does not restore properly, but is good at soothing pain in an abscess, and properly repairs broken bones.
Another way to make a plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and dried wood avens leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method of plastering for the restoration of bone fracture and for lessening the remaining abscess. Take root of wormwood, chamomile, violet flower, flour of timothy, each of these in part; grind them and confect with wine, and the members will be warmed by it, confected with coriander seed juice or water, and used.
Another method of plastering that is stronger than the first, when an abscess has become chronic and requires the restoration of the limb. Take roots of wormwood, flax seed, borage, melilot, and yarrow; flowers of violet and chamomile, each in part; grind them and confect with salt water or plain water or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
In his book, Ypocras states that for the restoration of a broken limb, one should use only a plaster made of wax and oil, and nothing else; he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galenus states that one should use dry things that are a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.
Another method of plastering that is useful for lesions and pain: take mugwort and horsetail, or feathers from birds, viscera, and a rope made even, and grind them up, and make a plaster and lay it on. And then take care not to let the patient feel any pain, nor does the bone move out of its place; otherwise, do not remove it by hand every day.
And if pain or itching comes to the place, or there is no rest or swelling, do not wait, and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip it in water, and lift it up until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved; then leave the member rest for an hour, then put another dry cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, and lay it on a nut, until you are sure of the heat;
and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and alleviate the pain of the bone, then continue the gentle application, and a little ointment, and do not pull it as strongly as before; and gently until it is cured.
And if you see that abscess, redness, pain, and swelling have occurred all over, and you need to use ointment and bandages, then start again, as you did in the first place with evenness.
And if that does not come to the limb as we have said, and do not separate it more than three times or four times or five times; and do not leave it for more than ten days, according to what is seen, until the break comes closer to the shoulder bone.
Then hold it more tightly than before, and make the meat thicker as I have said above; and if you see that it is drying up faster than necessary, know that there will be no growth; but let it rest a while, and then continue to bind it. arose lo onques d'aigue chaude teede, toves lo desliies, et c'est chescun tier jor, et esleich un poc la lieure;
arose lo onques d'aigue chaude teede, toves lo desliies, et c'est chescun tier jor, et esleich un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.
des diverses maneras de brisure Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;
For he has fractures which are made by the striking of an sword, and the collar bone all the way to the shoulder which is broken in two, so as to make a sound like a whistle; and therefore this manner of breaking is called "whistling".
Or the sword breaks the bone from above when piercing, and this manner of breaking is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two great or small fractures is great.
And if there is a collision within, or a fracture or a collar of stone, or a fall on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a piercing fracture, which comes close to the edge of the bone which is broken in two, or which is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if to a wound which is healed in the bone as fine as an awl, and is a small split, and for this reason this break is called "capilaire".
And if the wound is made by a stone or by falling or by some other thing, and brings in a piece of bone down, and the head of the bone is like what the blacksmith does when he works on the kettles; if it enters between the stones.
And if there is a small head of bone which becomes moist, as is the head of a child;
and I will speak about it in its place.
And let us know all kinds of injuries from traction on them, and the investigation in tents, and by the corrupt cart that is over it.
The hair-like appearance is created by what happens when one exposes the bone and rubs it, thus creating a black fracture.
In the cure for a fracture, be cautious of accidents due to illness, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of understanding, extension, palms, feverishness, and the eyes burning and reddening, and other similar symptoms in multiple conditions, it is doubtful that it can be cured.
And if you do not see a promising accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
And when the new birth comes to you first, and it is in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the month.
And if it is in summer, you must remove the bone before the seventh day of the month, so that the decay of the bone does not occur, and the accident that we have mentioned comes.
And if the break in the bone occurs only to the part that covers the skull, you must split it in half: and it is that you squeeze the chief of the disease, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more suavely than you can.
and if the decay of blood occurs when the bone is uncovered, or an abscess breaks out, assist him with what you have, and it is that you fill the space with wet cloth soaked in oil. and let the wound rest as long as the abscess is calm, and are sure of the evacuation of blood; then begin to cut through the bone, and it is done according to .ij. ways of work: one way is that you chop with a narrow edge in front, and this is the form:
And then I make another cut wider than the first.
And the second way is that you have a number of different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and are made of iron; and work lightly, so as not to wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, so that you pierce it from within, as well as you bring the talons with trowels, not completely through so that the point does not go out beyond the bone; and you must have more than, so that each comes in its place at the tip of the bone, so that you have trowels for all the test; and this is the form of the 3.ij. ways of talons:
Here is the translation of the text:
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, if it seems to you that you should place on it the little hook which is kept back from the bone with everything .i. another instrument resembling an incision, but it is necessary that it be less thick and more delicate than the other incision;
and if it does not hold back any small bones or scales, if the bone is lightly held with some instruments; then heal the wound with the tints and oils that we have said.
and the other method of work which is that which Galen says, which is more dangerous; and hold it very firmly, and this is his word: It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture opens widely, so that when you have uncovered this part, then you shall drive out the head of this lens-shaped chisel, from which comes this form:
And do not cut from one side, and this part is wet on 2 sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then take a small mallet on the top, so that you hit the bone lightly all around, and give yourself well protection from the cloth that is driven out;
if it is attached to the bone, then the bone will be lightly hit, because when the bone is well hurt, and there is no fear.
And if the bone break of the os ne perce jus' to the toile, and the os is cut so little only by above, and there are small pieces, then consider this asperity, and scrape off the scales with a sharp razor, of which you must have different quantities, to adjust in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the figure of the break.
If you are in front of many razors, and then of more subtle ones, do not stop doing this until it is well done.
In each of the other haircuts and subtle shavings, it is necessary that you bring to bear according to its adaptation; and this is something that has not yet been answered to those who have put their study in this art.
And if the wound is infected, then it is necessary that you strain .i. a piece of linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in oil, and put it on the wound; and let it rest for three or four days. then take another piece of linen cloth, doubled in two or three pieces, and soak it in wine and oil, and put it on the first cloth; and make this lighter than you can, so that you do not aggravate the wound, then remove it after it has soaked;
and let it be so. i. e. for a day or two, until the abscesses are calmed, then untie them, and administer medicines in the form of roots of plants, and flour of times, and incense powder, and aristologous, and similar things; and from these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer to them medicines that harm the world without pain;
and guard that the wound is clean, that you do not leave it to fester, nor do you let it gather bowel, for when the bowel gathers on the cloth of the skull, if it is corroded and rotten, it brings great evil to the patient; because when one puts a poisonous medicine on it, it burns from above.
Take care therefore, that no bad accident should come to the patient, as we have said, if it is uncertain without doubt.
And if sorrow does not come from the medicine that we have put on it, which has virtue, then you should squeeze a part of honey and 2 parts of rose oil and glues 1 drapelet, and put it on the medicine. And then the treatment in the manner of the treatments that it knows, until he is healthy.
Know that the 18 bones of the neck are never broken by itself, for they are cartilaginous, and they do not break unless they bend or twist, and then heal.
And if one of the 18 bones is broken, then you should knock your little finger or knuckle on the neck, and set the break evenly with your index finger, and out of place at the end, until the neck regains its natural shape. and do it lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the neck, and cannot return to its place, know that you should put it equal to the top of a small ray.
And if the break is in two parts, then do not restore it otherwise, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can.
If it is not, after the seventh or ninth day, when the apothecary's poultices are no longer needed, then bind at the top of the neck with strips of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Then bind the other end to the other side, if the break is there too; and let the strips be wide enough to fill the openings at the neck.
And they said that one should not dry the tents with hay, and each day. I do not think this is good, but it is necessary that the tent be dried with sheep's wool, and powder from a mill; then leave the tent, until the bone is hard, and the cartilage hardened.
And do not use goose feathers in place of tents, and if it is. I.e., sheep's wool, dry it in the sun, and stand it up, and blow on the patient with it; or make a veil as you see fit.
And if an abscess appears while you are operating, so that it oozes, or if you use cotton moistened with oil, or a little of astringent powder.
And if an abscess does not ooze, put paste on it from the outside, made of semolina flour and incense powder, confited with sheep's wool, then put on light poultices, and do not bind the wound.
and if the fracture of the neck is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with appropriate instruments for this, then cut the wound, and treat things that harm the car, and bind it together, as with plasters and ointments appropriate to this.
and if there is no pain within the neck at all, then treat the swelling, and put on bandages of plaster, until it is healed.
of the split in the jaw
When the jaw is split, and there is no wound, and the fracture is only slight, and it is not broken in two, except that it may curve inside, so that it can be made lighter.
If the fracture is on the right side, place your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if it's on the left side, place your index finger from your right hand into the fracture, and gently push it back into place, and use your other hand to hold it there, and make it even.
And if the fracture of the jaw is crooked, then it is necessary that you arrange extension on either side to make it even.
And if there is movement or a tear, then strain it with a golden, silver, or silk thread; then put the mandible that is broken over this, and put two sheets of cloth on top of it; and place a long, wide piece of leather, even with the mandible, over the sheet of leather, and tie it to the jaw; and command the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the figure has changed, then let it rest for three days, and then reset what has changed; and apply plaster to it, with powder from the mill with plenty of egg white or flour from the husk, after you have removed the cerotomies; and put on another light layer of plaster, and if the plaster hardens, and the patient's condition does not change, let him be healthy for as long as he remains so; often it becomes healthy in three weeks.
And if abscesses form, then administer as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and a wound together, then reward a small piece of the bone that is osteo; if subtle of the ostium are the instruments convenient to this.
And if the wound is tight, then enlarge it with fire according to your necessity.
And when you have ostected all these pieces, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, then put on it plasters convenient to this, to reduce the fever, as long as it is healthy.
of the lever of the lever breaks many times before, over the shoulder, and the break is according to .ij. ways: or it is broken and dislocated in .ij., and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with wound.
And the work if it is so that the break is without wound, you have  .ij. ministers, so that one holds the lever that is broken; and the others extend the neck towards the part; then make the break even on both sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or hair-splitting.
And if you have to extend more, so put a round staff of cloth or linen on the shoulder of the patient, and make it big according to your need; and lift and hold the lever, and draw the staff into your hand, so that you make the break even, as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder away from behind, so that it comes out perfectly, it is necessary that the patient lie down on his back and put his ear down; and the assistant raises the shoulder blade, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then place the break on your sides, and if you find it broken, you should split it; and draw the pieces out lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, then take off the instrument with which you are treating; but keep the shoulder blade in place for surgery.
and it seems like a spoon, and is not hair, and should also be wide enough to accommodate the size of the bone and the ability of the work; and it has .ij. shoulders, if you can see, one wide and the other narrow, just as the fracture of the wound that you made when you split the bones.
and when you are certain of the incision, if it is hot, and the fracture is small, or if you doubt about the incision, if you employ a drape or a tent, according to its quantity.
And if abscesses come, let it be wet with oil of rose, with almond, and wine; and put on.
For the extraction of bone, when there is pain and injury, it is that you put on the bone with plaster from the powder of the mill and with ash of egg, and put light stamps on, and put a spike under if you need one. then take a very long band of one palm wide, then put two layers of oilcloth on top, and plaster it on; then take a thin stick of two feet long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the head of the bandage is hanging down; and put the stake on the broken bone, and turn the bandage over your neck, and under the elbow, and around the arm; and take off one side at a time, and when you see that the bandage stays in place forward, and you clearly see that the stake does not move from above the bone, then take it all off every day, and when you feel that the joint is loose,
and make the patient lie on his back, and tie him when he sleeps . i . little ear pull out the shoulder, in order to raise the dislocation upwards; so will the break of the joint by the alignment of the shoulder be eased, where you bind the arm to the neck, and no bad accident comes, until .xx. days;
then begin the cauterizing again, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and let it be like this until he is restored; and she is restored in 39 days, and less for some men.
from the break of the shoulder
For the break of the shoulder
And if a piece of the bone is sticking out, and there is no pain when touched, then it is made to come up, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the shoulder to calm the abscess with heat.
of the breaking of the piece
If the piece is broken in half, it often comes apart, but when it does not, it causes great pain to the patient; and if it does not align properly, and sometimes it vomits blood, and the taste is bad in the broken bone, and the smell is terrible.
And if the patient lies down on his back, and you place a pillow under his head, then press his shoulders together, and join the ribs with hands, and carefully make it even in every way so that the figure of the bone is as it should be; then wrap it in a cloth, and fasten it to the bone, either with a string or something lighter, and tie it tightly, and adjust it hour by hour, and if it relaxes, you tighten it; and if it needs to be released, because of corrosion or itching that comes to the surface, or pain or abscess, then hasten to release it, and remove the covering, and treat it in a way appropriate to its condition; then remove the covering, and fasten it tightly until it is healed.
from a break in the ribs
I know that the rib fracture only comes from the outside, deep in the back, and does not bend much except because they are so thin; and it feels good at the examination to the two hands.
And if you restore it so that the break is even, as it should be; and then put on the plaster, and hold it with a splint, if you need one.
And if the rib fracture is facing inward, then the patient will feel great pain and aching, as if it were weeping; because the bone rubs against the membrane; and it becomes hoarse, and it vomits much blood, and this is a sign of bad health, and it has caused a great deal of trouble.
And if it is from those who serve that it is necessary to administer meat that swells the belly, to drive the wind away towards the anus.
We do not make this, unless hot poultices come, if it has not already come. And if it has come, let the patient rest.
And no one says that we put poultices on the spot, to draw off the excess, and this is true; however, doubt exists that poultices can attract excesses to the site by weak disposition.
And they said that one must cover the place of another's moistness with oil, and set tents between the ribs to make the space equal, then cure it from the plague cure, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain so that he cannot bear by the bone that stretches the tapestry, then there is doubt in the patient; therefore it is necessary to split over the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put there an instrument to ward off illness; and then it is necessary to trim the bone, and pull lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if they are big, and cure them with poultices, until they are healed. And if abscesses come, then put on drapes wetted with oil, and place them; and while healing the place where it is necessary for an abscess to come, and let him rest on the rib or where he needs to, until they are healed.
from the rib fracture
No one comes who breaks the bone of the neck, and that it falls; and also at the back of the spine. And when it is in anyone and you can see if he will be healed or not, if his hands are soft and swollen and dead and cannot move or stretch, and if you prick them with an needle, if they don't bleeds. Know that it is fatal in many dispositions, and if they don't bleed and feel good when they are extracted and there is no, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be healed, if he is put on treatment.
And when similar things come to the spine of the back, and you can see if he will be healed or not, if his joints are soft and the accident is in his hands, and on his back wind comes out and excretes without will; and when it is put on its stomach, excretes without will. And when it is put on its back and it wants to stand, it cannot. Know that it is fatal: do not work in its treatment.
And if this accident does not come to him, then is the thing lighter.
And the cure is that you put oil of rose or oil of musk on it if there is inflammation, until it is calm; then place it on a bandage and bind it, and tie it with a thread, and command to the patient to rest; and do not sleep in the part where he feels pain, until he is healed. And if any bone is dislocated, if it needs to be covered with cloth; and bone the bone, then join together the two lips of the wound, if it is big, with a stitch, then treat it with ointment, bringing in charcoal, until it is healthy; and if the bone is broken, which is called "bone of the knee", if you hold your cup in your left hand, and place it equal to the other hand at your power, then put on the plaster and tie it up, if you need to; then hold it, and if any bones are dislocated, if it needs to be done, and bone it, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
of the broken bone of the thigh
If the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, let there be only a little bit of damage to the head; and smooth it out, and set it in place, declining it to the side, and coming to the patient's pain, and pointiness, and swelling where it is broken.
And the setting in place if you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the break; and know what the break is and what its shape is; and if the break is at the head, set the break equal to that which is natural.
And if his break is long, or it declines inwardly, then let the patient lie on his belly until the mending of that break is arranged for him. And when you have made it even, then lay it on the plaster, and then put a board of wood or of timber upon it, and draw out the break so that it does not move; and employ the joint with bands at the sides, until the place is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his side or back.
And if an abscess comes up, so long as it does not cause pain, until the abscess has been drained, and then return to the restoration, holding it in place as necessary, unless there is some other misfortune; and that is the way.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
the dislocation of the shoulder
And the 2 heads 2 ties, and lift them up, and cut the patient on 1 seat; then pour out some of the water on the broken arm to the elbow, and have a bucket of water ready; then put it on any heavy object or weight down; then put the break on equal hands together, until the break returns as it should.
The other way is that you lie the patient on his back, and hold his hand to his neck, then order 2 ministers that one holds what is on the break at your hands, and the others hold down all the ties, and extend each to its part.
Et s'il est nécessaire de faire une incision plus profonde, alors on attache avec un fil la rupture, et sur la rupture, et on place chacun des assistants à sa part. Et si la rupture est proche de la tête de l'épaule, il convient que tu places un fil de manière lâche derrière l'assise, et un autre vers le côté, derrière la rupture; et aussi, si la rupture est de ce côté-ci, il convient de placer un fil légèrement, sans effort, tant que la rupture reste droite sur son emplacement, et sur sa direction; puis placez la rupture comme elle convient, et serrez-la, si les apoptes ne viennent pas.
And if apoplexy comes, then do not tie it up before 21 days, and put on the wound oil mixed with rosin, until the apoplexy is calm; then tie it up, and the way to tie it up is that you place the plaster on the rupture, and then you join the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the side; and wrap a cloth around it, and tie it up on the arm, so that the arm is in its natural position, unless something hinders it, or the bone does not break.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use a splint, and put on the rupture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and leave between each splint 2 inches of space, and let each splint be as large as to pass through the rupture 3 inches from each side; then tie up on the splints, so as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the plaster on the rupture, more strongly and less by moving away.
And if you see the seat of the stars and the extraction, as we said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the incision warm, let it bind until the seventh day, as we said; then look at each one .iiij. days to see, so that itching does not flourish or come into place, or that the return of sensation cannot come to the member because it is too much restricted. If it is done, as we said.
And if no such accident comes, if it is not removed after three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; then place a clean piece of lamb's skin evenly over the broken member, and look every hour during the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or that the ligaments are not relaxed; if it is healing by the power of medicine, and give him meat as we have said, in such a way that the food is at the first subtle level; and when he begins to improve, let it be thick. It is customary that the shoulder and leg should be put back in 40 days; and then it must be removed and bath and medicines of ointments applied to promote healing. And if the rigidity is ugly and sticky, do not remove it after one day or two months.
of the break in the arm
The arm is composed of 2 bones, which are called the "fosciles," one small and one large; the small one lies in front of the large one, and the two together make up the arm. The large foscile can break off by itself, or the small one, or perhaps both at once.
When the small foscile is broken, the healing is easy, and when the large one is broken, it is a bad healing, and more painful than when both are broken at once. If it is only the small foscile that is broken, then the appropriate thing is to extend it lightly, and make it even.
And if it is the large foscile that needs to be stretched more strongly; and extend it on .i. side, and turn the pouchet of the hand up higher than the other sides, and the small fingers lower than the others, so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then stretch the ministers' arms to the dislocated part at their hand, or at a .i. line, and another minister's arm above it. And then make the patient lie even, according to his best form.
And if the break is into pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is any that does not grasp the handle, and you cannot restore it to its place, then mend it with nails and wood, as we have said before.
And if with the cutter to the wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapître; so take the cure.
And if in the beginning of the restoration comes abscesses, so glue .i. a drape of cerote made of oil and white wax, that is not too hard or too soft; and put the drape above subtilely, as long as the abscess is calmed down. And then oil the cerote, and put the plaster of the powder of the mill with much tar, because put the splints, and be that the splint of the briseure is more farther, and a little wider than others; and know that it must have vj. splints or arms in many dispositions: whether the briseure is in one bone, or in .ij.; and stretch up above the briseure rather than other part, and all days less to be removed, if I said at the beginning of the chapître; and be the drape that are on the briseure soft and moist, and not too hard or too rough; and be the thread, of which it is stretched, of linen, not too thick nor too fine, as we have said. And reward the member and the joint after some days. And if some bad accidents come to the member, as pruritus that comes to the member, so that you must rinse the member with hot water, until the pruritus is calmed down; and let the member rest no longer confined. And then begin again the stretching, and if the ligaments are soft and the bones desevrez, and similar things, if you address it.
And if take ward that the stretching not come to the member, por ceu that it is too confined, so that you must make it soft  .i. bit, and leave it thus for some days, as long as the stretching runs, and then stretch it again.
And if any of these things that we have said do not come to the patient, so it is not a dislocation until .xx. days, or so long as he can feel, then let him put his hands on his neck, and make his neck even, and keep away from movement and change, and sleep on his back; and know that this broken piece has been healed in .xxx. days or in .xxxv., and perhaps in .xx. days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
Of the break in the hand
Know that at the back of the hand and on both sides there are few breaks, and it comes but a little often.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or plied, so it is that the patient dies, and if he sees straight before him even; then let him put his hand on the table extended, and extend the members of the bones that are broken, and make them even, until they are well joined together; and put the plaster and staples, unless there are any, then put a steele according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped up in 1. drapes of linen.
And if it breaks within the paregoric around the navel of the plant, then make a rope of drapels, and instruct the patient that he estrengs to his navel; and then he pulls out with a long drapeil, and is the size of a great rope from a sheaf, and draws him, if it comes.
And if it breaks at the end, then you should put a stake on it, and another one in the plant, so that the hands are open and straight; then tie it tightly around the hand, and seal the bond between the two.
And if it breaks at one of the two, then you should put it in a straight position, as it comes; and tie it with the plant, and if you see that there is one that needs to be lifted, do not move; and if it breaks on the other two, then put it in a straight position, and bind it to the healthy one after it; or all four together, holding them tightly, so that they can move, or you should put it on a stake, as I said; and take care of the restoration and arrangement of the aposteme, and help those who come, as I said.
of the broken shoulder
The bones of the hip are often broken, and one can see very well when they turn forward and backward; and the cure is this: first, you ligate above the fracture, and second, you do so below. The patient lies on his face, then extends each minister, or servant, of the body equally to his side; and that is when the fracture is mended.
If the fracture is near the root of the hip, then one minister should be placed above the knuckle, and another below the fracture; and if it is near the knee, then one minister extends the leg upward, and another downward; then he makes the bone equal with his two hands, as nature has made it, and then he applies the plaster, and ligates it, so that the wound does not open.
If there is an abscess, then he should let it rest and return to his work and treatment; the time for the operation is determined in this way. It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture .i. bend hard double in .ij. or .iij., and wait for the superfluity, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of birth, and stick i.e. a long thread between the buttocks and the leg, delving the knee cap off, and bring the head of the thread above; then turn on the leg and the buttocks the bend, then put the stork-beak on the fracture, and put a stork-beak on the bone of the leg; then employ the space left between the leg and the buttocks with drapels of cloth to make the compression equal, then begin to bind it form iij. twists or iiij. on the fracture; and as you go up on the fracture, and less the compression; then take the 2j. threads that you have stuck between the leg and the buttocks, and tie iij. stork-beaks that are above, then return to the knee cap until you come off of it; and the compression, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, then if it comes not a pimple or swelling or another appearance.
And if it should happen, if it loosens, and addresses the one who has come, if as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that grip, if it is necessary to move them, if you can; and if you cannot, if it is necessary to split the place, and pull forcefully; and heal it as we have said, until it is healthy.
And never is the buttocks broken here because we put stork-beaks, if as in the shoulder and arm; however, when restoring it in this way, do not clatter the patient.
And know that the cure is completed in .1. days, or less or more, according to the variations of complexions.
from the knee joint
For in the joint of the knee there is sometimes a little fracture, but it often heals over and over again. And if it does fracture, it may be only a crack or a hole, and if it is broken, it does not hurt as much as if it were a wound.
And the restoration is such that if what is broken is equal to what is left at its ends, as long as it can be put together again, then set the plaster and put a round stake there, if you need one, and fasten it as we have said for other fractures, whether it is an apostume or something else; also set each accident in such a way that it becomes healthy.
the break of the leg
that in the leg are .ij. bones, so that one is called by right "mustelz", and the others are called "foscile"; and it is the same break as that of the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same as that of the arm equally, and the operations are all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns on all sides.
And if the fine bones are broken, then it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and one can see it well; and then return to the dislocation. Then apply extension, and make it even, and bind the stars evenly; but nevertheless, it is fitting that the fracture should be ugly, and there are more pieces, so that the extension should be smaller and lighter; and align according to your virtue.
And when you have finished all your work, so take .ij. twists of twisted rope that purple the leg on one side and the other, and are long of the leg from the knee to the ankle; then wrap them in .ij. pieces of cloth above and below, and tie this ligature at mid-leg, and in this ligature the leg cannot descend to the right or to the left, and so it is good; and no one administer .i. twists of long rope, and if it is twisted, and put on the leg to ward off movement, and properly make one out of the fracture or there is a sore; and stir each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or some other accident; if the cure as long as it is healthy.
of the bone fracture of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture of the bone, but the bone of the foot comes in one fracture and two times broken, and it has never been except that it was shattered in several dispositions.
And if it should happen that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see these bones surmounting one another, put this patient down on the ground like he wants to walk, and then now place your foot upon his, where those bones have risen up, then press them back down into their places; then apply the plaster and set it in place, and under the foot's belly a small flat tablet of 2.5 ounces; then bind it around the foot in front, then since you have wrapped these drapes, and other things that you need to do.
When three or four days have passed, if the swelling has gone down, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there is any of the two broken, if you reset it, if, as we said, to the two of them in length; and let one be a little wider, then place under the foot that small tablet I spoke of, and set it in place; and if there are 1.5 or 2., or more, broken, if you place on each of them an eagle according to their quantity, wrapped in 1. drape of linen, and set the tablet under the foot; and let it be under the belly of the foot, so that it is well covered.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I said about other injuries, as soon as we have said them; and help each accident as it is necessary.
of the breaking of the bone in the upper arm
When the bone is broken in the upper arm, if the woman is seated, then she should be tilted towards the back and supported from behind; then the doctor should fill the cavity of the nature with cotton, and put in also a large piece of cloth; then the woman should stand up, and bend her arm little by little, and then take out the cotton, until it comes to the opening of the nature, and the bone returns with the cloth; and when she urinates, if she takes out the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and in this way do for six days or more: so the fracture will be healed, and the pain will go away. Take a bladder from a lamb, and tie a cord around it, and pour all of the bladder into the nature; then blow into the bladder, forming a shape until the bladder is empty: the nature will then return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it has healed.
And when the bone in the hand of the man or woman is broken, if it is restored as we have said before concerning the bone in the hip; and these breaks are not hidden from him who devotes himself to study and practice, and reads my book. For the break signifies many things to the right way of restoration: let us therefore understand them.
In the vagina, when it is broken, take a neck of an goose and pour it into the vagina; then wrap fabrics around it, and leave it like that for .ii. days or more, and it will be healed in hospital.
about a break with wound
It is appropriate for one who has a break with a wound, even if it is great, such as the bone of the jaw or shoulder or similar, to be healed now, so that the healed ones that we have mentioned testify.
And if the wound heals, except for the vitriol stain, then you have nothing else, then start restoring the break in this very hour, or the same day, unless the pustules come out.
And if the pustules come out, then delay restoring it for a new day, as long as the pustules are calm, and do not touch them either on the third day or on the fourth, because you would bring about a bad accident.
And if his nose is broken, it appears at the tip of the nose that has been revealed; then you should put your hands lightly on the extension of the tip.
And if the extensions are not equal to your hands in length, then take this instrument made of iron, which is 2.5 inches long and 1/4 inch wide; and according to the quantity of the wound, use as much as is necessary for each cure of a broken nose; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member at your opening, and be sharp in front and thick in the middle, like this:
And it is called "palainche," because the broken end of the bone should be placed on the tip of the nose; and it should be struck once, until it sets, and they should be even with each other. And if the break is small, then this instrument cannot take the bone well, so you should chip off the tip of the nose, until the instrument can grasp the bone.
And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, if you chip off a piece of a suitable instrument, or an incisor or file, at your command; then take that which remains in the bone and of small cuts.
And when the jaw is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. If it is in its place, then wet it with wine-based black dye, and properly so if it is seared; and do not put on the wound wax or anything else that has oil, lest it bring about infection and corruption; then administer stones when you have restored the jaw, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover everything around it according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound should not be strained with the break; and many times this has been done to the sick, and they have come to die or corrode at all times; and let the extractions be softer and more gentle than those of other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident has not come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, then it is not appropriate to put on stones; but wrap it in a tough fabric instead of stones, and bind it. And when you see after one day or two days break out at the wound, then remove that which you have put on with wine, and put on the ointment that heals wounds, as we said, with tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
And it is appropriate to loosen the member three times a day, in the morning and at dusk, until it is healed and whole.
And it is necessary that the members are arranged in such a way that the bow moves down lightly.
And if someone bumps into it, and he cannot hold it but it comes together again with a click, because there are small pieces of bone, so you must pull the wound apart, and remove all these painful pieces that cause the pain.
And if a fistula appears at the site of corruption, or in any other way, so it is necessary that you treat it according to what he says in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and opens up on the limb, as with the bones of the hip or shoulder, and similar large limbs, do not pull it out, for many die if you do; but leave it until it putsrefies; then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
of bruses that come from the soil
We come many times after the health of the broken bone, most often when it is near the joint, and the ugly thing to see is the shape of the member; and by chance cannot do the work of its natural limbs.
Take care, then, if we find him ill: if he is administered stinging medicines, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcacollege, ochre, and similar ones; so that you do not apply any of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine of the stinging sort, or with a lot of honey, or with oil; and put them on the swelling in layers, and bind it well, and do not remove the bandage for many days; and then take it off, and start again, until the swelling is gone; or you hold it to one piece of felt well made; because the property of felt is that it takes away all swelling from the limbs; and if the swelling has turned hard like stone, then it must be cut open, so that the excess appears; or you have it cut by a barber, as long as it is hard, and cure it as long as it is well.
When the bone is set and remains weak and thin after ward: either because it was too tightly bound, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and he could not come to the member's aid; or because of too much swelling; or because of too great movements, not in its time; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat and make the body lean, until the bones multiply in him; and give him a bath, and give him joy and comfort; then put wax on the member so that the wax attracts his great thirst, and rinse it often with fresh water, until the thirst goes to the member; and return to its natural shape.
the wounded member after health
When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken, and the form of the member is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish people who say that you must break the member all over again, and many such fools have done this in our land; and these practices are blamed, and great harm happens to them, and sometimes they even die. However, if the nodules and torments are fresh, it is good that they be bathed in hot water, or herbs with soothing properties be boiled, such as billets of turtle, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the poultice should be made with a soothing ointment, such as a well-made daquilon, and you take the muskeg of turtle, and confit it with linseed oil or ghee oil, and make a poultice with it; or you take ripe figs, and grind them with hay of colts, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And no bone should be knotted so as to be rubbed continually and for a long time with damp hands. And the member should be moved every hour.
And if the joints are twisted and hardened, as in the case of stone, it is necessary to open them with iron, covering the bone up to the joint, cutting lightly with a sharp knife; and put poultice and study in the treatment.
This is the beginning of the book on dislocations:
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, resulting in misaligned limbs, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs at any joint, if it is now necessary to bring back into alignment by force.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le déplace a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;
For if it is late, and the swells increase, and by chance we put it back in its place; for this is not good that we move it when it is swollen: many times it brings spam and other pains; however, when it comes, if one heals the patient, then let him rest, as long as the abscess is calmed down; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then gently adjust it, and cure each member as the healing comes.
And I have ordered the treatments of dislocations of the shoulder joint up to the tips of the fingers.
of the mandible.
Here is the translation of the text:
When the dislocations are little, so return by them several dispositions.
And if it is entirely and completely done, then you must reset it quickly in the hospital, and do not delay.
and in this way that the ministers wet the head of the patient with a little pot of medicine on one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, so the dislocations are of .ij. parts; and the other two hands should be apart, to make it even; and instruct the patient that he makes his jaws soft, and moves them in all directions.
And he looks at the metal to make it even, until it returns to its place.
And if they are grimy, certainly the two jaws are together, but if they are rammed with hot water and oil, so that they are gently brought back; do not wait to bring them back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the sick person is well closed with a mollifying substance, if you put it on drapes soaked in oil and wax, then gently move them away from each other;
and the sick person sleeps on his back, and his jaws are between two pillows, so that he does not move them from side to side or strain them, but eats soft food, until the pains have gone away, and the jaws are no longer painful.
and then cut what he wants lightly, and do not work to open the mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well tied and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their places in an hour, and they do not return to their places, then fever and usual colds come, and perhaps stomach upset, and perhaps vomiting of clear liquid.
And when you see that it is death; and many times he dies who has it, in nineteen days.
forcelle
The forceps cannot dislocate from the cost over the course of its extension and from the foot, and is dislocated only once to the outside, and one can feel it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the joint with your palm, and it will come back; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and tie it up;
and the head that is beside the cost cannot be dislocated; unless it is, and if it is dislocated once, let him return to his place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and tie it up, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
and also here is how to bring back the shoulder that is dislocated from its place when it has been dislocated.
of the shoulder dislocation
is dislocated except for two ways: either it is dislocated from the part of the shoulder to the arm; and the second is dislocated from the foot of the bone; and by chance it is dislocated from the top, and this happens little.
and do not dislocate behind the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the neck; and many times dislocates out towards the arm, but nevertheless to those who have little money, because at these it is usually admitted to hospital; and to those who have enough money, let it go back in pain, and return in pain.
and by chance some men have percussion or cracking, and breaks the shoulder with a hot apoplexy, and thinks that it is dislocated by this.
It is therefore necessary for you to test it, as far as you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And is distinguished from the dislocation when it goes down towards the shoulder, and distinguishes between the sick and the healthy shoulder, and you will find between them a great difference. and you will find at the head of the shoulder a depression, and put the shoulder back on the neck at the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move it at all.
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, unless it is hidden, for you will find it clearly at the neck.
and this way of dislocation is not used when it is new, or when the patient has become ill.
And the way is that the minister holds the patient's hand up, then puts the splint out of the socket, and raises the joint by force to its place; and the minister holds the hand up, and extends it up again, then puts it out; and there comes sudden pain.
And if it does not come as we have said with the hands after a few days, so that the patient is bathed in warm water; and mild and soothing remedies are applied, such as an infusion of alfalfa and fenugrec and mimosa in water, and it is applied;
then put a soft cloth on the patient's back, and put a hard but not too hard or too soft piece of wood under it, then put the minister's hand on the shoulder with care, and draw it up;
and others ministers taint the head of the disease, so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns all at once, and you see if they are reset according to this way:
and so you make be present .i. a man who is greater than the patient; and let it stand on the side of the body, and pull up the shoulder of the patient, and raise the shoulder in front of the patient, so that the patient hangs down. and other ministers pull the hand of the disease downward toward the stomach. And if the patient is too light, then weight him down with something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
And the head is reset in another way: and it is set as a.i. nail, and is not too big nor too small; and Then, treat the patient, but let there be a drape of salt water over him, and let the patient remain lying down longwise; then stretch out his hand on one side, so that the joint returns to its place securely.
and if it does not return because of all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a piece of wood from the arm of a strong and tall tree, which has a hole through it in the middle, so that the head can pass perfectly into dislocation according to this shape:
Then put it over the top of the head with salt water, so that it does not burn the patient, and then place it into dislocation on the patient's shoulder; and extend your arms along the wood, and place the aid on the wood, and the arm at the head of the hand, and then place the arm on a small board of a certain size, and let the body hang from one side: the joint will now return.
And when it is in place, in whatever way, you must then put down on the shoulder a piece of wool that is even, and then put on the pomander of the mill, with incense and ash of ash, all over the shoulder and around, then pull it out of dislocation gradually, and tie the ligature on the pomander, and embrace the hand to the neck, and let the hands remain in this way.
And it is necessary that he should drink little, so long as the members are comfortable, for they will heal more quickly; and then drink more after a day or two, and move them. And if they are stiff and not softened, they are healed.
And if the joint has moved from its place due to moisture which has come, or due to another cause, it is necessary that you treat it with cauterization three times, as we have described above, with the paste of cauterization.
And if you do all this, and after five or six days the joint does not hold and cannot raise its arm upright, then you know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder has been cut or stretched or softened; and you know that the joint has never been set in its place.
The dislocation that is above the loins, and the breastbone, or behind, is made by an impact, and by stretching of the arms, and I move it another way; and treat it until it is healed.
And if after healing comes stiffness in the member, and late movement, so the patient bathes many times, until that stiffness is relaxed, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the joint
Sache that the jointure of the shoulder is dislocated forward and backwards, and perhaps less so on the sides, and if it is dislocated in all directions, one can see and feel it clearly; and let it be dislocated according to its shape. And when you join the dislocated shoulder with the sound one, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder.
And it is necessary that you bring it back in the same way as the chest is opened, for if the chest were opened, there would be great grief in doing so; and by chance it cannot be brought back from all and everywhere, especially from behind; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes great pain, and by chance it leads to death.
And the restoration is, when it is such that you can bring it back, that you extend its hand to your 1 . 2 hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands between the base of the thumb and the knuckle, up and down, and press the joint together with its palm roots, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then come back when he doubles his hand to his other hand, and pull on the side that is dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, then give a strong extension; and it is that the two extend the arm, and pull it down the two, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arms of each side, then that you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth;
and when he sees the joints of his hand, if he does not apply any oil to soften the joints, then tighten them together until they recover.
and when it is in place, if he puts on plaster with ash and honey, and tightens it, and holds the arm up to the neck of the sick person, and leaves it for a few days, then loosens it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not move well, then begin again with plaster and the bandage, and leave it for a while until it is firmly placed, then loosen it.
And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it is painful, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a layer of sheep's fat, then leave it for one day and one night, then loosen it, and let him enter or bathe. and when it rains, he gently rubs the joint and then puts the child back on his feet and into the bath; and so he does .ij. or 1.iij. times, until he is healthy; and if you see it, put it on the end of a wet towel that has been heated with butter, and draw it up; and it will come back to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
the dislocated hand comes back more easily than other joints; however, it is necessary to return it to its place immediately after dislocation, when the joint is swollen, or else an abscess will form.
And if you put the diseased hand on a table, and extend its fingers, and look at it, so that he puts his palm against the joint, and presses it until it returns;
All the same, you must make sure that he is lying in a good position; then place the patient's back of his hand on a table for extension and for bringing it back. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's back of his hand on a table, and look at the appearance of the joint; if it comes back now, that is good.
If not, then cut off the appendages with sharp knives and let them bleed; then he leaves it like this without a surgeon's aid.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot set it in place after several days, then wait for the joint to heal.
and should not be told to the patient that as long as his hands are wet, he can't extract anything: so you know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; if there is no other device but to extract by delicate cautery the case, and perhaps nothing else.
And when his hands are in place, let them rest on the plaster that we have said, then extract and leave it for a day or two, then remove it and leave it like that.
And if he can't move it well, and there is no fracture, if the water is warm, and rub it until it is well.
of the dislocation of the two hands
None of the time are the joints of the hand dislocated at each side, none of the time to the back of the palm or the belly;
Then are the joints, and press the dislocation to your knuckles until it comes back, then support the head of the two joints, and move it towards the part where it is joined;
and then leave it.ij. days, and then set it straight that day; and if it is stiff, as we have said, and dislocates that day, and makes it move, and sets it back in place; and do this often, until it is loose, and
and also do this if it is dislocated at the base of the hand, and do so as you have done before, until it is well; and also do this when it is dislocated from the other side.
Dou desaluement de l'eschinee dou dos.
For the dislocation of the shoulder or collarbone, if there is one or more dislocations, without treatment, for fear that the patient will die quickly.
And the signs are that the excretions come out without will, cannot hold them, and often the limbs are weakened, or the two thighs or two arms or one.
And often the eschyne is mute in three parts: that which is mute at the back is called "gilbositez".
If it is due to a deformity brought on by childhood, then there is no cure or recovery from all of this.
And those that come from falls or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treating them with great words did not bring much benefit to all of this.
But I have simplified it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the deformity that comes before, there is no cure or healing.
and so too those who come from the back, if I say, for they cannot be cured except properly.
and so too that the patient lie face up on an even surface, and have a harness put on them, so that they do not bleed.
and then set a log on the ground under the patient's head, and another between his feet, and tie a rope around the patient's chest, and another between his knees, and another between his ankles;
and the two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other between the feet, among the two logs;
and are firmly closed, the twine so as we said, and the mirror sets its palms on the spine, until he comes round.
And if she does not come back by this cure, take a table of 12 inches long, and shave off the wall, and let the patient be on one side, and pour the top of the table off the wall, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and put the mirror's tips on the other top of the table, and press well, until he comes back to place; and if you see this, do it with your other hand.
And it is that you stick 12 torches on the top of the sick person with a big arm, and put them between each torch, up and down, a palm's length apart;
and place each splinter .i. on the edge, or let it run, and are the splinters firmly in the ground so that they do not move, and between each .ij. splinters is one splinter turning, because the string turns, and have in the .ij. turners .ij. small splinters of a palm long, to turn the string;
and then tie the string that is between the splinters to the top of the hook, and the other string toward the stones at the other hook, and each of the ministers turns his string on all the string, and the master puts the needle even as we have said.
And when it is even, put on dried ochre with a lot of oil, and then the plasters, and then the board of a tablet of 1.iij. inches long, that purple the head of the gibbus and the part of the spine healthy, then tie it with a string as we have said, and use subtle oil to the patient until he is well;
and if no thing comes to the end of health, so administer soft and soothing medicines with the tablet that we have said above; and never administer one tablet,
and never comes the appearance in the posterior spondyle of the back, and thought it is dislocations; and this is the bone that opens, so that one must not have presumption: by chance would come death.
of the hip joint dislocations
tell that the hip and shoulder joints only come as dislocations, not otherwise; and the hip joint is dislocated according to three.iiij. parts: within and outside, and in front and behind; and most inside, and least in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocations within is that when one joins the ill leg with the healthy, it is more distant, and opens more of the ill foot than of the healthy one, and cannot double its ill knee on fire; and is the place where the thigh comes from an abscess hot, for this reason the head of the leg comes there.
And the sign of that person who has it, if this accident is opposite to these before.
And the signs of that person who has it, if this leg is well in accordance with the condition; nevertheless, do not double the knee, and if you make him walk, he cannot go before, and he holds his urine back, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he goes on the heel.
And the signs of that person who has it behind, if he cannot spread his knee and double, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the joint of the hip is in place at the side of the ribs.
The ramening of this dislocation is that if you reset it and the dislocation is old, and it lingers according to its disposition, there is no cure for it; and it only comes about that he has assumed himself.
And in this one where the dislocation is fresh, and it's of the iii manneres of dislocations, if you hasten to reset the joint, and make it come back together and go away again and turn it to the right and left; perhaps so will it return, and there is no need for any other cure.
And if it does not return in this way, then you must get a very strong minister, and hold the leg very firmly with .ij hands, or with a .i. strap tied to the loins; and with others ministers he extends his hand over the joint in such a way that he can hit his hands together, then he ties a strap to the loins; and another minister ties the hair of the strap;
and are extended upwards and downwards together at once, as long as the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains still.
This manner of extension is common to three appearances, and when the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If that is not the case, then you must put a cure on his back. When the dislocations are in the parison, if you put a curcuma pouder on the patient's back, and hold it there for an hour, and then let it fall by its own weight, and spread it with a cloth;
then apply to his arms, and embrace the great line of the troublesome cuije, and extend it in this way: now it will return to its place; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot hold it in this way that we have said, then you must tie the .ij. feet of the sick together with a strong cord above the .ij. heels, and above the .ij. knees, so that the sick leg is extended more than the other two.
Then hang him by the neck from a beam, and let him be 2 feet above the ground; then order 1 minister to embrace the sick person's waist, and let other ministers hang with the sick person, who embraces the waist tightly, for the joints now come back quickly.
And when the dislocation is at a distance, let the sick person lie down as we have said in that which concerns the gimbose, and tie the 1 cord properly on the sick leg, and also on the foot.
Then put 2 torches, 1 at the head and 1 between the legs, then place 1 torch between the sick person's thighs. and put up damp flags behind, so that the patient does not bleed, then extend each minister toward him, and let him place the dislocation equal to his hand.
If it returns, that is good. If not, put it on .ie. a table, and press it as we have said in the gibosity, and lay the patient down on the side coast.
And when the dislocation is in front, extend the injured leg far away, and according to what I have said; and place his hand so that it is on top of the injured hip, then press with the other hand, and turn it downward toward the knee.
And when the dislocation is in the back, so it is not possible to extend the injured leg far away, and it does not stand on its own, but rather it must be placed as if the person were lying down with his back to the ground, as we have said in the laying-out of the legs; and let it hang down on his face, and the bone extended as we have said above, and must hold firm pressure on the joint to the table;
and will be able to stretch his legs out, and they will be even; then remove the poultices, put on the plaster, and draw out with a bandage, so that the ankle does not move;
and rest for 3-4 days, then remove the poultices, and put on the plaster; and if you see that they are even, draw them out, as before, and let it be. 3-4 days; then remove the poultices, and have him walk around loudly, until the limbs feel comfortable again.
of a dislocated kne
The genous are dislocated according to .iij. ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and do not dislocate in front.
And the signs are these: instruct the patient that he should bend his knee to his chest, and if it does not go to his chest, know that it is dislocated.
and the setting right of all these is that you should make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and put his foot on your knees;
then take his knee between your palms, and pull it back between your two, then bend the .iij. knees together as if you were sitting; and other ministers extend his foot, until the genous returns to its place, and the signs are that he has bent his knee lightly to his chest.
and bind the plaster on top, and make the leg rest in the crotch, and join them together firmly. .iiij. days or iiij., then take it off; and do not work the patient to walk, until the members are comfortable again.
And if the members are not in place, then administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
of the dislocation of the heel bone
the heel bone is never dislocated, and it never dislocates completely, inside out and upside down.
And these are the signs that the ankle is dislocated, and test before the part where it is dislocated.
they are brought back if they are light, and must be extended slightly with their hands when they are completely dislocated.
and when it is dislocated from the top, if it is convenient that you make sit the patient upright, and tie him down.
then train the foot to you at your right hand, and then to the left at your left hand.
and do this .ij. times, as we said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it comes back, it is good; if not, the work begins again, because it comes back;
if it can't come back like this, take the patient by the back on the ground, and put 1 pass firmly in the ground between his hips, and wrap a cloth around it so that it doesn't hurt the patient;
then put a minister's hip, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with a .ij. chain that he ties around it, so that it lies on the collar of the foot; then extend each minister equally, and let the 1 pass be close between the hips of the patient to hold the patient when you stretch him out;
and then make the dislocated joint equal with your hands, and other ministers will tan the healthy leg at the heel, and the dislocation will return completely.
And when it is done, if you apply the plaster and press it down, and the extract is formed, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard against the cords that are on the heel behind being too tight;
then leave it on for .ij. days or .iij., and if the extract is formed, then remove it after the third day, and do not let the patient go out, because he will be ill for .iiij. days; and if he goes before that term is up, it is not yet secure that he has not dislocated again.
And if abscesses form, so it is necessary that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
of the two
When the two are dislocated, if it is kindly extended without work, and that is a light thing.
And if the dislocations are in no pain of the feet of the feet, if it is necessary that you make sit the patient on a plain or a table all straight, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot forming, until he comes back;
and when it is even, and there is nothing open, then set the foot down on a table at .iij. shoulders, then extract it shaped, and leave it for .iij. days, then let it lie; and let it rest, as long as it is well.
of wound and dislocation together
When the wound comes with the dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times the patient has died:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are pitiless and merciful and slow, and not bold:
and apply at the beginning of things soothing paste to the abscess, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you don't see any hope for health. and when you see hope, then immediately set the member back in place so that the abscesses may heal;
and when the member is back in place, then apply soothing paste to the abscess and treat the wound, if necessary, with dry ointment;
and if there is a fracture and broken bones, and do as we have said in simple illnesses;
and guard yourself from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, because this will cause you great harm according to your Creator, and for the sake of preserving your body and soul. Amen
