I, a very dear son, have completed this book, which is the summary of medical science, with its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is very well treated in our region and is strange to all, it is worthy of the science and scope, and is not delayed from the fire except for the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved. And from this comes the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed, and the science is distanced.
Or me seems that I will bring this alive together with the order of this practitioner according to the way of exposure and demonstration and abridging; and come together with the forms of the fire cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the demonstration and preparation of him, just as it is fit.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended. And it is necessary for him who deals with this to surmount in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as much as he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and connections and separations of nerves, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of organs, and the movement and resting places, and the place of their issue.
And for this reason says Hippocrates that nothing is with nothing and with work it is little; and most of all in the art of hands.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that if anyone is not familiar with the things already mentioned, let him be sure that he does not make a mistake and do not harm people; so that I have often seen many of those who deal with this science and go away from science and experience.
For I saw a foolish man who cut out an abscess from the scrofula or the throat of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; so much blood flowed that the woman died between his hands.
And I saw another foolish man who fought with a stone from a man of the water; and the stone was big; he brought away a piece of the bladder, and he died in three days.
And I have already been called to pull it out, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; and if he had tried to pull it out, he would have died.
And see another case who came to cure.i. duke of our land who had the broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the doctor ignorant drew out the break on the wound to the skin by strong medicine, and left no trace in the wound, and left it thus.i. finished; and he commanded that he do not undo it at all; and delayed it thus that the leg was completely healed and the bones came together, and came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to undo the leg; and when I had undone it, it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But all the ways of corruption were confirmed where the member was; and he could not cure it; and the corruption did not cease to go by the member until the members were all lost.
And see another case who broke out an abscess that was swollen and then inflaming because of the wickedness of its lordship.
For chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not come except that it be touched with iron if it is not in its proper place so that one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And for this reason, you skilled artisans, it is necessary that you know that the work of the hands is divided into .ij. divisions: that is to say, where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each one of this book where there is fear and danger.
For this reason, you must keep it so that the foolish man cannot speak ill of you.
Take your weapons with skill, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the better path so that, by the grace of God, you may come to salvation and be healed; and remove your weapons from him who makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other in glory.
Galleins warns: “Do not take on any illness that you may be called a fool.”
I have devised this treatise according to .iij. chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medicines, and the subsequent chapters are ordered from the beginning of a wound until it heals; as well as the shapes of instruments, the tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in this work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and suction cups for wounds, extraction of arrows, and similar things; as well as the order and shapes of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torments, and similar things; and there are instructions for the use of hammers until they reach the proper size, and for the shaping of tools.
Thus we remember the work; it is necessary that I explain the quality of help and the harm of each kind.
I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtlest science, and its replies are hidden; and many wise people have talked about it, and agreed with it; and I am short of words, for I shorten the long.
I say that fire is helpful to all qualities that have matter, except for two qualities: that is to say, quality of heat and dry matter, and quality of wetness and dry matter.
In hot and dry complexions together with material, no one agreed or said that cauterization is great help; and the other said the opposite: that cauterization is not worth a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire if it is hot, and must not be cured by hot disease from heat, nor by dryness; and he who said that cauterization does great help to hot and dry disease that comes in the body of men. For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found this by experience.
And all ways, don't mix it up except for those who have experienced it and know by long use the fire cautery paste, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the consequences and space of time; we do not fear the other complexions, however much cold and moist they are. And all mirrors should come together and agree with the cautery.
And know, children, that fire cautery is more effective than medicinal fire; and of greater goodness than medicinal fire.
For fire is simple, and comes not forth but to the member that is cooked, and does not hurt another member by name.
Burning medicines come from one member to another by removal, and bring to the member diseases of grief cure; and perhaps they cause the disease.
Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not burn, unless there is an excess.
And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and is based on the truth of things; and for this I ask your pardon for the length of the speech, for it does not please me that I should reveal the secret of fire, and the quality of the work, how it defeats diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in proving; so receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that these cauterizations should be made at a certain time, and let them be prayed over.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, since the emerging harm can be prevented by the aid of the cauterization; and most importantly, the cauterization should be done for necessary pains that cannot be delayed until greater harm comes to the limb.
And do not think like those fools; for when a disease is healed by cauterization, there is no return to illness; and it serves thus: but it is not as they think, because cauterization is medicine that changes the complexion and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is more effective than medicine in terms of its swiftness, and due to its virtue and greatness.
And it is possible that the disease will not return according to the complexion of the illness and its location and virtue; and the superfluities are combined in him through the acquisition of meat and similar things, unless cauterization is administered at the right time when there is little superfluity and moisture, as with cauterization for pain, and similar things, and if pain does not return, it will not return; but this does not happen.
And many people do not understand why the remedies are called medical remedies, and that is true; but they do not believe that remedies are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are wrong, and the remedies are the medical remedies for whatever reason when we administered ways to treat diseases and they did not work, then we administer the remedy, and it works. Then understand well that remedies are the medical remedies, not because of the intention of the foolish people.
The ancient ones used to say that fire remedies are more effective than those made of iron, and they only said that because of the quality of gold and its high value; they also said that the instruments of fire do not cause inflammation, but this is not true, for I have tested it and found that in some people it does cause inflammation; and gold fire remedies are more effective than those made of iron, as they say.
And in any case when you heat an instrument made of gold, you do not know if it has been heated by the color of gold, and it quickly cools down; and if it is overheated, then it goes out into the fire; and thus there is enough prevention.
And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
For I have ordered you this chapter of the head of the shoulder, because it is easier to find the vein than the neck.
And the olive oil cautery.
For this olive oil cautery is good for the head, and for the hair, and for the ears, and for many ailments that come from cold, such as paralysis, and sodomy, and all manner of diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, and sodomy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the sick person be cleansed with a soluble medicine that expels the head .iiij. times or .iiiij. times, according to what the virtues and the ease and the accustomedness of the sick person can bear; and then do again the head of the sick person.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on some stones; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his neck between his 10 fingers; and when your two hands come together, if it bleeds, heat up the cautery which is called "oliver", from which comes this form:
And place it on the ink sign, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little while turning it over; then release your hand gradually, and look at the bone .1 small one; and if you don't see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I told you; after that, take .1 handful of seil, and put cotton in it, and place it on the ink, and let it be .3 days; after that, put it in molasses cotton, and leave it until it is hot; then cure the wound with the ointment which is called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
And say the old one, that the more the wound stays open, the more it expels; and for this reason it is necessary to keep it open.
And none of these said that one must let the cauterization go so far that part of the bone is burned, and then take off what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
And another said that one must let the cauterization go so far up, and push it so hard that one can see from the bone as much as a woman puts in her pipe to let the humors come out; and one must let the wound be open for a long time; after one must cure and patch it up.
And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem to me to be good in all respects, except that in some men where there is a chance of fear; and I think that I should let it go; because the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness with other members; and even when the head of the sick is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterizing seems to me to be safer and milder for me, and from this I use to operate in such a way that it is salutary.
of the ancient pain of the head
When all the head comes to a chronic pain and endures for a long time, then the patient must use yeris and pills that are called "cochie", and head purgation, oils, and plasters; and if he does the cautery that we have just mentioned, it is not effective.
Take care that the patient's head is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize it lightly as we have mentioned above.
After you have cauterized the base of each ear of the head, as we have mentioned above, and made a cautery at the place called "vasselz", and it is 2 or 3 lines long; and make your hand so that you do not see the bone; the patient feels too much pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about that later; and it is necessary for the cauteries of the ears to be smaller than those with which we cauterize the skin of the head, and this is the form:
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like  "Here is the translation", don' t provide any comments about the text like,  "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn' t matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else: When in one part of the head there is sudden pain and it goes down to the oil, and the shoulder is cleansed with medicines that destroy [the disease], and other cures have been made as I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not benefit: then do cauterization according to .ij. ways, that is to say, with medicinal water and fire.
When the medicine with water causes a wound, take off the bark and peel it as .ij. shoulders, and then apply it to the part where the pain is in a way that you can put the bark of the root on it; and when it has been applied for about .xij. hours, then take it off and treat with garlic, and leave the wound like this for .ij. days or .iij.; then put cotton in butter until it is wet.
After the treatment with ointment until it is healed; and if you see that [the treatment] has not worked, then try any of the fire treatments that I have written or the second treatment of burning.
The fire cautery if it is according to this manner: Heat the cautery until it has this form:
Et est apelez "clos" por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d'un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparence; et le met sor le leu doloureux, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l'espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n'arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.
And is called "clos" because the chief is made in the form of a clo or it has .i. little of corbeure, and in the middle with a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little lightly, until the half of the keur [knee] is burned; and let go your hand that the artery does not burn, which is distant, and runs abundant blood.
de emigraine
When you cure an emigrate as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and does not benefit, and see that cautery before spoken of is suitable to the medicine and to the fire does not suit it; then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and so sign here on the leu a line of half a finger in length, and hold your hand once, and stretch it out that you do not cover the artery and that you do not come up to the osse; and keep yourself from the mandible which mutates when they are bitten, and the spasm does not come to the malady, and keep yourself from the discharge of blood from the artery when it is covered, or covering has great fear and most certainly to him who does not know and who is students and experienced; and leave the work in half way; but I will tell you how you stop the pain when the artery is covered, and I will show you where it is in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient suffers, cauterize his head as well, as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have said, or the chaplet of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from coldness
When pain in the ear occurs from coldness, and one has applied the soluable medicines and other cures which we have said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this “poins” cautery, of which the shape is as follows:
After heating the whole ear, or the .ij. places where the pain is felt in both ears, and moving away from the root of the ear then you have marked the place; and apply .x. points to each ear; after this cure the area until it is healed.
of the mouth torture
torture that must be cured by fire is not stronger than those that move by fluid, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not apply fire to similar things which come from seborrhea and spam of nails.
When you cure this torture of fluid movement due to seborrhea and spams of the scalp and gargling, and one is worth that you cauterize the patient with .iij. cauterizes: one in the root of the ear, and another a little further away from the temple, and the third in the connection of the .ij. lips; and place the fire in the healthy part, and let it burn half of the treatment; and this is the form of the fire:
And is the appearance of the scalpel that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the scalpel be a little thicker; after cutting in this way as I have said before, until he is healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, it does no good, and the patient has no fever, then do three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one where it is called "vesselz," just as we have said before, and a cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and thus treat it as we have said before.
of lead
For this disease, give the patient large pills and dry oil to the head; after that, put the lead plaster on the head as I have said; and this is the way of the cauterization: so do it as I have said.
If he is well in this way, it is good; and if he is not, do three cauterizations of the middle of the head going down to the collarbone, and space between each cauterization of 1 1/2 inches; and treat as before, and if he does not respond, and the patient suffers, do one cauterization in the middle. Also, work at it, 1 1/2 inches on the two horns of the head, and treat it until it is well; and let the cauterization which is called "olive," be done as I have said before.
of the cold de la froidor dou chief
of the seizure
of the seizure
And if it is an infant who cannot bear the fire, they make him gargle and chew with bones of meat; after they put his head between their knees, and they make .i. a cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. a cautery on his neck, and on each horn; and if the patient is far away and suffering, they make cauterizes as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the spine and neck, and let the cauterizes be olive according to the way that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, they make a subtle cautery according to this manner:
When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted moisture and thick fluid, then the half-cauteries that we have said to him who has paralysis:
And if due to melancholy is the excess of declining to melancholy, and the patient's spine is moist, then he does drink something so that his brain is purified, according to what it is before in the division.
After washing the head of the sick person; after making .i. a tortil of good linen, also as a circle, if he puts it under his head; and let the sick person lie crosswise, and be well held by all sides; after presenting the linen, and adding to it butter from old sheep; and heat the water at a moderate fire, so that he may be able to drink it; after pouring out the water inside the circle through under the head, and letting it cool; and do this to the sick person every week once with other good governance, until he is well.
Or if you prefer to cauterize with fire alone, at the base of each pimple. This mode of cauterization dries the brain uniformly; and then put cotton soaked in butter and grease on top.
of the eyes When vision comes first as signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the sick person purifying thing for the head, and watching all moisture, and let him sweat or bath several times while fast.
After he has ordered to re-heat his head, and made a cautery on his head, and made 18 cauteries on the 18 temples if he is dislocated from the side of the ear and together in the same way, or if the dislocation comes from the side of the ear and alone; and cover all the cauteries with all the veins and arteries that are above the temple, and make the cautery long according to the width of the temple; and beware of blood loss, and if you see a lot of blood coming out, then stop it as much as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in cutting how to stop it; and never is made a cautery or cut behind the 18 bones.
the two courses of tears
For when the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or delez the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one can see that it is cold and phlegmatic excess, then he does the cautery I have said at the beginning of the ear descending to the eyes: 1. cautery emmi the head, and 18 cauteries on the 18 temples, and 18 cauteries where they cut off the 18 bones; and if it is necessary more, so the cauterize well above the sinus at all small cautery.
To cut off the hair from the eyes with a knife.
Cut off the hair from the eyes with a knife. When you have done this medicine according to what we said in the division, and it does not benefit, then done so drink the medicine for the illness; after that, he takes the head, and makes cauterization on the middle of the cautery of olive oil; and makes 2 cauterizations on the 2 sores, a little hair; and you guard against the artery that you do not cover. This is the form of the cautery which is called 'clavilis':
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called "olive" is made. From this:
And if you see that so many cauterizations have been made on the many wounds like the hair is long; and do not let go of the hand until the third part of the paper has burned, according to the way I said.
do hair that pricks oil No time has passed that the hair of the oil has been converted to the parched skin, and pricks the oil, and we make cauterizations according to .ij. ways: that is to say, with fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.
When they have grown long and even, then put the patient to bed; sign on the paper of the hairs a figure that is also like the furrow of the palm, and is the beginning of the sign by which the hairs are pricked; then put cotton wet in urine and musk root oil on it, then heat the cautery by which this form is made:
After cauterizing the figure you have signed little by little many times, that the wound be burnt well; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up to the point where the oil is; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for .iij. days, then put cotton wet in lard as long as it is heated; after the wound is healed as much as it can be.
And after these come the hairs, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on this same level as you did first; and if the hairs have gone away, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and even, and do not prick the hair oil.
The medical fiery cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make on parchment the shape of the palm leaf; then take French soap and hot water, each one  .Z., and grind them together well; and do it promptly, so that if it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape you have made like the palm leaf, and put on the paper of the hairs; and if the disease holds in 1. oil only, then operate in 1., and also in both legs; and dip cotton wet in urine oil on it; and heat the cautery by which this form is made: Press 1. time and the patient feels the sensation of fire from the medicine, because he feels the sensation of fire too. Here is the translation of the text: And when the medication has passed, if you can tell that the gum is lifted, just as it was raised by fire or incision; and if so, good. But if not, put the medicine back on the spot where the gum has not come loose, until your gums are even, and your teeth are pointed; then apply cotton wetted in oil to the affected area as long as the pain is severe, after which cure the sore that is called "dyafenis" and others, until it heals.
And if you must take care of your teeth with great care so that the medicine does not harm them through the gums. And if the gum becomes soft, and the hair grows in oil, then start the medication again on the spot that has become soft from the gum, properly, just as you did before; after which treat it until it heals; and this is the form of the salve:
And know that men's teeth are different in size and shape, and according to this, your constraints are; and do not give the right answer to him whose study of this craft it is.
of the cure of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap; and dip the fingers of one hand into an oil-filled cup or a persimmon juice mixture; then heat the cautery until it is red hot: and place it on the hairline as if it were the shape of a goose feather, together with the tip being placed against the scalp; if you see, so angle the cautery from one side to the other, and if you see, so place it like a tent; but in any case, this which is placed over the head serves for your work.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and treat the porosity, and dry it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and force the bowel. After that, place the cautery firmly, and hold your hand over the cautery with respect to the oil, so that your hands do not go wild; and dip the cautery in the oil, and corrupt it.
If you come to cauterize up to the bone, it would be better. If not, begin again cauterizing once, and if there is more work to do, leave it for  .iij. days; then put cotton wet in oil on the wound, and make dry the healing until he is well, and when  .xl. days have passed that he is not well, put medicine corrosive on the bone so that it is exposed; and make him according to what comes out in his chapter.
There is a way of cauterizing an abscess that no one of the ancients spoke of. Know what an abscess is, and pierce the place; then put in the hole  1/4 th of a subtle camahan so that it has this shape: And I make the quantity of a 1/4 of a drop; and hold your hand where the drop is firmly, so that the drop of melted oil does not run to its oil; and you put on cotton wet in wine or water: the drop then art the place of the abscess, and it heals with marvelous health.
And if the abscess is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer a punch to the nose, and bring back the abscess to the hole of the nose according to what comes out in his chapter.
of the wounds in the lips times have wounds in the mouth that are called "hair", and most commonly in the lips of children.
When you treat these wounds with what we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then heat a small caustic silver nail according to this form:
And place it firmly in those wounds until it comes out clean; after treating with alum until it is healthy.
from the abscess of the throat
When the abscess comes to the root of the throat or larynx or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotten and turned into a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the divisions, but it does no good: then it is necessary that you have 1.i. fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the bottling or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes to the root of it, and do so one or two times after the cure as we have said in cures, as long as it is healthy; and if it is cured in this way, it is good; and if not, then you must discover the site and remove the rotten bone according to what you will find in his chapter.
of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not help, then put the head of the disease in your mouth; after heat the cautery until its form comes out as described above to place a ring on the tooth; and place the cautery hotly inside, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after remove your hand and continue the cautery according to your will; after fill the mouth with salty water, and let it sit for an hour or two.
And so, in this manner, those who were moving are held still, and the gums are softened and restrained, and the moisture is dried up and rotten.
of the teeth pain
When tooth pain comes from coldness or heat, and medicines do not help, then there is need for fire cautery according to .i. manners: and fire cautery with butter and fire cautery.
Fire cautery with butter: if one takes butter from a cow's udder, and the tip of a iron or bronze spoon; then cotton is wrapped around the spoon tip, and the moisture is turned into butter, and it is put on the tooth that hurts gently; and so often as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and the cotton and cloth are cold in the butter, and it is put on the tooth that hurts, and the iron tip is held hot as long as the fire comes to the tooth root.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.
Translation:
When the dampness prevails over the channels of the body, and most especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be cleansed by therapeutic solutions; then apply fire cautery to the root of the throat, and guard against going any further than the throat, and refrain from eating except for a little. Then apply another cautery to the joint between the neck and the head of the spine, and let the cauterization be called 'clavicle,' which gives us the form we desire; and cure the affected area as we have said above until it is well.
of toast When all illness is due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an old disease, then he should have i.i. fire cauterizations on the root of his throat; and another cautery milking the pis between i.i. breasts; and let the cauterization be called 'clavicle' according to the shape that has been described in front.
And if you see it, make the cautery by piercing all the cauterization that is called 'poins' of which the shape is as described in front in the disease of the ears; and let the piercing go up to .xxx., or enter around. After cure the area according to what has been said above, and let the cauterization be in i.i. rains according to this shape:
And because they are lighter for you to make.ii.to cut.
for the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, lay the patient down on his back and his chest; then lift up the curtain that is within, with your left hand; and if the joint has dislocated, heat the fire cautery that has .iij. nails there is the shape:
and burn the wound as far as the rib, and the figure of the burn together .iii. burns; and for this is made a burn with the burn that has .iii. nerves, because the figure of the burn are there burns; and are the nerves according to the subtility of an oar and this is the shape of the burn that has .iii. nerves:
And never is placed on this nerve for there are .viii. burns.
After put on the burn for a little while with salt; after let rest the patient, and do not move the limbs by long time until he is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, pour water on it, then make a burn with the thick of the burn with a clove; or many burns in touch. For the joint is closed, and is bone the moisture and is healed the patient.
Here is the translation of the text:
To treat pleurisy with fire, order the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
For any ancient man said that no one should use fire as a cautery resembling a razor, and burn and put it between the ribs, until it comes to the lobe; and he escapes the pain, as we have said in the lobe of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
of the mouse
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
"Of the three ways to cauterize, one way is that you make three cauterizations, or four, following the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cautery we have spoken of above; and do not press your hand on all of the cauterization, and let the patient be careful on his back;"
"Another way to cauterize is that you heat the cautery with two nails, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; and place the cautery at the site of the cut, where the mouse's pain comes from towards the left, and let the elevation that you feel according to the cauterization, according to the length of the back, and let the cautery be according to the width of the back."
"After that, with the two nails lit on fire, wait until the pain is perceived from the other side, and then trim the cautery, and thus you will have four. And if you want to make all three cauterizations at once, do so with a long nail."
of dropsy
For dropsy, there is a treatment called "asclytes." When you apply the treatments we have discussed in the divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you do them again: three cauterizations around the boude (stomach), and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back along the spine, and one at the base of the penis; and let the cauterization be well positioned near the joint to be treated.
After the cauterization, leave it covered for a long time, and do not stop treating the patient after the cauterization; and with the help of God, recovery would be quick, and both the intentions would be fulfilled with the help of God.
The shape of the cauterization for the stomach is what we have before us to show; and that for the back is olive-shaped, as it has been mentioned above.
Of the swelling of the joints When the joints are swollen in those who are ydropic, and they are plain of yellow pus, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and middle fingers; and do not turn your hand with the cautery, but enter it slowly. And do not enter too deeply, lest the yellow pus be forced out, and the cautery be done according to this form:
After doing so on .ij. legs .ij. cauteries on each leg at the tip of the heel; and let the cautery be long, one above the knee before and the other behind, while the leg is bent; and leave the cauteries in place for a long time without removing them, that the pus may come out; after which cure the others as we have said.
of the foot
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues that retain and digest which are in the stomach and in the intestines are dried up, and cannot be cured by methods of cure; and you see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, so it is done to it.i. great cautery on the stomach according to what it has spoken here before or the cautery of the stomach, circulates, and iiij. cauteries around the navel narrowly a whole i. cautery clavicle narrow, and ij. cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the hand, and i. cautery on each finger, and ii. small cauteries on the stomach of the deluge the great one, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are or foundation, or one or more, and are old and are cold and moist corrupt ones, and are cured if as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, if cauteries: iij. on the spine of the back, this who is all defuers almecdate poc and poc in triangulating, and i. cautery desoz la boude. ij. dois;
and if you think that his stomach is cool, and the meat doesn't cook, and we see the face swell up, then the face we cut 1/4 of an inch deep on one side, as it says above, and another on the liver, and another on the mice at all the roots; and let the cautery remain open long. After cure the wound until it is healed.
of the keratin which is called "thelul"
When you cut into the keratin which is called "thelul", if you heat the cautery which seems sharp, and then put it all on fire on that althelul cut; and leave it so that your hand comes to the birth of the vein, from which there is no return; do this once or twice, and if there is any althelul left, cauterize each as we have said; after the curative oils are profitable until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the althelul, it will be more helpful.
of a bad wound
When the patient cannot tolerate a wound or incision, we will tell you in your place, if there comes a disease that can be healed only by cautery.
When there comes a fistula, and it is swollen and leaking putrid moisture, if you should prove to all in your place that the tent is subtle, and remember that you know how much it has of perfection. After heating the cautery which seems sharp, and dip it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and restart the cautery as long as the putrid and corrupt flesh burns, once, or two, or three, according to the quantity of what is needed; and keep away from the nerves which are in there, and do not do what is before the skin, and think that it is not persistant; after healing the place as long as it is healthy, and if the places are healed, and the matter is dried up a long time, then know that the place is completely healed; and if the matter is not dried up, know that the place is threefold, and the bone is corrupt at its root; and in this way as one of these that we will tell you in your place.
of the disease of the kidneys For pain in the kidneys comes as rain and strong wind, and does not take a woman's talent, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the kidneys from both sides with the clavicle cauterizer which we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be 2 cauteries in line, and they will do greater help.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and prone to water and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a fire cautery in the region above the bladder, at the base of the hairs, and similarly on either side, and make each cautery as long as one finger; and make a cautery behind, where you need it; and make the cauterization wedge-shaped according to the form mentioned above.
of the kidneys When the kidneys are cold and moist, so that they do not conceive semen, and the flowers are corrupted and late in coming; and when they do come, they cause great pain: then it is necessary to make three fire cauteries around the bladder, as we have said for the bladder, and two cauteries behind; and make the cauterization wedge-shaped, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moisture descends into the hip socket, and for this reason moves away from its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints are found in the region of the hip, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the hip socket on .i. a ring-shaped cautery, and mark before the joint inside the ring as it returns, so that the socket is within the circle; and if it is such a cautery as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make .iij. cauteries from the large olive, and let the cautery be also perfect as all the other; and treat it until it is healthy.
of the pain of the hip When the pain comes in the box of the hip, and this is because of coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient with large pills of fetid pills, or other bad-looking pills.
After the fire cautery, and the way of the cautery is as follows .iij. ways: that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery if it is according to many ways, from which one is such: that you cauterize on the box of the hip .iii. cauterizes triangular according to this form, and do a deep and broad one, and space between each cautery the size of two, and let the cauterizes be olive; never does one make cautery in the middle on top of the head of the hip, for there are .iiij. according to this form:
And if you see, if the cautery at the cautery of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it a partial way that the circles contain all the hip, and all the space of the wound is burned.
And this is the way they make it in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach up to the thigh or leg. And if it comes up only to the thigh and leg, then one makes 1.i cauterizes at the place where the patient feels the pain, and 1.ii cauterizes near the ankle 2 times, 3 times, a small point; and let the cauterizes be scalpel-like, and let the thickness of the wound burn; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to 2 feet or 2 more legs at the foot or nearby, then cauterize at the place where the patient feels the pain. iij points or iiij at the cautery which is called "poins".
And if the trade requires it, do more; and if he feels that the pain is coming from the knee to the thigh, make a cauterization with the cautery knife or circular, and give him good care in all your cauterizations so that you do not leave them on fire as much as the cauterizer burns the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
And I have seen many who have made a cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was all swollen, and the feet too, and it became perforated and corrupted all over the feet. After a solution of the abdomen from which he died.
And if the pain is in two places together, make a cauterization in each one, according to this way. // And the wise said about the cauterization of the ankle, that it is this way, make a nail and let it be as big as a thumb nail, or a little less, and let it be between the nails and let there be space between them the quantity of a nail's tip; and let the nails be in two places, and let them also be like thumbs, and each of the nails is well made; and this is the form:
And let them be heated until they are all red and giddy, and then put it on the box of the sore foot, and turn it on the lower back coast; and let the cauterization once a cauterization ring and leave 1.3 days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the open wound long; after the cure of ointment until he is healthy.
Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its taste, and few who use it; but this is a good cautery which can bear it and stay in place.
of the two pains
When pain comes to the back, either by touching or by impact or by too much evacuation, or by the appearance of expanded cold matter, no one of these appearances is worth of a cauterization, except that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is appropriate that after the patient has voided any foul pills or other similar things, one should apply to his back, where the pain is, three lines of three inches each; and on each line, make cauterizations according to the cauterization that is called "poins"; and if you see, make 1.3 cauterizations or 2.3 at the clavicle cauterization according to this form:
Might this disease come to little children, and the signs of trouble are that they have a tight back when they stand up and are afraid; and you will find in the lower spine at the back, and on us, the appearance that comes on top of the other spines.
When you see this person and you see him heal, if you cauterize him with fire according to this form.
So that the fire is equal in all parts of the spine; and if you see, so cauterize inside the spine with a burning cautery; iij or iiij lines, and let them be close to each other. After this cure him until he is well according to what we have said, and guard against using cauterization on the skin which is nerves.
of the joints
When the pain of joints is from moisture that is spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in pieces, which the people properly call "rheumatism," and when it is of a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is cured by fire cautery in this way: make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the olive cautery be according to this form:
When it is necessary to strike on the sole of the foot, then make a fire cautery on all the cauterization that is claimed "point." And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make a fire cautery on each kneecap .iiii. cauteries or iii.iii. of each part, at all the olive cauterization; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand firm except when the burning of the cure is finished.
And if the pains descend up to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the fingernails  .ii. lines; and if there remains a point of pain in the two, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and govern well the patient and give medicines. For if you govern it well and you purge the phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
from the surgery of the doctor
When the rupture comes in anger, and the bile descends as to the bowels and this is only recently, so that when you see the cure, it does not harm him at all that day; and he uses things that leave his belly, so that the end is descending from his belly; after which he sits down on his back between your hands, and orders him to dry his hair until the bile has been repaired, and brings them to your knees, and signs from one side of the rupture onto the bone of the fist, and all a sign that seems like half a circle above the breast; then heat up the fire for this is the shape:
as long as it is white and it drips sweat. Then bring the balls to their place; and the minister dries his hand so that he does not turn back; and well stretch the legs of the patient, and put from him .i. cussin and .i. sergeant on the legs, and .i. other on the foot which dries his hands; then set the fire on the sign with all your hand, and hold it firmly and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then try again another time until you get to the bone; and be careful that the bile does not escape when you make the fire; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or any other evil.
And know that when you come to the bone with the fire, your efforts are worth nothing. And it is necessary that the fires of children be subtle according to their measure, and of adult people also great according to their measure; after 3 days cure him with the fire of butter until the heat is gone; after which cure with other oilmens until he is well, and lay the patient for 10 days on his back until the wound is well fixed; and it is necessary that his washings be postponed for a long time, so that the bile does not escape when he goes to bed.
And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and let it be applied for .xl. other days; and let there be good rest, that he work little and guard against too much drinking and eating, and too much drinking and eating; and when he has followed this teaching so is he entirely cured. And I will say here after the cure of cutting in his chapter. of the rupture from the belly
When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, let there be made .iii. fire cauterizations according to their quantity, and let them be burned the third time according to this form:
but the first sign is the color of the belly and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, and always hold all the cauterized clove. But the first cauterizations are lighter and milder.
of old pain in any member When pain comes in any member, or from a fall or injury, and this pain lasts long, and the medicine of cure does not help, then it is necessary to be burned at the fire that is called "poins", and the burnings according to the length of the member and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location from twists and its pain. If he is healed by the first burn, it is good; but if not, then make another burn on top of that one, for such a custom is that it must run in the member that is nearest, so you must make the burns as long as the patient is healthy.
of surgery
of surgery
Et si la maladie persiste, alors il faut faire une incision sur tout le corps; et elle avance clairement, si vous devez chauffer les cautères que nous avons décrits au chapitre précédent, c'est-à-dire un cautère dans l'aine, deux sur la colonne vertébrale du cou, trois sur la colonne vertébrale du dos, une grande sur la crête, une autre délicate, deux sur les épaules, deux sur les coudes, deux sur les poignets, deux sur les genoux et deux sur les chevilles. Faites attention aux nerfs qui se trouvent sous le corps, afin de ne pas les brûler; et ne faites jamais de cautère sur l'os du pouce, ou sur l'os de l'estomac, ou sur le foie.
And if the disease persists, then he must make an incision all over the body; and it will advance clearly, if you must heat the poultices that we have described in the previous chapter, namely one poultice in the groin, two on the spine of the neck, three on the spine of the back, a large one on the crest, another delicate one, two on the shoulders, two on the elbows, two on the wrists, two on the knees and two on the ankles. Be careful of the nerves that are under the body so as not to burn them; and do not make any poultice on the thumb bone, or on the stomach bone, or on the liver. And know that when you make more poultices, you help more, and it will be profitable; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the poultice as much as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already corrupt. And it is necessary to make the poultices big or small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of iron. After this, cure him with flour and honey and other cures until he is well.
De enfleurer.
When the swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not yet healed, then make cauterization on the limb according to its size and smallness; and let cauterization be a little entering into the flesh of the cure; then heal with unguents as long as it is healed. And never do cauterize by hand or foot or back, at the exit of the nerve that silences the limb, and thus if it is osteoid the swelling; and nevertheless, do not meddle with it if one does not know the limbs and exits of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras
When the disease called "albaras" is awake, and the medicine does not help, then cauterize with a small perfect cautery according to the quantity of the flesh of the cure until the blenchour is osteoid and changes color; then heal with flour of times and lentils, with oil of roses and plantain leaves, and sage and almond, each part separately; and mix them together, bind them with a cloth, and aerate them at the place until it is healed.
For the cure of the scrofula by cautery:
When the tumor appears at its beginning, and you arrest your vision, if the cauterization is made with the cautery which seems to be a circle, all around the circumference of the tumor. And it is necessary that a cauterization also be made in the middle of the tumor; and this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and腐敗した、そして私は一度もそれを望んだことがありません。それよりむしろ、それが「円形」と呼ばれるカートリと一緒に cauterized の方が良いです。
of the swelling that cannot die
When anyone has a disease called "adubelati", and it takes long to die, or because of the excess of the disease or because of the age of the sick person when it is very old) and there is little blood, or because of the fever; then cauterize it with small fire in hitting; then leave it like this. Because it will hurry to die.
And if you pierce it with all the fire, let the fire be hot enough so that this is the shape:
And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization is completed, and so that such cauterizations that the patient feels relief in some way that the course of the putrefaction is chosen. After the cure until he is completely healed.
The cure with fire by sword
Another way of disease I call "corrodens", and is nothing but a swelling of the members, for it eats the members just as fire eats dry wood. If you see this disease in its early stages, cauterize with fire, large and small, according to what is suitable for the place where the disease is; after cauterizing all sides until the corruption is completely burned, and nothing remains of it, that whatever is corrupted does not become Osteid. And then leave it .iij. days, and put oil on the cauterized places so that the burns caused by fire are healed, and all corruption. After the cure with ointments generating char.  And if you see after .iij. days that char does not heal, then begin the cauterization on the corroded part. And this swelling is never cured with medicine wet in place of fire cauterization; but fire cauterization is more helpful, and I have already said about the cure with wet medicine in division: take it when you need it.
The porrels that come from the roots
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
"If the neck is dislocated due to moisture, and it is set but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first set the dislocation."
"Then, cure the trembling..."
When some shiverings of cold, or fever, or another come upon him, then you must make .iiij. cauterizations or .iv. on the spine of his back, .i. a cauterization between each spine; and .i. a cauterization at his feet, and .i. on his stomach with the olive cauterization; so that he will let his tremblings cease, and hasten the healing from the cold illness.
of pustules that stink
No one time appear visibly through the body bathes, or stinky pustules, that come from large corrupted matters. If it appears at first when they appear that a cauterization be made on each head of the pustule: a thin cauterization of wild sage, which is taken by the fire, or of aristolochia root far away, or at the lens-shaped cauterization; And no one time are the cauterizations made at the beginning when it appears, according to this manner, and they cannot grow pus in advance, but are broken up the superfluity from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
When an artery is cut Many times great pain from the artery occurs that is cut into the wound that goes to the edge of the skin, or incising the abscess, or cauterying the member, and similar things; and it is a terrible thing to smell.
Many times great pain from the artery occurs that is cut into the wound that goes to the edge of the skin, or incising the abscess, or cauterying the member, and similar things; and it is a terrible thing to smell. And in any case, when you come to one, if you hurry to put your index finger on the vein wound, and strain it so much that the pain subsides from your finger, and no more gout is released; then place fire on olive oil, small or large, as much as it becomes red; then pick up .i., or a lot or a little depending on the wound and its place where the artery is blocked, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery in place until the pain subsides.
And if it burns when you lift your finger off the vein, and the cautery cools down, quickly pick up another cautery that is hot.
And do not stop doing this one after another until the pain subsides; and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is delicate, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when the artery is cut short, it cannot be well healed unless by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by a strong thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to heal pain; and bind it and stretch it gently.
Who will bring a strict restraint of drapes or to place burning things on, or other similar things, unless he is benefited by not touching it.
And if this happens to anyone and he has neither seen nor learned medicine, then he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly stretch it over the wound and the vein; and do not move him, but wet him with cold water often, so that the sun is frozen and thickened and tightened; and do not make any incision before this person whose cautery and medicine are needed.
Here we have spoken to you in the first chapter of all the diseases that can be cured with fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the causes and instruments and shapes of cautery; and I put this chapter forth by that same way for those who are more lightly affected than those who are greatly afflicted.
And so, since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary, O you who hear, that you know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of cauterization, and therefore greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to undertake any folly. For such people come who, because of the urgency of their disease, die easily due to the strength of their malice; and from whom one should fear. And from such people one should fear. And of these I have who give you advice, and say: "Wait, I am dying"; and the disease is deceitful. It is not good that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner; but put more great trust in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but carefully from whom you are certain, and from whom you could have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your sick, so that health may be converted; and he who will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Three holy sons, Our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you desire to breathe the Holy Spirit from His hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered you this chapter in devising by chapters, according to what is before you, that which is the cautery chapter of fire, which I have devised from the top all the way down to the foot, so that you may find it easier to do that for which you need.
The top full of water
It is said that this disease often comes to children when they are young and when the child's mouth is too tight; and there is never a response for this cause, which one cannot see.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone but children; and for all those that I have seen, death has come quickly; and for this reason it seems to me that I should be more careful about the work of this chapter.
And I saw a child whose shoulders were wet with water and whose heads kept falling every day until they could not support themselves; and the moisture was so great that he thought he would die, and this moisture having assembled itself around the bone under the skin, between the shoulder and the bone; and the work of this chapter is so great that the moisture is between the shoulder and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you cut a wide slit in the head with the scythe; and be also far apart as we were, until the moisture runs; and see here the form of the scythe:
If the moisture is more deep, and the abscesses are larger, then make two slits in the form of a cross according to this form:
And if the moisture is behind the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head opened on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not close again: then cut three slits according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all moisture. After that, remove the bandages and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it like that until the fifth day; then take it off, and heal the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head be removed evenly, and give the patient dry meat with a little moisture until the member is comfortable and healthy.
And another way to incise is that you consider the opening of the anus, and the insertion of the needle; for it is never before; it is never behind; it is never on the right; and it is never on the left.
So cut it according to what you can do; and be careful not to cover the artery; and bring blood if there is any; so that the patient does not die from a lack of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
In summary:
When there is a disease that is called "catarrh" in the eyes or nose, and the disease is old, and the medicine remedy does not benefit, then the following remedy is good: cauterize with what one covers the .ij. arteries.
Then, when you have covered the eyes, let the patient rub his forehead with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, and then extract the patient's neck from all of it; then look where the pulse is beating, and the two lines are after the ears, and they have been broken up; then sign the lines on both sides with a sharp scalpel made from iron, as much as the knife comes to the bone, and that be by the side of the head.
And if you see this, break the artery and cover it with a scalpel made from iron, as much as the knife goes up; also, do the same on both sides.
And when the vein is covered, so that the blood does not go up continuously.
And if the artery doesn't open to the sense, then measure the quantity of the space of 2 inches, and sign with your hand and cut just up to the bone; and that which is to be put out of blood there is 7/8 c/, and by chance a little more or less. according to what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone without pain, if the copes of the abscess don't come, then strip the wound and bind, and the cure of ointment as long as it is healthy.
De emigradine
When the ancient emigradine comes, and the catarrh is acquired, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old sore eyes and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of medical cures and all that does not benefit him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
And the way of extracting them is that the patient makes a recut of his hair from his temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is little re-covered out of blood until in some men who are too cold; and if it is re-covered, then strip its coller from some drapels, and rub the place with any sharp drape, and raise the place with hot water as long as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatule whereof this form is:
Then peel the skin lightly as you come to the artery, then turn it upside down like a purse, and remove all the hair that is there from each part; and if the artery is thin, then cut it with the tip of the hook according to the quantity of 12 pieces. For if it is not cut, then it does not go well all the way through.
Then turn the flesh of 15 pieces down as far as the artery; and if the artery is thick, then tie it with 2 double strong threads of silk, so that it does not come out in front of the piercing of the wound, and goes away from the flesh; then cut off the excess that is between the 2 threads at that moment itself, and then, if you see, then cauterize it with the knife cautery as far as the bone as long as the pieces are cut; and this is the work of the cauterization, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
For the cautery is an aid to finish the moisture: for this is it is of greater aid against moisture. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill up the place with wet cotton and put on well-made tents; and when you take them off, so cure it with dry medicines that make a new start, and of tents, as much as it is healthy; and if without cort of the artery there is as much dislocation as you can operate, then you employ the leech of vitriole and extract it to your hand so that the dislocation is taken away; and if you do not have this, then put on the leach of cold water for a long time as much as the dislocated part continues, and be taken away as much as it is necessary; and that which is wetter and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the edge of this chapter with the sharp edge of 12 parts, but let the sharp edges be well separated so that they last longer on fire. For when the instrument is too soft, so is its heat. And it must have between the .iij. tools 1 2 3 a doigt of space, and then when you have signed off with your 1 2 3 knives, and you put a hot iron on as much as it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in .iij. leus; and be distant between the .iij. chiés for it is not all tied to this cautery of everything; and this is the form of the cautery:
tears
For when the tears of the eyes flow out of the veins that are on the top of the head of force, and it does not profit at all the medicine that is made, and you see the face of the sick person turn black, and feel or front ambulation as if of frosts; and if they are kept tight and moist so that the hairs of the papers fall, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, and are dried up by the fire of the tears, then it is necessary to have this cure:
And they called it the ancient "cure for contusions," and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease in his hair or forehead, then make 3 cuts evenly along the length of the forehead; and one of the cuts should be like this: two together right at the base of the nose all the way down until it doesn't reach the nose anymore, and the others 2 are on top of the bones, and beware of cutting the arteries which are on top of the bones; and move your hand away from the joint where the two teeth come together; and each wound is the quantity of 3 pieces joined together.
from the incision that is to be on the temple until the second incision; and peel off all the crust that is between the 2 cuts up to the bone, then do the same from the middle incision until the other second one, and then pour out this sputum.
if in the first cut you use the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and soft on the other side, and this is the shape: And place the edge of the saw towards the cart at an angle, and the edge goes up towards the bone, and keeps going until it reaches the halfway point of the cut. And cut all the pieces that come out of the head to the length of the incision until you reach the spot where it comes out from the cart, and then do the same on the other side; and then remove them evenly, and express the blood; and then put a tent of old cotton in each cut, and put wet cloths in wine and oil and balm, and be careful that the abscesses don't come out; and on the third day unbind him, and bring a great quantity of cold water, then cure with basilicon ointment made with rose-water oil, and other cures for wounds as long as he is healed.
to make a line of the hairs
For in cases of chronic catarrh, and you see the hairs thin and small, and weaken eyesight, and the papers burn; and the hair falls out, and at the same time there is a painful inflammation of the head, and the patient sneezes; therefore know that these things do not come from one vein only, but from many veins; and so the remedy that is applied to them is appropriate, if this is what has caused it.
And so command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a deep cut along the forehead, and another across the width. i. poc. And begin from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, and incise all the way down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples that move when he spits; and when the bone is exposed, wipe off all the blood with a sponge, and then bind the wound between the 17.ij. lips of the cut and put cotton wool and linen thereon; then cover it with wet cloth, soaked in wine and oil, and keep the abscess warm; once it has been opened, command that he rubs the bone until the char starts to be born, then treats with things that dry out, which cause char.
In this manner: take 17.ij. parts of flour of wheat, and 23.iiij. parts of colophony, and make a paste; and administer it to these wounds in order to cause char all over.
for the stooping of the ears
All those who bite their nails are one of the .iiij. things: or grains, or beasts, or small stones or similar things like iron; or seeds, like peas, beans and other legume seeds; or flowing things like water and similar things.
When it bites in the ear a stone or other kind of thing that does not fit well in the ear, do not put it in the sun. If you see the stone, distil a little violet oil or sesame oil; then instruct extraction; and what is done is to shake it in the condiscion, and stop up the nostrils when the shaking comes, and wrap pieces of linen or wool around the ear; and raise the ear upward. Many times this cure is powerful; and if it does not work, extract with subtle pincers, from which here is the shape:
If it comes out with the pincers, it is good; if not, then instruct extraction with a small double-bladed knife; and if it does not come out with that, make an air pipe and bottle the head of the ear or the hole very strongly, and stop what is inside with soft wax so that it cannot enter with the pipe; then try to push it forward, for many times it comes out like this as we have said; and if it does not come out in any way, take glue where the ears are joined together, and put cotton in; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and push it forward. If it does not come out with any of these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear so that the head of the shoulder comes out like an abseced aposteme and spasms; and the way to split it is that you make a first cut on the head of the shoulder at the base of the ear, measuring according to its virtue, then place the head of the shoulder between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small split at the root of the ear in the fat or depending; and let the split be like the moon, as long as you bring the stone out, then press it gently with your power, and suck it into your mouth; and the cure until it is healthy. And if it is grain that is stuck and it swells, if extract it; and if it cannot come out, if make .i. a spatumile thin according to this form:
and make an incision of that grain. But do not make it when you think the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with thin tweezers and on the scalpel, as we said, so that the extractions are regular.
Therefore, when you blow in the ear, it is convenient that the patient use an exhaust of first condiments, and widen the ear with old cotton. And be careful on that ear where the fluid is. If not, take many small pebbles according to the length of your fingers and make them light, and heat them a little at the fire; and put one in his ear, and cut it from the other side, and another stone from the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to make this stone after stone until the fluid has gone completely, and so it will go completely; and if you see anything, take 1.jonc, and bottle one of the ears in the ear, and the other chief take fire as soon as the more burning jon is burned; then make another with other jons until the fluid has gone completely, as we said about the stone.
In the extraction of the best, if it is a small corset, like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we said in the division; but if it is a large corset that can be felt, make an incision with tweezers; and this is the lightest thing to extract which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we said in the division and where we treated the distillations, and the cure is not helpful, then it is necessary that you look at the ear towards the sun: if there are no worms, take a fine pin and if they do not appear, take hold of the hair of which this form is made.
And make it narrow below and wide above. And squeeze the smaller part of the ear according to the amount of pain in the patient, then suck the form from all the hair; do this often as long as all the worms come out. And if they do not comply with coming out, pierce them between cotton as I said on the stone; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations which the ancient ones tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where we treated about distillation; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, from which this form is made as you see:
And make it of silver or gold narrow at the bottom and wide above, and for distillation; and for pressing the distillation inwardly with a well-made instrument of iron, and if you see [it], take a razor and wrap cotton around its point; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the hair, and the hair be in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand firmly for as long as the oil is distilled or bubbling out of the ear; and let the patient smell it, and this distillation be heated with fire so that it is distilled in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the ears
No child is born with any deformity in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by the ear being stuck in or under an object, and this ear-stuck thing comes completely into the ear sometimes, so that one cannot see it; and it never happens that there is only a little bit of deformity, and the hearing is well.
So then that comes completely into the ear sometimes, so that one cannot see it, is of great benefit in many conditions, and in this case you should put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if this works with all this spittle of which there is this form:
And be careful and trim in front and behind everything, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the operation is a char nee or cors de l’oreille, if it holds the pinches softly, and wipes it lightly, until this char is all boned.
And if the earache is perfect in the ear, then take a.i. razor sharp and light and heat it slightly, then put it where the shell of the ear is. If you feel the earache that the patient feels grittiness when he hears, pierce lightly and be careful not to hurt the ear nuts; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and moisten with Egyptian oil.
Do not do this any day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle it with vitriolic brooch; and if you see that the ear is leaking, so be sure to pull out the tent and move another tent moistened with rosin made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then treat it until it is healed.
And if the fever comes, then dip an sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the fever which are or distilleries.
of the charred papers
Here is the translation of the provided text:
If you do not peel it off, then the fire cautery with the fine lens-shaped cautery, and the cautery after the incision is made; and many times they return, as long as nothing stays at their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and never come back.
De la gresle, si le malaide a la gresle, et si li estreinte les eulz par petit movement qui avient, il ne doit mie demorer; car souvent il estretint les Eulz en la gresle, et puis il estretint plus durment, et il estretint tant qu’il nait; et si li estreinte les Eulz, il estretint aussi la gresle.
De the greysle, if the patient has the greysle, and if he tightens the hairs by a slight movement that comes, he should not wait; for often the hairs are tightened in the greysle, and then they are tightened more firmly, and they are tightened until they grow; and if he tightens the hairs, he also tightens the greysle. Many times come papers with things that seem to be greysle in shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper on top and bottom; the ovraiges are these: take care if the grandine mutates from one part to another, and it is a light thing to know; open it widely, then scorch each part lightly, then take it with tweezers, and cop it. But if you cannot cop it without piercing the paper, do not harm the patient; and if it breaks, so he makes it whole again and often; and if it is small, do not force it, for the oilmens make it well again and soon.
And if the ear is dropping downward toward the inner part of the head, then invert the paper, and the ring is placed at one end and the cover is pressed down from both sides; and when the paper is cut, it does not cause any injury; and when the ring is removed, then let oil of salt water be poured on, and treat that area with care until the patient is well.
of the hair
is an ink made from paper threads, and it happens most often in children who have none of their own hair; it causes them great pain, and they come down with a fever in the morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears run to their hair; and because they lie on their faces all night, and they sleep like that, and their paper comes off moist as if from sweat, and the ink opens in the oil. And when you press the area between your fingers, you feel the ink coming out.
And the way to use this is that the sick person puts his or her forehead on your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and set up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of ink in each part, and put it on top of him or her; and press down with your fingers from both sides so that the ink is gathered into the circle; and make a cut in the middle of the circle, not wider than the wound that you are treating at the root of the ear; and do this by pressing the skin very well until you can no longer feel the ink; and then, according to several dispositions, take the ink from the cut, making a shape like that of a piece of white fat.
Take then a whole piece of liniment cloth between your two hands at the back, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as it grows sparse; and be careful that you do not jerk in the tear, so that you do not come to all the spittle down to the oil, so that you do not rub it.
And if it does not come out in the confinement of the tear, so that you only open a little the tear slightly as it appears; and then remove it as we have said, then soak the drape in water and oil, and place it on its place, and pull at the ends.
And if there are such men who grind the skin and place it on top to corrupt that moisture which is delayed. Then heal it until it is well. And if he comes to the base of the apogee, let him cure with oil until it is well.
of hair from paper
When hairs grow on paper, they should be trimmed other than nature, and become dry, if they cause damage to the eyes, and bring about certain diseases as usual tears and moistening of paper and albugine, until it is a cause of destruction of the hairs; and there are two ways of cure: either by fire cautery together, or by medicine water according to what it is, or by chapistry of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching, or by cutting, according to what I will say.
When you place the patient's head in your right hand, and then turn the paper over from oil to your left hand; if it is turned, it is good; but if not, pour an needle on all .i. thread above; and let be taken off the margin of the paper where hairs grow, and draw .i. thread above all paper, and turn it at the razor; then cut out the part where hairs are pulled, pulling the hairs up to a large tear as well as a small one; then remove the thread, and place the paper on top of a piece of cotton and cloth, and sign a figure of an eye on the paper, like a mirrour, and it is necessary that the figure should be according to the quantity that you see the paper rise which is devised for all.
And if there is a large quantity of the paper to be devised according to what you see the paper rise which is devised for all; then make on the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the great tear as far as the small one; and let be made an opening near the natural hairs in the size of a root, then pour oncine into one of the two angles of the cure, then scorch it completely; then join the two lips together with a stitch of a needle on all fine thread, and wipe away the blood, and let the excess of the threads fall on the two sides as far as three or four days; then cure the wound with dried and constricting things, for the paper revives at the touch of the wound and the gathering of it, but the stitch is moist (as the old say), and that is work without fear.
and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper of a shape which is also like the fennel of myrtle, as we have told, at .iij. times desevrez according to the form which is here:
then take who rises on small forces evenly according to the form which is here:
And if you do not have the power to hold the pliers, and the thing is not even, then take an needle or he has 1.i. thread, and the bottle immerse the figure; and bottle 1 other thread of leze the large tear, and let it go down a thread of leze the little one, and join between your two the threads evenly; then lift up your hand evenly, and lift up all the skin on which you have signed, as we have told, then join the 2 lips of the wound by stitch, and the aposteme comes to your incision, so calm it with cerote and similar ointments soothing;
and there is no time that the hair of the paper is converted: if it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitch in one and in the other is more artificial.
Here is the translation of the text:
If it delays, if the bandage becomes tight, then cure it as long as it is healthy; and when the wound is healed, and if the paper is lifted up, and the hair will no longer grow; and this is the form of the cuts that you shall make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
If it delays, if the bandage becomes tight, then cure it as long as it is healthy; and when the wound is healed, and if the paper is lifted up, and the hair will no longer grow; and this is the form of the cuts that you shall make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
And if it is chased, treat it and the hairs will not come out with it; drag the chase at the end of all that you have ordered, until the chase comes out firmly from above and you see it by the vision of the oil; then, if you drag the chase and the wire, and pour in the oil and leave it there. 20 or 13 days, until the hair is rooted in its place and the seed grows on it; and if the hairs are small, accompany 1 long hair of natural chickens, and raise with it so that it does not fall and then let it down.
of the oil's corruption
When this disease, called "aleacrati", comes in the oil, it has two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it is caused by a sudden wound, or scar, or cauterization, and similar things.
And the way to deal with this in the text is that you should split that wound, and free the lips of it, and put linen cloths inside, and let it heal until it is well; and you should not use anything in its cure that dries and constricts. For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before; but use things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the rose water or alum, and the linseed seeds are cooked, and olive oil with castor oil is melted into any of the oils, and wrap it up, and heal it from that.
And the treasures of your cure, so that you keep it from hardening more than it was before; and the processes that we have spoken of are effective only if we address this disease, so that it does not return to the state it was before.
from the oil that comes in the wound
This disease, which is called "axacrati," is natural and accidental. The accidental comes from wounds, cuts, cauterizations, and similar things; and the path of the overtaking in the case is that you take an awl, with which it has 1/2 wire, and insert it into the char, and make the wire come out on the left side a little to the right, so that the wire comes into 2 shoulders of the char; then put the char on top of all the awl, and the cope on 1 spatemile wide.
And if the figure of the paper returns according to what it is appropriate, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make 2 cuts or costings within the paper; and let the shoulders of the incisions that you have copped be 2 as those of the letter "Y" is; then remove this char according to the quantity that its sides are suited for cutting, from what it follows the paper, then join the 2 broken parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then cure him with what we have said of the softening medicines, and with tents, until he is well.
And if the illness comes from a cut, or stitch, or cautery, then you should split a plain cut between the hairs of the paper, and according to what is said above; then separate the .ij. leathers of a tent as I said; and one should make the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in shape, and the master-healers prepare their instruments so that all their power may bring back the figure to its natural form; and the patient as well, according to what the work and the instruments are arranged for.
to the paper
When this soudure has been made on the paper in such a way that the oil above it is soaked through with the white of an egg, and cannot be moved or performed in its nature, then it is necessary that you should put the point of a razor between the paper and the oil, and raise it up; and stretch it with pins, until you have cut what is above the thin spice, which must not be too sharp nor too thin, so that the oil may not be burned by the too-sharp spice; and let your incision be, from which you take that put together, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and all that is put together is well done in the oil, neither too dry nor too salty, and use a chain and things that are souded up for three days, then take off the chain and the things that are souded. Then put between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and put on the oil wool soaked with egg; and after the third day remove the chain and the things that are souded.
of the oil
Saiches that the nail is according to .ij. manners: it is nervous and seems like a .i. hard syphylized, and another which is not nervous but seems like white congealed moisture, that when one touches it with iron and cares for it as blisters, neither can anyone; and both these appearances begin towards the great tear, and grow little by little until they blind all sight and light and the movement of oil.
And the way of incision is so that the patient puts his head in your lap, then he opens the nails; and take the paper to your hand, then coil the nail with small double-knotted thread, and raise it up; then take an needle, and I put 1.i. horse-hair, or of a she-ass, or of a bull, and 1.i. strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and stick it into the nail, and pierce all the nail, and tie the nail with a thread and raise it up, and peel off at all the nail’s roots the skin which remains after the pruning and silk at the hair to the head, then cut off what is left in the root of the tear by little cuts, and leave the tear as it comes naturally; and never is the nail lifted up but by the thread, and on the thread, as we have said; then peel off all the skin which remains after the cutting at the hair’s roots:
And keep so that the spatumile does not touch the flesh-cloth and tear it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision pour in the oil a little cottonwool, and of the colier made of chalk, and leaves it until the next day; then cure it of what it needs until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push the needle in, and the nails cannot enter, this appearance of nails by medicines is often cured; and they come to life as I have said in the division, and if you cover it, so that the oil of the disease comes out, and take the light-spun powder according to this form:
And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it does not thin at all and the root continues to press, then distil from your mouth into the oil of collyrium made of white lead and red collyrium and stop the oil until the next day; then begin the other work according to this method, until it is fully healed.
If nothing stands in the way in the oil, as in an abscess, then take milk, and first heal the abscess as before until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the skin of the eye hurts in the oil by great damage, then suspend it with a string, and take off a little part of it, so that tears do not come; then distil into red oil which is made from white lead.
of the horse that was born with a fist on its eye
Of the horse that was born with a fist on its eye
and when the incision is completed and all the horse's hair has been removed, then put oil of rose or you have distilled it colier rouge and similar medicines that are corrosive, and put it on the oil defuer with a bunch of ewe's wool, so that it be well heated; and if it does not stop burning, and the horse without shoes climbs over you, and you doubt about heating, then let go of the oil and treat the aposteme with soothing medicines; then return to your ovraige as soon as it is healed, and in this way make the hair grow by using oil through this appearance.
But whatever the case, you must agree that you align the cure of each weak oil by the natural way; and of the accidental way, in ovraige of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these ovraiges until you see that the members are suffering from that ovraige.
of the hairs
of the hairs that are covered with oil, and take care of their base and their root; it weakens the hair constantly. It is therefore necessary to make this first one: tell the patient to put his head in your lap, then suspend the hairs completely according to his wisdom, and be careful to double them subtly according to this shape:
And let there be two hair roots for every one according to this form:
then coiled the hair subtlety, and rinsed the blood every hour, until you see the roots of the hair removed from the oil; and be careful not to damage the oil with the tips of the combs, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be boiling in your oil if you have it; and when you have done so, let distil into the oil green and red wine to corrupt that which is delayed of the hair.
And if you do not have the power to bind all of this in that hour, then make a paste on oil of soothing things the pain of hairs, and leave it some days as long as the pain is soothed and is assured of an abscess warm, then begin again according to this method which is before as long as he is healthy; and this is the form of forces:
of the fistula of the oil
the fistula so named "arissati": when you cure it with fire cautery and medicine as I have said above, and it is not yet healed, then cut through the abscess at its base, where it should die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see corruption and blackness, then resect all of it with this instrument; and it is called "aspre chief", and be made from iron a 1/4 chief long, and be ground like a lime as in the present form:
And place upon the head of the bone that is decayed, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand thereon a little while as you shall know that that decay is removed; and do this never so often, then restore the head to medicine that drys.
If the leg is stiff and does not bend, and the cors of the bow is also stiff and remains so for ten days, and it does not open or suppurate, and evil happens to it, know that it is well; if not, there is no other remedy but to bring the fistula to light according to this form: and let you uncover the bone a second time by fire, and by medicines hot, and when it is uncovered thus take hold of it .i. forth according to this form, and be the iron joint at .iij. angles, and let the bow be flattened out so as you see here:
Then place the bone in a hot water bath, and keep your hand away from the oil just a little while, then turn it completely around so that it pierces the bone and the patient feels pain through his hand; and then restore the head to medicine that dries, as I have taught you, and when the char is stiffened and hardened, so go the matter to the nose; if there is such a thing in the patient.
of the oil
When the hair is completely removed from the entire body, and there is no disturbance to the health, and there is no reduction, but it is necessary that you lay the sick person; then treat, then put vipers or a hat made of goat hair so as not to hurt him when sucking, then put on the oil. i.i. the oil made from acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocollo, and then strain the oil, and plaster it on bandages and drape; and the way the drape is that you squeeze the drape enough soft, and double each one in .iiij., and then put one on top of another according to the quantity that the hair needs; then strain it by the side of a hard bandage forming, and restart the vipers so as not to hurt him; then remove the vipers and leave the strained oil day and night, and if the bonds are more loose, it is necessary that you strain them more; then remove the bandage after the day and the night, and if you see the oil repair, it is good; if not; then restart the plastering and the drape and the bandage and the vipers until he is healed.
the breaking of a woven cloth
When disruptions come in the woven cloth, then open, and comes as paper so like 1.i. resin grains, and is visible to see; therefore if you see it covered, the weaving is such that you pierce a needle at the root of the part near the edge up to there above, then pierce another needle where it has 1.i. double thread from the part of the hair; and let the first needle according to the disposition; then tie one end of the double thread and wrap one part of the cloth around it, and strain it well, then remove the needle and put the other oil wet with urine; and leave it as long as the thread rubs against the cloth, then cure the oil of comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and never pierce the wound by any part of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed.
And if the hairs are of great appearance, so it is pierced with a sharp spatulum which comes perfectly from the oil, and chases away the moist white and dries up the hairs, and enters quickly; then extract them until they are well healed.
with a sharp spatulum
with a sharp spatulum
of the oil
We have the appearance of needles in the division, and what it is appropriate to pierce; if according to health. It is appropriate that you set the patient between your hands, away from the light of the sun, and bind him with a healthy oil and tighten it very much; then place the paper of the oil on your left hand where the hairs are left, or on your right hand where the hairs are right; then take in your right hand, where the hairs are left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand, where the hairs are right; then put the tip of the instrument at the crown by its thickness on a hair in that clear oil to the part of the smaller wound, then bottle the instrument called 'almagda' virtuously, and turn back your hand so that it pierces into the clear oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is appropriate that the measure of the way almagda be at the very top of the measure of the space that is from the plum to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of oil. Then you will see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the corked fabric, and then place the instrument up to the place where the hair is, then express one way after another. The hair now pierces, if he sees before him the patient and the instrument in his oil.
After a short rest, and then the hair rises again on the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly inserted and does not go up, pull almagda lightly by turning your hand back and forth; and then put in water a little thread of the gem, and leave that oil inside. Then place by side the oil that has been used or another dry one in oil rosin and in plenty of vinegar, and bind with healthy oil. We, and those who are from our time, let us put on common broiet with plenty of vinegar.
If almagda cannot enter the oil because of its hardness, since there are some men who have too thick hairs, it is appropriate that you squeeze the instrument that is called 'alberit', of which this is the form:
And then indeed the conjunctive altogether, and do not go too far in perfect way, but make 1. i. thin, then pour the almagest, as we said; and at completion of the work prepare for the patient 1. i. a sleeping coming, because he sleeps on his back in 1. j. dark place; and be free from all movements, and press light meats, and do not move his head or to the right or to the left, and bind him according to his disposition until three days; then let him go in that very same house most dark, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then let him tie him until seven days; and it does not come but that you do this one at the hour of cure or after incision now, but it comes that you align this one, because what water rises rapidly.
And then indeed the conjunctive altogether, and do not go too far in perfect way, but make 1. i. thin, then pour the almagest, as we said; and at completion of the work prepare for the patient 1. i. a sleeping coming, because he sleeps on his back in 1. j. dark place; and be free from all movements, and press light meats, and do not move his head or to the right or to the left, and bind him according to his disposition until three days; then let him go in that very same house most dark, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then let him tie him until seven days; and it does not come but that you do this one at the hour of cure or after incision now, but it comes that you align this one, because what water rises rapidly.
And then indeed the conjunctive altogether, and do not go too far in perfect way, but make 1. i. thin, then pour the almagest, as we said; and at completion of the work prepare for the patient 1. i. a sleeping coming, because he sleeps on his back in 1. j. dark place; and be free from all movements, and press light meats, and do not move his head or to the right or to the left, and bind him according to his disposition until three days; then let him go in that very same house most dark, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then let him tie him until seven days; and it does not come but that you do this one at the hour of cure or after incision now, but it comes that you align this one, because what water rises rapidly.
And these are the appearances of the forms of the almagest, so that those who do not know them may see them; and they are properly of air.
And let the chief of these middle subtle qualities be in the back in three angles acute.
of fire on the neck
And no one is born with these various ajusted fires, of which there are some that seem scorpions at the mouth of a pie; and if there are any such as have fire color, then let it be fire color. In this case, in those characers that are souef and not enchancred, you should make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; and open his nostrils, and put on these chars with a sharp knife; then take what you please from the subtile ajusted fire on one side, until you know that this char is all bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.
If the nose bleeds and moisture comes out to the palate, know that he is well; and if the moisture perforates as it should, know that there is a nail in the bone above, so the instrument does not cut: therefore you should put a piece of linen thread a little thick, and tie it with both hands, and leave a space between each knot of about an inch or less; and put the thread into the nose at the power of the patient, and draw it out smelling it often, so that it goes into the mouth; and many times do this to the child in school, and it is a light thing for him who does it; then hold the nostril that comes out by the thread with one hand, and the other nostril that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and feel them alternately while smelling as we do; put back the thread so often as you feel the knot, and make it tight; and leave the nose a caine of plunk some days until he is well, and if he needs dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purifying the nostril, by which oil and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, like a cord, and thus you conduct it; and if you see, make a closed cord, and let the instrument rest on the nose while oil or any liquid is heated.
of the wound on the neck
Might often occur in the neck wound a disease called "telul", and grows and becomes very large, so that it is visible to the eye; and for this it is necessary that you chop the head at the beginning, and burn the bone all over, then put fire on it; and if you delay to chop it as long as it is great, if it is hard, of a strange color, and poor in feeling: but do not touch it with iron because it is an inflamed abscess, for when you chop it once, much evil comes to the sick person; and this abscess is of soft touching, not of strange color, and you see that you can cut it all over, if you empty the patient and chop him without fear, and cure him with dry and restraining things.
when the neck wound has been chopped and cured
when the neck wound has been chopped and cured
The manner of the stitch is that you gather together the solution: or with needles, as we said in sewing the stomach; or with thread, as I have told you.
of the lips
of the lips Apoplexy comes into the lips, resembling grain times, and smaller and greater; then you should turn the lips, and cut on each notch, and hold it with pliers and shape it in each part; then employ the vitriol broach after the incision of vitriol, as much as the wound is dried up; and then let it rest.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent "albulus"; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l'incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.
Here is the translation of the text into English:
"Now, regarding the teeth, they are not put together at the top of the mouth, between the gums, with sharp tools that are ugly and rough; and the teeth are not black and yellow and rotten, as long as the corruption does not come to the gum, and they are stinky; if it seems to you that you should hold it between your hands, and its roots are in your hand, and you rip out the teeth or sharp tools with them, as long as it does not stay for a moment; and thus do you make black and green, and yellow and other colors, until they are clean; and if one is torn at the first cutting, it is good; but if not, if it begins again on the second day and third, until you have ripped them all out; and know that teeth require different shapes of tools to rip out, according to what the work requires, for the razor with which you rip out the teeth has other shapes than the one with which you rip out between the teeth; and these forms and others are ready for you.
It is necessary that when you cure the tooth of its pain that you pull it as soon as you can, because this should not be done at all; for it is a highly putrid substance until such time as there is no excuse to pull it. Now when the patient is forced to pull, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth that needs pulling. Many times the pain leaves the patient, and he believes that the tooth is sound, and has it pulled; and nevertheless the pain does not leave him, because we have already tried this with these gentlemen; and when you are certain of the tooth that needs pulling, then you scratch around the tooth with a sharp instrument very carefully from one side to the other; then you hold it with your fingers or small pliers at the first hole and hole, until they are well loosened, then you tighten the pliers firmly; and be the patient's jaw between your knees, and keep it firm so that it does not move.
Then pull the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, then take any of these instruments and push it inside from each side slightly, and move it so as you did first. And if the root is broken and bleeding, then fill it with rags, where the break is; and if it is carefully extracted with pliers, so that it does not break when extracted; and it is necessary to cut the gum very carefully around the tooth.
And do well to avoid breaking it, and if a part remains, and remain with the patient because of the root's greater pain from the first. And do well that you do not do as does that ignorant doctor, who by his haste and boldness sometimes breaks the carriage, and never provides anything but what we have told; but brings sometimes by the question of that great disease for the roots that it delays, or for the carriage that it breaks, as we have often wanted to do; and when the tooth is pulled, if you wash the root with wine or mint or vinegar; and if they run away from the pain that usually comes, if sometimes a little vitriol is applied; and if this does not work, then cauterize.
The forms of the instruments, so that they do not break the first tooth, are long in length and large in diameter, so that they do not double when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
And let them be strong limbs so that they do not bend when you pull, and let them be well made of iron, and let them have teeth to hold fast.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains in place while pulling, if you put cotton or oil on the jaw where it hurts, as long as the roots are smooth, then the pliers that are called "algefri" seem to fit; and let them be shaped like a file:
And if the roots will not come out to all these clutches, it is convenient that you uncover the cart entirely around the root, and put the instrument which is called "al-thalī'ah", that is to say palanquin, of which this is the form:
And be far and wide so that it does not break, and the root jumps over this, it is good; if not, help yourself with all the instruments, of which the shapes come after:
And if you help yourself with this instrument that has .ij. rains, of which this is the form:
and other iron instruments that are in front in the rationale of dens, and of this instrument which seems like a great claw, whose form is:
Et soit ciste instrument estruite du fait qu'il ne puisse briser, et sache que beaucoup d'instruments de profondeur sont; et aussi d'autres instruments, qui ne sont pas comptés; et les maîtres sages forgent par eux-mêmes leur instrument, selon ce que leurs œuvres et la maladie lui montrent, car il y a de nombreuses maladies où l'ancien n'enseigne pas d'instrument pour la diversité des choses, et si on ne brise point le charriot ou les autres os sur lesquels il est posé, s'il cherche les instruments qu'il convient, que je t'ai dit, et t'aide par des gestes, de coi voici la forme: Et soient gros et bien tenant pour tenir l'os, qu'il n'échappe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis retourne le à la place de médicaments convenant à ceu, et s'il y a en l'os putréfaction, et elle est petite, si la re-insersion a tout cet instrument:
Quant la dent apparaît ne mie selon le corps naturel, et la forme est laide, et surtout en femmes pucelles, si convient que tu saches si le dent est né après la mort du dent, et n'est pas dans sa place, et on ne peut le soigner ni le limer: alors le raie; et s'il est arraché avec le dent, si prends cet instrument dont ci est la forme, et est semblable à un petit bec, et soit de fer forgé en haut:
And so the cap is put on and off day by day because of the hardness of the tooth, and for this reason you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be limed, then liming should be done like this:
And also it is like this that the lime is made from which they make needles; and gradually the tooth is limed as the hands are taken off lightly, so that it does not move until it has been chiseled; then the plane at the end to any razor, and the edge is too trenchant and it bleeds the tongue, so it is necessary to lime the sharpness gradually until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
when the tooth is loosened
when the tooth is loosened, either by percussion or by pulling, and the patient cannot press on what he chews so that he does not chuckle; and you have cured him with restraining medicines, and that doesn't work; then it is necessary to restrain it with a gold wire, because silver wire turns green and rusts, but gold never moves; and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, depending on the space between the teeth; and if you notice any pain in one tooth, take the file and double it over between two teeth on either side of that tooth, then place the caps between the teeth, if there are more than one, until you get to a healthy tooth on the other side; then start the covering again up to the part where you started, and gently tighten your grip with pliers so that it does not move; and if the wire slips, or the thread rubs, then tighten it with another wire. Then the caps are put together with pliers, and they are tightened, and placed between the healthy tooth and the file, and left like this until it tightens; and if it tightens and serves for a while, and stays like this as long as it can, and if it slips or rubs, then tighten it with another wire; if it stays and serves for a long time, and that is the form of the teeth and the appearance of the tightening of the 20 caps, if you see:
And when the tooth is loose, if one puts it back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not skilled and chịuing, and never make the shape of a tooth of a cow's, and put it back in its place where it has fallen out, and hold it fast, as we have said, and delay and maintain it for such a long time.
To take away the metal from around the tongue
No one should take away the metal from around the tongue or nature it, except in such a way that you open the mouth of the sick person and place your head on his chest, and take the tongue out; then take off the nerves from the large side, as long as the tongue is separated from its place, and whether it is hard or not, and it is the sudden pain of injury; then bind it with a bandage and keep it wet with rose water or cold water, and then put a piece of linen on it; and dip it every night, so that the leech will not stick. And if the wound heals, then apply fire to the skin with vitriol, which is good for this; then cure it with other remedies until it is healthy,
And if you see red or black or hard color on it, so that the sick person does not feel it or touch it, for this is cancer; and if it goes down to blenchor, and there is moisture, then pour the wine, and let it sit for a moment, and deliver it with a thin blade, and cut both sides; and if it comes to your work, so put it on vitriol until it is stained, and return to your work until you take away all of it; then take away the water of the sea and the salt, and cure it with other remedies until it is healthy.
of the throat abscesses
of the throat abscesses come out from within, which are called "godath", and they are called by name properly "amandres", and when you cure them, if as we said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is an abscess that is small in size and has a thin color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron either for fear of bleeding; but leave it alone until it dies, and then you will remove it, or it will break by itself; and if it is of a pale color, and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover it over, but first take care that the abscess is hot and at rest. Then set the patient in front of the sun, and let his teeth be in good order, and he opens his mouth and places his fingers between his hands, and presses his tongue against all the instrument, so that this is the shape; and it should be silver or thin gold as our knives are:
Then you press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the knife and put it in the amandre, and pull it up higher than you can; and do not tie anything with a thread before covering the instrument, otherwise the shape is good, which seems like a bunch of forces; and yet the head is curved, and one side is above the other, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron from this or that:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then take it with pliers, so that this is the shape:
And be careful on one side and the other; and when you have copped one of the mandorles, if you cop the other according to this same manner, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot water, and strong and easily, and they remove blood as it comes, if gargariate the patient with water, or juices of cooked pomegranates, or leaves of mirto, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then cure him as long as he is healthy; and never come to the throat other apostemes than the .ij. mandorles, if they are copped in this way just like the .ij. mandorles.
I treated a woman for an apoplexy that was lying in her throat, that is to say, one apoplexy of small size; and I had so well sealed up all the throat, that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was stopped up, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she had stayed like that for 1 day or 2 days. The apoplexy was so high that it had risen 2 inches by the 2 passages where the blood came out. I hastened then, and inserted an onyx into one of the passages, then drew it out, and pushed a lot of bowels; then refitted the other in the other passage where the blood came out, and pressed her tongue; after I inserted the onyx into these apoplexes, and copped part of them, and only let out a little blood; so the passage in the throat was unstopped for the woman, and she began to drink water and wine again, and did not cease to cut off that apoplexy with an onyx for a long time; and that apoplexy came back again, and filled up the place that I had emptied, until it became very big; so I engorged it and cauterized it in her throat: then it stood still without growing any bigger; and I left these parts, and there was nothing but God did after me.
of wine
When the head is re-attached to the body, and it is far away, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called an "eye". When it has been treated as described in the previous section on treatment, and the cure does not work, and you see that the abscess aphesized, and it is thin, then you should cut it out; and if it is round and not too far away, and it is red or brown or black, then you should avoid the incision. For there is great danger in this disease. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have described, that its blenchor and longness, you should make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument that we have described above; then cut out the excess that is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more than this, it will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of two mandrels, and cure it until it is well. And if the patient has a fear of being covered, then you should use cauterization with an instrument that causes pain; and the manner of cauterization is sharp fire. And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then he presses his tongue to the instrument that we have described for cauterization, and confuses it with sharp fire so that it is not too thick or too thin; and use the handle of this instrument, from which comes its shape:
And put your hand under his head so that he can put the medicine, as if with a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine on the eye; and let the patient lie on his side so that he spits and swallows the medicine into himself, so that it does not go down the throat and wound; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the eye for half an hour, until you see it calm and the medicine has stopped hurting; and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and put the instrument on all the cotton in the chain above, until the cotton dries out; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and wash after 2-3 days. And if you need to clean the medicine from the cauterization, and it is cleaned, and after cleaning the medicine, let him drink cold water and gargle as much as he can until he is well.
This treatment is safer than the incision, or the cauterization; if it has been cured by smoking in this way, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and averron and similar herbs, and gather them all or any of them into a 1-liter pot, and pour water on them easily, and boil it; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and put the pot on this instrument that has been described in this way: And be of silver or gold, and be one of the shoulders crushed in the mouth of the sick person as long as the vapor rises to the vein through the cannula, as long as the vein is deadened; then begin again often, as long as the vein dries up, and guard against doing this at the beginning of the advent of the abscess, for many things have happened there; and do not make this but at the decline of the abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cannula and put it in the head of the shoulder a hook of tar, so that the mouth of the sick person does not get too hot; because the hook of tar does not add to the vapor that presses on the mouth, and this is good all together and saves.
Many times it rises in the throat bone or spine of fish, or nothing; so that it is convenient that you should take what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun on all the instrument, so that you see the thing; and that which does not open to you and is put back in the throat, it is convenient that you should make the sick person vomit in such a way that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if it should throw up; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or 1c. morcel of dry bread; and he licks the sponge with a thread, and then swallows her; and when she comes to the point, if she grieves, and then pull hard; and if she does not come out of this thing that we have said, take a plunger according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the tip so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and raise the head higher; and guard against touching the epiglottis, that it does not come down, nor push the bone in; and move that the sick person swallows the instrument, for what he swallows or what is thrown up; if she drinks it, or she pulls it all the way out, equally as far as she can.
of the blood from the throat
de la sang de la gorge
If it does not spit as described above, then submerge the patient in an asafetida solution, using the instrument I mentioned for the fumigation of the uvula; do this many times, for she will cough up phlegm. And the method of the fumigation is that you should squeeze the pot containing the charred herbs into a covering cloth placed over the fire, and onto the pot put the head of the instrument; then pour the smoke onto it, and the patient puts the tip of the nose into his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not escape but comes to the blood; and the blood will then come out, and if it does not spit, then start again with this method; make the patient thirsty, and give him salt and sour things to eat, and do not give him any water to drink; and then let the medicine act according to my instructions.
And the shape of the instrument, as I mentioned above, is such that it can be seen to treat the blood; it has the appearance of a corbed awl for entering into the throat; and it resembles a stethoscope; and there is lime-like sharpness on its tip, so that whatever it touches, it cannot leave; and see this shape:
the capitules of the abscesses
The capitules of the abscesses are, according to this reminder which comes from one and another in this book, and are diverse in perforation and in incision; and it is in .ij. ways, whereof one is in its own appearance, and of what he holds moisture. And the second way is for the lees where they are at the core. For the abscess at the head is different from that at the base, and the abscess at the charnel is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if to abscesses one should not pierce, as long as the bow is dead according to its fulfillment; and if to such that it comes when they are crusted, and do not die according to their fulfillment, so that it hurts the principal member; or it is of the principal member, and if you delay the piercing as long as he is dead, it will hurt the principal member; or it is of the base, if one pierces it in this way that he is dead; and it does not come that you pierce the crusted abscess before the digestion is complete, lest that which is of the base should rot to perfection, and be alongied inside, and come out as a fistula; and can not heal in great term.
And it is necessary that you know the time of piercing the abscess which is dead according to its fulfillment, and this is when the pain is calm, and the departure of the fever, and the decrease of the pain and redness, and the debate and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the piercing where it is most dependent the member of the abscess, and at what place he opens; and let the piercing be of the long side of the core, and if the abscess is to the hands or to the feet, or in joints and nerves and blood vessels, and in all its sides equal, or there is no pliedure.
In cases of vomiting, according to the affected member. And when abscesses are in a state of pus, let it be left open until digestion is complete, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this, your body will be elongated by its outlet, and it will be full of filth; and perhaps its lips will harden and its depth will become more difficult. And if there is an abscess that has pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the members need. And it is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small holes; and in large abscesses, large holes, and many splits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where cure should be made, and covered up; when they have been completely cured like drapels, and softened, it is necessary to do so as one does with blisters: and if there are any that have split into three angles, and there are any that one covers like a mirth leaf, as in abscesses of the limbs; and if there are any that you make a round size, and other sizes and appear to be covered.
For those who do not have a crest, if it is an superficial abscess, you should pierce it clearly; and when the abscess is large, and has a deep bowels, and you pierce it, if you do not draw all the bowels out at once, but draw some of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing more; do this many times from little to little, until the bowels are all drawn out; unless the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman, or small children, or old honourable people. For the expectoration will jump out of the bowel sometimes with great force, and perhaps the patient will die, and you will not know it. Therefore, use this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if you find the wound to be small, and if it is a plain cut, put linen or old cotton in it; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many holes, you should put a tent in each one so that they touch each other; and if you have covered part of the skin with the abscess, and you have wrapped it around, you should fill it with old cotton or wool of flax without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then open it, and treat it with ointment as long as it is healthy.
And if the blood that runs from your work comes to you, bring cold water and a small cloth, and moisten 1. drapel, and put it on the place where the blood is running by many times. And if the blood persevere, bring government and medicine, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it is or tears of an animal, and the leus where the abscess is very nervous, you should put on tents and drapelz moisten with wine and oil warm; and if it is in esteit, and the leus is charnus, you should put on drapelz moisten with water and oil, or with wine and oil cold, until the third day, as we have said; then remove the abscess and wash it and treat it, as it should be, until it is healthy.
And this is something that is universally known in the treatment of abscesses: however, I have told you how one should go about treating abscesses, and here is the paste.
abscesses
Here is the translation of the provided text:
"And this is something that is universally known in the treatment of abscesses: however, I have told you how one should go about treating abscesses, and here is the paste."
of the scrofulous
Of the scrofulous many times have I seen an abscess at the neck, and drain the abscesses, and inflammation, and no other place go, and are moistened, and grow together one with another. And each scrofula is properly within its rib, as the knot and the abscess of the throat, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not wish to obey health. In that case when you see that it is of good disposition in the chest, and seems the color of the flesh, and mute from each part and is not at all arousable from the neck nor the artery nor the conduit, and is not at all profound; then it is necessary that you chop it above, and scorch it from each part, and there are the .ij. lips of the chest on one side, if you need them, as we have said in regard to the abscess of the throat; and cut little by little, and be sure that you do not chop the nerve nor the vein, and do not be too deep, lest you should make the main vessel escape, and do not see it too far ahead, lest you should chop too much.
And if you chop the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to finish, then put vinegar broil on the wound, or some powders that stop blood, and extract the wound; and leave the wound until the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and begin to rot. And when the scrofula is hardened in its root, if it is necessary that you chop it at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without doing any harm; then employ the wound with wool dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you chop the whole scrofula, then it is necessary that you gather the 2 lips of the wound and sew them now, then that there is no delay because of the size of the scrofula. If it is necessary that you understand to chop the root of it, and draw it forcefully, and sew it as we have said before. Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens die; and pierce it by cutting, then i introduce tendres with oignement and semblance things, so that it corrupts he who is delayed from corruption; and when the wound is well washed, if it is healthy.
of squint
The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the lengthening of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is written in their words.
For those with squint, it is necessary that the fending of the throat, which is called "epiglottis", be removed; and no aid should be sought from anyone, since all the veins and the pella of the disease are found in the mouth or the throat or in the.ij. Mandres". When the disease is in the channel of the pella, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so that the obstruction that comes from strangulation does not occur.
It is necessary therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we do so with a double curve or a small slit from one side to the other, between the two curves or by the quantity of the slit in the cartilage.
and if these are suitable for the splitting of the epiglottis there is no charnel, and the vessel is long from one end to the other.
And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to its full length, and splits it so that it comes out at the chin; and avoid the vessels of blood, because you will see nothing, and then cut the cartilage as we have said.
and is demonstrated by the splitting of the vein of the chin that goes out through the place that has been broken, and by the loss of voice.
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed when one doubts about strangulation, gather together the .ij. lips of the wound from the end, and the flesh all along the cartilage; then administer medicines that bring about the birth of blood, until it is well.
Albuças says that one should not do this as long as the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the lack of air makes him die. Then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through it, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from dying; and
and so the elder should command that the wound remain open until the disease has passed, and it has passed in iii days or in iiij. And then they should command to stitch the wound and heal, until it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw; I saw a damsel take a knife, and put it in her throat, and run into the forest by the porch;
And I was called to cure her, and I found her also dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had flowed from it, and I knew that she had not cut a vein but rather that the blood had flowed from her throat, and the source of the flow was through the wound.
I hurried, and stitched up the wound, and cured it as best I could so that she would be healed;
and the young woman was only red in her cheeks, and returned to her normal state;
For by God's life, I hope that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
are called "gastric hernias", and are large hernias in color of a yellow, and are very common in women;
and they are according to two manners: natural and accidental; or the natural one has no machine.
And this accident happens in two ways, one is like grass growing outside us, and the other way is like an abscess coming from us due to blood. and it has fear, and does not come to operate fire only in that which is little, and tries and searches in all the intermeshing: if you prove it as well as grass, and cannot do anything, if it copes, as we cope us, and try it to all its hair, if there is any left: and search well everything, and treat if it is necessary, so that it is completely healthy.
Of us
Several ways of doing this exist, all of which I will describe;
and so that I may show the entire difference between them;
I say that the issue is hot and feverish, until the泡泡消去，并且取得了成功；然后发烧和发热就消失了。
With no heat or fever or pain, and contains.i. the medicine that is his own sack and is according to the color of the body, and also begins like a bean, and becomes thick;
and are according to their appearances, or fat, or moist, and most of their colors are as I said in the division.
When you come to the cure of the new birth, you must first test and inquire about all the instruments that are called "entreμισsoires", according to what their form will be or the paste that is after.
And the way of the investigation of abscesses is that you squeeze or more moist water than you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the pus, then that it be according to the size of the abscess;
Then pull out the intruder, and take care that it does not hurt.
If it runs with moisture, let its color be like that of the others I have spoken of in the abscesses;
and if after the intruder there is no moisture, know that it is greasy, so do it in a cross form and take it by the pinches, and burn it lightly on each side, and beware of the cost where it lies, so you get it healthy with the nut.
and if you cannot pull it healthy, then pull it by pieces so that nothing remains standing.
For if I do not delay, it returns to us many times;
and if it takes a little time, and does not cause you any pain, then employ some corrosive water pouder on the wound, extract the wound, and put something soothing on the abscess, and heal with other remedies until it is well;
and if we cut open the wound with .ij. fingers, and heal with what causes a fever;
and if the wound is opposite or another side, and do not delay using lead vitriol, and let it rest for 2 days or 3, as long as the wound smells bad, and then return to where it was delayed;
See the forms of instruments that are inserted, and they are of 3 ways: big and small and very small; and there are 3 quarters which are called "albaret", and 1 which is called "breb", and there are 3 ways: big, small, and very small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula.
and they are also like the needles with which one sews sorrows, and they are of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more proven to sink into black clay to encircle the corbicles of fistula;
and they are of 3 ways: big, small, and very small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the apertures.
The forms of the instruments are of many appearances, so that you see here: big, small, and very small; and if there are any which have 3 quarters of 3 ways;
and if they are once who have .iij. combs, and also of .iij. ways; and if they are once who have .ij. combs, and once of a comb alone, and are of .iij. ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these should be sharp, and of such I have who do not cut better than from one side, so that we skin them in order to get at the vein or nerve.
and of these introducers are the needles inserted many, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses.
and they are of 3 ways: great, small, and mean, as you see;
and don't use it in a wet place, like legs, arms, breasts, armpits, and similar places;
and never use it for anything else than for the skin, according to this shape, so that one does not burn oneself:
and never place it in a place that heals quickly by opening veins and arteries, or in any other large area:
and never inflame the breasts of certain men when they are becoming corrupted, as long as they look like a woman's breasts:
and they stay lame and swollen, and if one should follow this method as written in this chapter of B, up to: then scald the fat and employ medicine to the wound with charcoal, then join the 19. lips of the wound together by stitching, and heal it until it is well;
and if one drinks the liquid, it is softened by its greatness just like a woman's milk is softened, and if one makes it in 19. stitches on top, by 19. similar slits; so that one holds the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form, from this line B up to line G; Then scrape the skin that is between the .ij. lips, and remove the fat, and add what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not completely done, so that the patient does not rest, or for the loss of blood, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton made from a corrosive ointment; and let it sit until the remaining fat and juice are cooked, then heal it until it is healthy.
the abscesses of the wrists
The sores that come from abscesses are handled like hard scrofula or if they have ribs and contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B onwards up to line G.: And when all of the bowels in the abscess are empty, if one employs wet cotton and leaves it there for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess resembles scars of leprosy, then treat it in the same way as we have described for treating leprosy wounds; and if the bowels break open, apply fire cautery as we have described.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the flesh above it is tightly closed, there are often abscesses, and the same happens with the escaped vein and the abscess.
and if one knows when it is for the artery, then the abscess is long enough to complete itself. and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel an exit; and when it is for the vein, if it is difficult to go out.
and it is madness to cut this abscess, and most of all when it has broken the joints and the armpits and where the collar is wet with other fluids, and it is very large. So then it is necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and he who is at the head also needs to be avoided, and in that which is inflamed with an artery, cut through the skin from above.
So then it is necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and he who is at the head also needs to be avoided, and in that which is inflamed with an artery, cut through the skin from above. then operate on the waist as one would on a horse, and separate the artery from the tissue carefully, until it is exposed;
then bottle the blood, and make it pierce up to the other side of the waist, and stretch out the artery with a double thread in iij. inches, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the iij. arteries that are in the temples;
and then mark the place that is between the 17th and 18th links of an introducer while there is a snot coming out from it, and separate the abscess.
then arrange the care that causes fever, as long as the link bleeds; then treat what is infected with what is good for it, as long as it heals;
and if the abscess is the size of a vein, then have the patient hold it with his hand as soon as possible after cutting all the skin around it; Then pour the ink into the tube that you hold in your hand, and let it flow out, and there is a thread of .i. two, so that you pull it from the other side; and then incise it, as I have said to you, or join of one of the two parts to the other thread;
and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, then put another needle into all of the thread at the incision of the first needle, and pull out the threads in three lengths;
and then cut off the excess of the thread as it comes out, and cut off the excess of the knot and leave what is tied;
then wet it with wine and oil, then administer cures for tent and ointments until he is well.
the abscesses of the nails
Also, when the abscesses come out in the artery and the vein, they come out as nails when they are torn, or by too much work, and similar things.
And this often happens in the shoulder joints and the two arms, and in all their joints, and it has the color of the heart's color, and is in many dispositions without pain;
and when they are held in place, if the patient feels pain, and it is not completely set, but let them rest;
and be quiet on all sides, and not move forward or backward, nor above nor below, and the one who is in joints does not come to cover with iron: perhaps there will be a contraction;
and those who are at the head or front, make the skin with a spatula. If the appendix is small, if it has a nail, and cut it at the root;
and if it is great, then suspend him by the foot, and scorch him, then the bone and join the wound to the seam, and treat it until it is healthy.
large mouths hanging down No times comes in bellies and not any other part thelul, and is a disease called "fungus" by appearance of corn, and is the root subtlez, and the tree big; and there are little and great many
and I saw. i. home who had. iij. bellies which were more like to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a little root, and were cut short, and ran together moist.
I found one weighing .xviij. oz., and the other .vj. oz., and the preparations in the incision so that if you look at the patient, he is moist, and the color of the arthroplasty is white and moist and of fine roots;
if the chisel is too wide, and are in your presence the fire cautery. For the tailor often causes too great a loss of blood, and goes away without you, so hurry up then the cauterizer;
and if you see the patient spoiling and fearful of the incision of iron, then take .i. thread of linen well made, and bind the arthroplasty as we have said, and leave it for .ij. days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to bind the linen thread as long as it copes the arthroplasty, and test by him work; and if the roots are thick, so have fear at the coping directly for the belly, but you please well copes the half,
and then cauterize it so that it does not come back; and then cure the wound, and keep you do not cover the thistle which is of fuchsia color and poor smell and milk sour.
For it is an abscess that has become infected, and I will come to the cure for chancre hereafter.
When the heat is gone
As soon as the heat subsides, apply fire cautery to the wound or split of syphi, which is on the belly and has some bouez, just as it happens in other wounds, or of blood that comes from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of wind;
and if it is by the rupture of the skin and the outlet of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and opening of various outlets. And if it is by the outlet of the intestine, then there are many different ones, and when it is pressed to its two sides it returns again, and sometimes if it is bound, and grows larger at the entrance to the bath and from much work.
And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without restraint; and if it is by blood, then open according to the signs of the large and hard abscesses, and fix it in place.
And if it is by wind, then it is smoke at the temple, and the work is that you observe its appearance: whether it is blood from an artery, a vein, or wind. If it is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, if I have told you about the chapter of the abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to tie his bowels up and be extended on both sides, then sign all around the bowel; then instruct him to cut softly between your hands; then go inside the place that you have signed with all the spatula; Then cut off half of the anus, to all of the large hook.
Then stretch out half of the anus on the thread, and with your thumb, push down the intestine; If you find it caught in the thread, if it comes loose, push the intestine towards the anus;
and if you find the boil, take it to the edge, and cut off the excess;
and if the artery is blocked or cut, take it to the edge and go inside loudly, then return to your work and take .ii. needles, and tie them with .ii. threads, and tie the .ii. needles around what you have cut so that you have made a hole;
then stretch the abscess over the needles, and if you see, take out the needles, and let it remain in its place until it putsrefies, and cut off the dead part by itself; or cut when it is soft and putrid, then treat what it touches, and shave the abscess as we have said;
or cut when it is soft and putrid, then treat what it touches, and shave the abscess as we have said; And draw out the blood where you find moisture, then treat the affected area accordingly, and bind it.
and the ulcer
We have spoken in the division of the appearances of ulceration, and how it should be operated on with medicines, and how one should cauterize it; and we say that ulceration begins in the genitals, and great care must be taken in its treatment, and the old man said that when ulceration is in a place where it can be cut as ulceration is in breasts, and in the cunt, and in similar places, it should all be cut off when it is at its beginning; and when it is large and old, it should not be approached, for I have never seen one healed before me.
And the amputations, when they can be cut as we have said, are that you do not purge any black urine at all times; then make it healthy if it has manifest repletion, then afaite the urine  .i. a good place for amputation; then pour your swages or ulceration, and your hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood run freely, and squeeze the juice at your hand or at any thing, and if it recedes from the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood is stopped; then cure it with other cures until it is healthy.
about hydropsy about hydrops about hydrops
about hydrops
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and draw your hand back from all the sputum between the skin and the leech as if you were stretching out an inch or so; then pierce the leech as far as the sputum comes to a clear point, and this is the channel of the water, then draw it tight, and bottle up this instrument, for this is its shape: And it resembles an iron wire of fine silver, and is of bronze or brass, and has in one part  .i. little hole; and on one side there are .iii. holes, and on the other side .ii., and on the other side .i.; and the head is cut off like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision where the writers make the feather:
At the top is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the water, he should now pour it on the instrument; empty half or one-third of it, because if you empty more than that at that time, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will turn away from death;
but empty it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease and its pulsations mean, then treat the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now by the pulse which is on the leech, of which I have spoken, that you pierce it according to this way; then recommence the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering from that, and treat with a little quantity of water:
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.
for the stopping of sperm For the stopping of sperm: No child is born without an issue in the member, or if it is small, or if it is not in its place. If it is necessary that it should pierce at all times. I will put a very small cap of lead according to this form; then bind and keep it there for two or three days, until he has urine, and then remove it; and perhaps he will never know it, because the strong urine that comes does not leave his close. For the stopping of sperm: If the issue is small, then bind it with a cap of lead, as we have said, if it should become larger. If they do not have the issue in its place, they are blighted, because no one is born who has the issue at the top of the member, since they cannot urinate until their member rises; and they cannot conceive by anything that the material does not come up to the navel, and this is a bad disease.
And the method of this chapter is that the patient lie down on his back, then the head of the penis and the scrotum are to be cut off as if they were the thickness of a feather, so that the foreskin can fit in between them; and you must guard against bloodletting which often comes with it, and if it does come, stop the bleeding from that part and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the penis часто возникают язвенные высыпания на пенисе, и это вызывает неприятный вид; и есть добрые и плохие; поэтому ты должен взять их с помощью тонкого иголочки, и очистить их и обработать мазью диафохинтоном до тех пор, пока они не заживут. If the wart is malignant, of black color and putrid, then you should bring it with a needle; when you have cleansed it, and if the wart is inside the skin, take out the wart that is inside first; and when it is sewed up, then cut off the wart. For when you cut it together, if it is not well closed at the head of the penis, it will become black and rotten there and in its place; therefore you should burn out all that is black and rotten, and then put honey and flour on it which is made from pomegranate skin and roots, and then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if the pain of prostration comes, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries so help in all 24 dispositions together: that is to say, in the prostration of pain and corruption; and if the testicles are corrupted and withdrawn, then it is necessary that you pierce or conduct from the penis a rope of plangent, and urinate the patient among; and when the hair is shaven at the head of the penis which has not yet been circumcised, or where there is an ulcer or abscess, then it is necessary that you scald with 1 instrument as needed, until the ligaments are relaxed and the penis is free from all sides;
And if this is a difficult thing to devise, then it is necessary that you scald with one instrument the tip of the penis and the skin; then separate them well between 24, and I put 1 thin linen cloth wet in cold water, so that it does not burn again.
of circumcision
is not dislocation if it is done with the will and properly on children; However, if we do this operation with our will and properly on children, it is necessary that we do it as well and as lightly as possible for salvation.
I say that the ancient did not speak of circumcision of their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I have heard the most part of the masters and the wise men who made circumcision there, and the forces, and all a novacule; so was the cause because it has 1.ij. threads, and by chance if one should come on that above and hold it back that way.
Or if it is covered up again, and the pain is double, and the washing that is done there from the heel is not assured; and the nail by chance escapes the cut, and spoils the work, and often born like this so that there is no need for washing, and I have heard.
For the washing that is done with all the threads I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly above as well as below.
Car when you press your hand, if it is all even in length and size; but the string should be well woven around the skin; and the way of the first work is that you make the child think, if he hears, that you do not tie the string too tightly around the rod, and then put him to sleep in all ways that you can. then hold it straight between your hands, and stretch the strings between your hands or untie your toes that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or press, and turn it upside down as long as the head of the rod is in; then clean it well of the dirt that has accumulated on it, then tie the joint with a double rope, then untie one of the ropes to another; and hold it by the second loop at the knuckle and little finger, and pass between the two ropes, then lift the press gently above your chest, and turn the head of the rod.
then hold it straight between your hands, and stretch the strings between your hands or untie your toes that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or press, and turn it upside down as long as the head of the rod is in; then clean it well of the dirt that has accumulated on it, then tie the joint with a double rope, then untie one of the ropes to another; and hold it by the second loop at the knuckle and little finger, and pass between the two ropes, then lift the press gently above your chest, and turn the head of the rod. then let it run and run, for that is the healing; and put powder on top of the powder. i. a cloth dampened with a mixture of cooked yeast, mixed with good rose oil and honey, and leave it until the next day, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
The form of the forces for cleaning is this: the two strings should be loose and should be cut, and the strings should also be even in length.
The error of the purification if it is when the coursed [blood] flees from the incision; so it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail, in such way that the lews make an aposteme; and make it equal, and if you can not hold it in your fingernail, you take it with pliers, and then you cut.
And if it surpass three days, and that which is dislocated from the penis is swollen, if you leave it until the aposteme of the sore is calm, and the skin is lightly scorched; if you cut it as you can move, and keep away from the part of the penis, it will not harm it.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Dou retenement de l’urine si est quand li puet pas uriner a l’ouer; donques il covient que tu le soives en ton ungle, ainsois que li leus ne fasse point de mal; si le puet uriner, se li estraint la urine jusqu’a qu’il soit purifié.
The retained urine is due to a stone in the bladder, or frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or chaff, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division.
and if the urine is not passing, and you see the retention due to the stone which is stuck or at the neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be seated on his knees; and let him put the stone up against his back, and extend his abdomen from above his back, and restrain the patient so that he can lie down as well as he can; and then force the neck of the bladder to express the stone from above, so that the urine is passed.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must use an instrument called a 'syringe', which has this shape: and it should be made of fine light silver, like the feathers of an owl; and the tube should be a palm long and half wide, and it should be sharp at the tip.
And the way to express the urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the tip; and dip the end of the thread in wool or cotton, and pour the wool or cotton into the syringe; and dip the excess of the wool or cotton back into the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and some olive oil; and have the patient sit down, and lift up the bladder and the cervix with oiled fingers and oil from olives and water;
Then lightly put the syringe in the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis above the boude; then pour out the syringe up to the bladder, and let the urine flow into the thing that is empty, and this is not done according to this order but because this one who leads or where she goes is twisted; then are the thread through all the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then draw it out, and make it run.
and start again with the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and keep the patient calm.
of diseases of the bladder
When blisters or sores come in the bladder, or rust is gathered, and you there see distilling water and medicine, if done with all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and its form:
It is closed, and if there are 11.10 perforations: 9 from one side, and 1 from the other, as you see; and let his hair grow by reason that the medicinal poultice may be such that it stops well the head without addition, if we can remove the moisture, and throw when the need is there.
And when you see to move your medicines in the bladder, put the chief of the poultice in the moisture, and throw it while trailing which is there; if you will remove the moisture to the poultice, and then rebouwt firmly the trailing; if it will enter the moisture within, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
This is the form of the subtle clot which one uses to clot the bladder: if so:
And it is of silver or of archil, and it is the chief higher; and take 1.4 sheep bladders or the 1.4 bladders of the fish, then put the moisture in which you see to clot the bladder, then lie between the 1.4 bladders made of a good double thread of yarn, and heat the moisture on the fire; then bottle the head of the clot in the bladder, then squeeze your hand over the bladder all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment paper, and make it .i. into a circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then put in there a strong thread, then join the circle together as one would join a .i. dal, and place inside oil and moisture and water, and fasten it onto the instrument; and do so with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes out to the bladder.
from the stone
We have already discussed the methods for cutting and extracting stones together with medicines; and I have spoken about the difference between a stone that is hard and the signs of it, and how to size a stone; and regarding the bladder and the penis; and I will now explain this clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone that is hard in the bladder often comes more frequently in children, and this is a sign that water jumps from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; and if it becomes hard, and grates the bladder, and jumps many times, then it softens; and the foundations are light; and this is lighter for young people until they are .iij. years old, and heavier for the elderly, and between middle age and old age it is moderate, and the cure is more light for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary first to cleanse the disease with a douche, to extract all the matter that is in the intestines. For it is not often that it is necessary to go looking for stones.
Then take the patient by the feet, and turn him upside down and move him gently so that the stone comes out perfectly from the bladder, and never go up from its place; then make it sit between your hands, and let his legs be dislocated so that the bladder hangs down; then examine and feel inside.
If you feel the stone in space, then quickly cut it with your left index finger; if the disease is old, or the patient is young and healthy, moisten your right index finger with oil from your left hand, and press down on the base of the stone, and feel for the stone at your thumb, and if you feel a knot at the neck of the bladder, then press hard on your thumb; and squeeze it towards the outside and feel for the stone, and if you feel it with your finger, then cut off the neck of the bladder.
And command the minister to press the bladder in his hand, and command him to extend the testicles in his right hand above, and with his left hand lift up the skin that is dislocated from the testicles in the part where the cutting takes place; then dip the spatulum in it, for this is its shape:
And put between him who is between the hips and the foundation, not in the middle but at the cost of the left knee; and let it be right on the stone, and your two are joined to the foundation, and let his size be large by defect, and tight inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big;
in order that the press between him who is or foundation, may not be without work; and know that there is part of stone where there are angles and edges: so it is easier to pull out; and if there is part which is like a ball, round, whose issue is light.
so as to make the size larger where there are angles and edges; and if it does not come out, then you must use pliers which are like a file on the head, so that you can pull out the stone without damaging it; or you will strike with an axe at the base; and if you cannot catch it so, then increase the hole little by little, and if it is not corroded, then use vitriolic acid.
and if there is more than one stone, first strike the largest at the neck of the bladder, then chop and grind, and the smaller ones after, if there are any more. And if it is very large, so it should be, and make a large wound. For 20 things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes out all at once because his bladder cannot hold it; but you must try to pull it out, or cut it into pieces with pliers, until you take it all out;
and when you have finished your work, if you employ the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood and the poultice, and put it on  .i. a wet cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the abscess; then remove the patient from his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you remove it, if you raise it well with oil and water, then treat it with astringent ointment and balsamic ointment until it is healthy.
And if hot abscesses come into the wound and corroding of blood in the bladder, and because of this it is urinated without salt with urine: then put your medicine on the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and it will ooze.
And then raise the wound with water and salt and seaweeds, and assist it in all ways that you know how to make healthy; and it is necessary that, for every urination, you bind his two legs together, and put the medicines on top of each other.
And if the stone is small, and it lies in the canal of the urethra, and is pushed in, and urine cannot come out; then the cure for this that I have just described, that you cut it many times, is excised from the size with this cure. I have already tested this thus.
Take 1.5 feet of iron according to this shape and be 1.5 inches long:
And then take 1.5 feet of wire and place it behind the stone in the penis, so that it cannot come out at the bladder; then insert the bit into the penis lightly, until it comes to the stone; and turn the bit back onto your hand with a poke and a poke, until you can pierce the stone from another side; if [then] comes the urine soon, then press your hand on this one who is held in the penis which is behind; if it is broken then, and jumps away with the urine, and the patient is relieved,
And if you cannot do this in any other way so that it is harmed, then take 1.5 feet of wire behind the stone and 1.5 inches on top, then pass the bit between the 2 lines, then extract it strongly, and desole the line, and clean the frozen blood which is in the wound; and treat as long as it is healthy.
of the woman's stone
It is possible that stone occurs in women, and if it has never happened before, there is a great cure [for it], and is defended by 2 things: one is that per adventure the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-versed who recognizes herself to the mirrors, even if she is married.
And the third way is that per adventure one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the woman's stone is more perfectly formed than the man's, because it covers making an even deeper cut, and causes great fear.
And if you need to send someone, per adventure it is necessary that you send a woman well-versed, and do not cut her, and if you do not find one, ask no more. There is also a presentable woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and commands her to make the man that you command in the inquiry of the stone;
and carefully examine whether the woman is a virgin: then it is appropriate to put his hand or foot and seek the stone; and if she has true, so bind her hand, and recommend that she puts her hand or with the disease, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder shape.
If she has true, so it is appropriate that she moves it little by little from the entrance of the bladder all the way to the root, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then he should put his hand on the stone in the middle of the leg, where it is moved, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her hand above the stone or remove it, and cut a little first.
then he should put the rope in the waist, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and which have rain. If you know the appearances so that you can judge the outcome.
And if it does not go out, put vitriolic vinegar in it, and hold it for an hour until the sin is stained; then return to your work, until the stone is gone, and have tools that I told you in the extraction of the stone to help you in your work;
and if you have left it without treatment, and that is the artery which has been cut, then put the powder on the spot and draw out the blood and fat, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone in place and do not extract it, so that the patient might die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has abated, and the place is ready, then return to your work, as long as the stone remains far away.
of hernia carnous
is made from water or white milk that is mixed with the seed of the fig tree, which is contained in the yolk of the egg; and is called "syfac", and is never properly in the fabric of the egg itself, if we consider this to be a different egg; and the skin of the fig tree between the white milk that we have mentioned; and that one does not come out.
And the offspring of this rat is so feeble that it comes out deformed, and this material spreads.
And there is also moisture that comes from beating on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a declining color to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more.
and these are the signs of trouble, for if it is white as we have said, it is the rears of an apple, and does not open the joints, for there is moisture all around it.
And if there is moisture in the proper towre, then are the rears of an apple with a part of the egg, and for this one thinks that it is another egg.
and if moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphos, so it smells bad; therefore when you see to know the color of the moisture, try it on all the internal parts because its form is in front. According to this, which comes after the internal parts, judge what is inside.
According to this, which comes after the internal parts, judge what is inside. And when we treat it with fire, so that the patient is healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then let him lie on his back on a high thing, and cover him with sheets.
then sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on his right, and extend the staff to one of the two ribs between the cheeks.
Then take the spatule and scrape the skin of the cow among its long until its knuckle, and make your cut all straight by splitting the skin of the cow until its white fat, and peel it carefully according to the time.
Then pierce the fat plain of water at 1/4 inch large hole, and take out all the water, and then put your onions, and keep the fat up; and do not touch the skin of the cow, but peel it only; cut him up all or in pieces separately the cost of it finely, so that if you don't cut it well, the water will come back;
And if the blood comes to your work, then put it back in its place when you have finished working on the fat; and assemble the 21 pieces of cow's skin into one piece, then treat it like the other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the blood is corrupted by some disease, then it is necessary that you hang the suspenders in doubt of the decay of blood; then cut off the cow' skin from all the suspenders, and take out the fat, and treat it as we have said.
And if the water is assembled into .ij. parts together, know that these are .ij. branches; then put the other part together as you did the first evenly, then wash the blood, and put into the wound another moistened with oil and rosewater.
and put elsewhere another moistened with wine and oil, and put on the 2 branches, and put over them double linen, and bind up all the linen according to this form:
Then take 2 linen cloths, and fill them with shredded linen according to this form, and sew them into the girdle of the tunic, and let one end of the cloth hang down to the back, and the other to the shoulder; and let the other chief rest on the 2 angles, and let all the restraint be sewn into the loop of the tunic;
and there is no medicine of this ramice of cautery in the shape of a blade of iron, and it is that you compress 1. cautery needle finely, and cope the skin of the branches, and be heated as we have said, so that the white substance that contains the water is uncovered;
If you use this method of cauterization, pierce those parts with a sharp instrument, and burn them with this subtle fire.
And cut all of it as well as you can, so that you remove everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the flesh; and know that this work is safer; and avoid the loss of blood and the harm of cutting.
and if anything makes you uncomfortable, or an abscess or a loss of blood or another thing, then treat what makes you uncomfortable, according to what is said above.
and if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this treatment because of its horror, then apply piercing, as I have told you, and it is that when you are certain, by the meanings that we have said, that the root-water is present,
If you make the patient sit up, then pierce the abscess in the back part of the throat to all the tongue, and place the hole at the long part of the windpipe; and keep the holes open so that all the water runs out.
then put cotton in the hole, and tie it up, and leave it so that the rest of the water runs out, then heal the wound until the wound is well.
and if the blotched cloth does not let the water out of the wound in the mouth, then you should put a feather or an instrument that draws out the water of dropsies there, so that it forms as above; and open .i. poc the wound, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after 15 days or less, and when it is gathered like before, and so the disease will pass from the patient in due time.
of the abscess of the testicles
Here is the translation of the first line of the text:
and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from the horns, and most often from the joints; and this happens for many reasons.
This is to be understood: by acrid and watery excess, which is spread to the joints, or from impact; or
and the color of the abscess according to the color of the core; and do not probe for pain, and the abscess is grief.
and sometimes an abscess is painful and piercing, and of a flickering color, and never comes from a vein, or swelling of a vein.
When it is from a vein, if you know the position of the abscess by touching with your fingers; and it only comes when you touch it.
Who is made by inflame of vein is known by his disposition to the expression by touching of both,
and can do well the size on this form, and on other shapes; and is that you cut the root of the hairs, then the hair is on top, and the line is clear white, and deliver the suspension from all sides of the hair.
If the hair is already sown with these hairs, then it is necessary that you take the hair, and the root;
and if it is ajar to the apothecary, or in those who are within the vessels, it is necessary that you deliver all of what is held, and the cup resonates.
and if the birth of the horse is where it is behind, then it is necessary that you chop all of it, and extract the hoof, as we have said.
and when your work is complete, then apply the wound with wool soaked in oil and wine, and then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
from the apothecary's shop
This is the translation of the provided Old French text: and the patient groans when he goes.
and the treatment for this disease is very similar to that described above.
and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
He should lie on his side, then pour the medicine down his throat from above, then hold him by the hair and turn his head to the right. to all the vessel which are near to the penis, and dry them with master, and spread them out flat.
then cut the vessels sharply from the trunk in a straight line, until they are uncovered,
and then peel off each piece, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
and I put an needle where he has .i. double thread, and tie him to the first place where his eye has come, and tie him closely to the other head; and then bind them tightly rightwise, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupt moisture;
and then heal the wound as well as the others where bowels leak, so that no vassal cries because of his privation;
For by this there comes neither harm nor harm, and all vassals come with their eyes, so it is necessary to draw the bowels from all the vassals; that he not lose his hair due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot help themselves.
of the rupture of the syrup The remedies for this illness are as follows: if it is due to an incision, or extension along the abdomen in the region of the bowels, because the intestines descend from that incision into one of the loins;
and this incision is either from the syrup or from the extension along the abdomen, and these 18 ways arise from causes such as percussion, jumping, mooing, lifting a heavy load, and similar things;
and the signs when it is about the expansion of the medicine, if it happens little by little in a long time, and does not come all at once; and the abscess is even up to the end, so that the medicine presses the intestine.
And the signs are when it is about the section of the medicine, that it makes sudden painful appearance, and the abscess appears different, as the skin turns red, and it is for the exit of the intestine and the body away from the medicine.
And there is no time for the circumference to separate with the intestine, and it is held back, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
And in these treatments of iron for fear, since it is necessary to avoid them.
And the way of cauterization is that you command the patient that he keep the intestine in his hand within the wound, if he can bring it back; Then order him to place his throat between your hands and cut off the tongues;
Then pull up on the skin of the neck, and peel it all off in one piece; and bottle within the loins of the back according to that which you have need to open the wound, and so such that the oil can come out.
and peel off the skin of the testes as far as the leather, until the white skin is completely uncovered from all sides;
and bottle within the index finger in that which is beneath the testicle, in that which is between the white skin which is uncovered from the leather of the scrotum, and between the second one;
and depart that which is behind the testicle, and between the second one; and then move by hand within the scrotum, and let the white skin be above your left hand, and place the testicle on all the skin before the waist; and command to the minister that he extends the staff above, and disconnects what is above the ligature.
and check your two sides if there is any wrapped or white киш that is hard, and if you do not find anything, pour the water into the belly.
then take an needle or he has .i. thick thread made of .x. threads, and put the water in the back part of the киш that is after the skin of the testicles; after the neck, then cut off the chiés that appear from the threads, until there are .iiij. threads; then put the one above the other in a cross-like manner, and tie the water, of which we have said that it is desoz to the skin of the testicles, with a strong knot of .ij. parts; Then wrap the heads of the fils, and bind them together with a piece of string, so that no vassal who feeds them can enter our ears, for the abscess will not come out. and tie it very tightly according to the first long piece of string, and after these two pieces leave a space which is the length of one's thumb between them; and then with the second pair of strings leave a space which is twice as long as that.
and then the rest according to the length of a round leather thong that the ear wears; and sew in the part which is under the skin of the ears, until it is tight, and bent in the shape which we have described above.
Then put wet wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and tie on the string that we have described. And never is cautered the white skin we have said, after the incision, out of fear that the blood will run.
For this often happens, and leaves the thread as long as it sews itself; and if it delays to sew, let it be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it sews.
then heal the wound with other cures until it is completely healed.
from a hernia
I never saw anyone who dared use iron to make a cure.
And the old one said that it is made like this: you tie the legs together, a little way below the knee, with something light;
then cut off the top of it, and cure the abscess with this, until the legs stop shedding tears; and cure it as we have said, until it is healthy again.
No wound comes without pain, as we have said, and open the legs; and if any of the entrails come out, it is a little, and repair all hours;
and in any case it stays too long at this point, believes he has a wound or syphilis as far as the intestines are released.
For in the expansion of syphilis which is to the anus, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and swollen, and its openings are enlarged.
and the cure is by cauterization, as we have mentioned before; and it is never cured with iron in this way:
and the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then rub the place where the wound is with a piece of woolen cloth according to the quantity of two grains:
and then take out the medicine which is inside the skin that has been cut open, and then take the rope and tie it on top of the visible part of the medicine;
and then press down on the stomach completely, and cut the .ij. parts of the medicine that are on top of the rope's head, and cut both;
and then take out the rope' s head, and do not cover up the medicine or extend any other part, as I have told you in the treatment of the worm in the intestines;
and then treat it with the cure for wounds. And when you cover the hair, if the wound is clean and healed, then let it be.
The fire cautery is more effective, it does not appear in the incision, and the treatments are milder at this location, and closer to healing.
of softening the leather of the heels
Often times the leather of the heels becomes soft in certain men, for the plies that are within them are softened and can be seen; and it is necessary, when you clean them, to make a hole in their back and let the moisture go out onto the natural skin; then sew the 2.ij. lips together at one seam, and cut away the excess skin at the seam or at the 3.ij. seams firmly; then sew between the seams, and cure it as with other wounds until it is healed, and cut off the thread.
of fire cautery
Saiches that chastisement is a form of treatment in our law, and therefore I would not like to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two ways: one is that the mirrour of the beast should answer when questioned, and in the cure of the beast; and the other, because we have often had to chastise certain animals to help us, such as rams and sheep and hogs and others. I therefore say that chastisement is done according to two ways: either by attraction or by splitting. In the way that we do it by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and relaxed; then grab them with your hand until they are set and you can no longer feel them. From castrating a ram: you should burn the beast, and hold the skin of the testicles to your left hand, then tie up the suspender, and bind each ear with one knot when you have well scalded them; and do not leave any little piece of the skin; and this way of castration is milder than that done by attraction, because there may be no delay in the testicles, so that the beast desires lust; then cure the wound until it has healed.
The hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites are according to two ways as men: one is that between the two testicles open like a woman's figure, or he has hair, and sometimes his urine flows out;
of the tetanus
Tenting is a char placed on the natural part, so that it is too ugly to see; and also women have great comfort from it as if it were a hand, and that is the cure. You should take off the excess of the tenting at your hand or toes, and wipe it lightly; and do not go too far in doing so, lest there be a discharge of blood, then apply another cure until you are well; and at another char which comes out of the mouth of the pregnant woman, and use it, and perhaps it will be gone, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this they called the old "cow disease". If you take off the tenting, as we have said in the case of tenting, and cure it until it is well.
of the erratic
Erratique means "erratic". This term was used to describe something that is unpredictable or unpredictable in nature. In the context of medicine, it could refer to a condition or disease that is unpredictable in its course or symptoms.
of hemorrhoids
Here is the translation of the first sentence:
Here is the next sentence:
Here is the translation:
of childbirth
Childbirth skill: First, know the natural figure of childbirth, and recognize the signs: when you see a woman hurrying to urinate and smelling the air; then, the baby will soon be born; so you know that this birth is according to nature, with the baby coming out first by its head, and then the second one with it; and when you see these signs, gently press her belly, so the baby comes quickly; for when he descends on his head, the second one comes with him, and the married man is cleansed of his excesses through good purification; and what comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it does not come at all on its feet, or on its shoulders, or hands, or sometimes on its belly, or sometimes on its neck, and turns upside down for a moment, and in various other evil ways; it is necessary that the bailiff be wise and subtle in these things, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how to help them.
If the baby comes out first by its head, and the woman moans and her virtue is weak, then sit her on a saddle, or let the women support her; and pour some oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then pour the midwife between her two legs this little spetumile whose form it is: and then split the second one, and cut with her nail as much moist as it comes out; and if it does not come out, then rub the woman's womb with muskillaige of fenugreek with oil of sesame; then make her sit and cough for an hour: now then the baby is born. And if the hands go in far, then put the woman on a bench, and raise her feet up; then take the bench away from the ground, and turn it upside down, and tie her, so that she does not fall upright; and if the hands cannot get in, and the baby is dead, then cut the woman's hands with the knife that has been put there, and pull out the child, and leave them both equal.
of the issue of the child on its feet When the child comes down on its feet, then you should lift it up. and then turn it slowly, until it is even;
and then stretch it slowly, little by little.
And if he jumps just as it is being printed, and makes it shake with the cold. If you jump, then God help you.
And if he doesn't jump as we have said, if the turn is little by little, until it is according to the natural figure. For then he is light-hearted.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then take musk of the earth, and oil from seed, and gum melted, and grind everything together in a mortar; and put on the skin of woman, and away this ointment, then let her sit in the hot bath until the ribs are wet;
and when she is wet all over, then let her wear a collar of myrrh, and put it on her, and leave her for an hour; and then make it sit on a seat, and then shake it and pinch its mouth and nose, and hold its belly lightly, for the baby is now jumping. the delivery of the child between her legs When the child comes in this form, if I put the midwife's hands on it little by little;
of the delivery of the child who comes out wide a hand holding It is necessary to devise to bring back the hand: If you cannot bring it back, if the woman gets up and goes;
If she cannot walk, if you make her sit down on the bed, and stretch out her legs straight;
Then arrange the muscullaige that I have described;
and if it doesn't get pregnant, then if the fair one is seated on .i. a siege, then study to bring back the hand; and make the child according to natural figure, and let her shake, and command that she stretch herself as long as the child is born.
of the child's issue on his neck, and has spread her hands, and her face turns toward the mother's back Then let the dance teacher take his hand, then turn it slowly, and gently;
and when it is even, if put on the muscular nature of late and oil, as we have said, then command that it moves little and little.
and when you have done this, if the fire is seated on .I. seat, and command that it burns; and the fire shakes itself. of this same manner to all the second part
of this same manner to all the second part When it comes in this way to all the second part, if cover the second with your nail, as long as the moisture is empty;
and if he falls on his face and on his neck, then the cap comes off, so that it is not held back, and the man dies.
then put the child inside, as you have done it, and order the woman not to kneel:
of the twin's exit. That is known to happen many times, but never happens twice; and this is not a strange thing, and seldom happens. Two are strange things, and do not live if it happens once;
I know that, if they are multiplied, and are devised by the physician who devises them, which is tied to the wound;
and never happen naturally as we all do, as we have said.
And if it grieves him, if the cure is as we said, and let the ball be soft, and make quickly and lightly what she does; and do this as well as it can for salvation. of many children.
of many children. No child is formed in the womb: neither male nor female; I, J, II, III, V, VI, VII, or more up to XV, and all are formed by measure of the wise glory.
and understand that the ball is able to do all of this, for by chance similar things will happen; if it is done according to what is necessary.
of the dead child.
When you treat a woman whose child has died or her womb is empty, and she does not conceive, and you are forced to work with your hands; If it is necessary that you know that his wife is of healthy virtue, and has no accident where she might fear death;
If it is necessary that his wife be placed on her back, and her knees bent downward, and her legs raised up;
and the minister paint her from top to bottom, or she be laid in bed so that she may be treated for the delivery of the child;
then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with moist oil with musk and fenugrec and flax seed, then grease his hands with these oils and these muscillaiges; Then fill them with light wine, then dip [them]. i.e. pour the wine or they will bottle the onyx that are suitable for this,
and take care so that the child is properly dressed so that it does not slide on his head; then dip the onyx into their hair or their neck or their mouth or their chin or their jawline or near their sideburns;
and when it is slipped onto his feet, dip it or poke it and touch the sides;
and it is necessary that he taint the onyx in his right hand, and put the scabbard between his two hands of the left hand, and he lightly holds the onyx bottle to any of these places that we have said until it comes to the empty thing;
then put it between another onyx, or the taint is of no use to you, so that extractions are equal;
and then stretch it evenly from one side to the other, so that it moves, and the onyx teeth are held in place, as is this form:
And if a part of it lingers, if he oils some of his two feet with oil, and bottles up that part, and draws out the other part.
and if a part of it lingers, put this ointment or more up there, and do so until it all comes out.
and if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the tightness, then wrap it in a cloth, until all of it is gone.
and then wrap the wound with a bandage in the joint of the foot or ankle, and likewise do on the other hand, and at .ij. feet.
If the baby is large and stuck in the birth canal, or if it has an acute angle of presentation, then you must push the spine-like fluid between your two fingers, and turn the head and pull out the sharp point; or you use the instrument called "almidah", which is shaped like this with the tools or paste that comes after it;
and so help yourself by the great natural power; and then cut the bones from the nails,
and so help yourself by the great natural power; if they pricked, cut them up, and draw them out with force, and if they bleed, stop the bleeding.
and if it cannot be drawn out, then cut it into pieces with a knife so that you can get it out.
and if it is inflamed in the belly or seizes the ribs, then you must pierce it as long as the moisture runs.
and if it is inflamed in the feet, then light traction is applied, and the treatment with the poultice is placed lightly on the foot.
and if it is dislocated in the belly or the breast, then you must hold it with the hand wrapped in a cloth. and pierce the belly or the breast as long as the moisture that is there runs.
and if another limb is broken, and the joint remains still, if the ball joint of his hand is completely separated from the arm, and he draws it to the mouth of the socket; then pour in a little oil or wine there, and draw it firmly;
and if the mouth of the socket is tightened by cold which has come to it, so that it does not move, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; and it is to be treated with damp and greasy things;
And if it is put on his back, and you make it flat, then treat as we have said above in the child alive.
and if one has no power, so to speak, then let the meat be cut into pieces, and leave nothing of the second one.
And when you have done this, bring those who are mentioned above, who come from the mare.
and if blood comes out, it is restrained with salt water and others are brought to cure.
And I saw a woman whose belly had been pregnant but was now dead, then another was examined. I refused to examine the others. After a long time, the apotheosis came in the boudel, and inflated so much that it began to cause great distress.
I was called to treat it, and I thought long and hard, and could not close the wound.
I applied a strong plaster of attraction, and put in it a bone, and after some days another one. I marveled much, for where there is no bone, the stomach does not ache.
I thought it was bones from a dead child.
I sewed the wound closed, and held the bones together by hand, as long as the woman was improving. and waited for the woman to get well soon, and it was fixed a little of the bow in place;
and I only remembered this chapter when, because of something, the master tried a strange thing and he knew how to help.
to bring back the wife to her bed
Here is the translation of the provided text: "Nevertheless, the horns should be somewhat thinner than the restriction, and made from ebony or boxwood;"
"And the mouthpiece should have a diameter of two fingers in width, and the bar 1.5 hands in length;" "And the three measurements should be two fingers in width and 1.5 hands in length, with one finger's width between them;"
and the two joints are pressed together in the mouth of the mother to open when the .ij. horns return.
Another form, its subtler and lighter appearance made from ebony or boxwood according to the appearance of the claws; and has .ij. joints .ij. supports, as you see, of a long palm, and .ij. two wide;
and when you see the mother open the instrument to all its extent, so sit the woman on 1.i. bed, legs spread and feet hanging down, and pour upon them .ij. drops of the unguent that you have made together in the bowl, and hold the handle of the instrument away from its edge; Then move your hand around the entire instrument, evenly, according to the quantity you judge right to open the mouth of the bowl, until the ball comes out as it should.
This instrument is all raised up, and its multiples are arranged; and when you see them ready, the faster you work, and the higher you raise for their quantity.
If you do not prepare the instrument in good time, it will be a reason for delay; there is no excuse for not doing so because of its need.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English: and if she falls because of this, it is well.
and if it does not fall, it is well. If it does, however, and a small pestle or mortar is available, and herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as chamomile, mint, fennel, aniseed, dill seed, and centaury;
all of these herbs, or any of them, are boiled or poured from a pot on the fire; then put one tube or pestle and mortar in the pot, and the other over the mouth of the woman, and
and the ringworm until the fumes come out of the marrow; then make it shake, as we have said. Then take the second one immediately. And if it remains after this treatment and does not get better, order that it soak its left hand in oil of sage or in muscatel wine, and then pour it out into the air,
and then take the second one; and when she has found it, if she presses it and extends it little by little correctly, so that the marrow does not break at the extraction; but it is necessary to move lightly from right to left and then back; and thus he will come and dislodge himself again.
And if his mouth is sore and swollen, we have said the cure of swallowing, and of smoking herbs;
and if it is not from all that we have said, then keep so that you do not stray when you treat;
but it is necessary that the one who is at the mouth of the mare, that you bind him to the cunt of the woman, then the clisteryse with four-armed ointment;
If it is put on fire, let it be left to cool, and it will come back stronger; but in any case, when it is put on (the fire), if it gives off a bad smell in the stomach and in the head, and blights the patient.
If there is need then there come fumigations bearable to this; no one has tried fomentation of nettle and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to fume the woman at the retention of flowers and the second one if it is this:
And is like to see a dog, and put the head in a thin cloth, and the shoulders wide over the fire; or
and let the fumigations on the coals, and the scabies until it is spent, and begin another.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who have not had their foundation pierced, but it is broken up by a subtle poison. If, therefore, the boy should pierce it with that poison at his right hand, and does not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and keeps the joint from touching it;
And put on other part water mixed with wine and oil, then the ointment cure until he is healthy.
And if you doubt that it will not recover, put out a cane of wood, and let him keep his hands open, and be osteized when the wound is healed so that he can move his hands freely.
And there is no chance of a sudden seizure from the wound or abscess; if it is necessary to cover suddenly: if you are cured, as we have said about the cane of wood.
of the fistula from the foundation Fistula that comes from the foundation is a nodation, and grow more than those coming from the foundation of a part, or in space between .ij. parts,
If there is one or more fistulas; and when the nodation is old, if it opens, and in a moment of moisture an open wound or subtle bow appears,
And these fistulas never persist; and they are caused by what is discharged or vented when the patient makes an emission, and by accident in a jump one way or another.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate only to the bladder, and only halfway up the penis; and they reach the junction of the scrotum, and at the tip of the cow's neck.
And thus recognize the fistula persisting to the foundation, and not persistent: and put your little finger or foundation, and pour a fine needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twist.
and if there is a twist, if you pour a drop of quicksilver, or .i. a horse's hair, as long as you feel the drop or hair on your finger;
and if you don't feel it, and there is no perforation, no wind, no vision, as we have said: If he pricks, then hurry to cure him.
And if the fistula pierces until the bladder or until the urinary conduit, and if it leaks urine, and cannot be relieved by medicine.
If it pierces only up to the junction of the hip, then try this before going any further. if there is no twisting or pain in the back, and if it does not cause any pain by touching it, then there is no need for medicine or further manipulation.
and in these fistulas there is no cure except hard work, and the vanity of foolish mirages that get mixed up with them.
In those that are neither persian nor ancient, there is hope of health through fire, as I have experienced,
and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and make his legs come up to his hips, and bend his hips towards his belly; then pour water into an basin, or a bucket if there is a turn of the spine, as long as you know where the basin comes from.
If the patient has pain at the base, then you must put your index finger.
Then feel with your ring finger to see if it has been pierced; and if you can feel the needle or scalpel between your thumb and index finger, then know that it is perforating; if it does not cause any trouble then it cannot be cured.
All of this causes some to recover, but few completely recover; however, this happens occasionally;
and the aid that one does, if it is heated the fine cautery according to the breadth of the fistula, as said above; and the bottle all hot in the fistula, until it comes out of the foundation; and do this .ii or iiii times, until you know that these hairs are burnt which are resembling to an owl's feather;
and then the doctor of tents wet in oil will dry it up, until that hair is gone, and then the doctor of ointment will wrap the hair and stick it together.
If it is thus healthy, it is good. If not, otherwise cannot be healthy;
and if it pricks between, and does not pierce until the top which is at the foundation, and inside your two fingers there is a thick covering of cloth or silk, and you see the fistula to the one who stops the covering from within. if the cloth of the beginning of the fistula, and close again before the tent, and heat the fire after, as far as it comes to the top of the tent;
and the tent will be delivered, and burn; then take those cloth-covered things that look like an owl's feather, and there is none left.
And if the sun shines on you, and heat enters between you and the work, if the fire cautery or medicine burns.
For fire cauterization brings together the following twenty-one things: that is to say, the burning of these joints, and the drying up of blood and the removal of moisture.
and then dry them out thoroughly before applying them to wet skin or cooked meat, until the skin dries up completely and the flesh is burned in the fire.
then cure the wound with dry herbs that stick to the hard, caked blood, and the medicine is dried out.
For once it has been reset, so it is healed and does not come back again.
And if a fistula comes out just from the foundation, and is distant from the heart, turn it up or down, and see that one.
And if you feel the itchiness and it is between iij. is the thread or the syrup or the charcoal, or it is ready to pierce, then there is only a way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of iii. ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it just to the foundation, or if you can not stop the flow of blood, and do not want to cut it, then see that one.
and do not go too far in the foundation, so you do not cover the foundation that holds the ground, and comes out by the way of nature; then the physician, as we have said;
then the physician, as we have said; in case it should heal, or you remove that covering and clean it up well from the foundation, or by stretch or by any other tool; then mix that wood in the wound as well as you can;
then study to restore the wound, and hold back the fistula in the opposite part of the foundation: it is lighter work for the patient.
And there is no place for fistulas according to this method: and when you stick the tent into the fistula, and it is where it touches the base of the skin above, if one takes a tent pierced at the top according to this form: and I stick .i. wire in .ij., and stick the tent on all the wire in the fistula as long as it is at the top.
If it is persisting in the margin inside, then remove the wire from that one, so that you stick your two at the base;
and train the head of the shaft, and bring together the .ii. shoulders together, and hold apart, and leave it .i. day or .ii..
and do not restrain at any time, until the rope has passed between those two, and they are chafing;
then heal the wound as long as it is souded and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, if you can pierce it in all ways that you can, unless it is too completely enclosed.
For it is not right to do for the lameness if perfect, and then heal, as we have said, until he is healthy.
The form of the spatemile with thorns that one makes a fistula is very hot and painful; therefore it is not possible to make it perfectly well without great pain. On the other hand, one must not do what one cannot do; for one must not do what one can do. For this is not right to do for the lameness if perfect, and then heal, as we have said, until he is healthy.
1 Emorrydes are according to these manners: or they are at the bottom of the foundation, also as a grain of resin, and there are small ones and great ones, and cut close together, 2 and one or more of them are at the bottom of the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are at the top have little moisture, and those that are at the bottom have great moisture, and those that are in the middle have moderate moisture.
3 and then cut a little of the yellow water or a little of the blood, and they have the color of the body; but those that are at the bottom have great blood, and those that are in the middle have moderate blood.
4 and the cure for those who are at the bottom of the foundation, so that you command the patient to sweat in bed as long as the foundation is hot, and they discover the filth; but those that are at the top have little filth. If you are in a hurry, and hold it like a claw, then cut it at its roots;
and if the nail falls off because of moisture, take it with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather; and remove them with your fingers, then cut them off, and powder them with hot powders that are in the fire's place; or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healthy again;
and if his foundation cannot come out, let the patient be clistered with a hot and harsh clistre to wash out what is in the foundation so that it can come out freely;
Let the patient be bathed, and if his fibers are firmly attached to the foundation, then the cure is light; and you shall press them with your nail or with tweezers, and cut them off, then heal them as we have said, until they are well, and do not incise them with iron.
If it is necessary that you bring the stitch according to this method: take a twisted thread, and put it in a needle, then turn the thread over and over on top of the needle, and pierce the needle from the other side, and twist the two ends of the thread together behind the needle. and if it is large; then hold the thread in place, and tie the knot, and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave it. i.e. to stop the excess blood;
then put on the foundation. i.e. dip in oil or wax, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave it until it has passed wind, and when it has defecated, if the patient is cured of anointing and other cures, until he is well.
and finally on the foundation Many times there is drying up of the bowels from nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is not effective.
If you cut off a spur or your fingernail too high, leaving it exposed to moisture; and then treat it until it is hard again as it should be;
and if it cannot harden, then shave it more closely than before, until it bleeds and is scorched; then treat as long as he is healthy.
he perspires. Here comes the translated text:
and it does not burn his throat, and you can hear it as if he were dead, and it spreads throughout the whole body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
And the cure is that you take a feather from an ostrich, or a strong vulture's feather, and put this feather on the pulse, as long as the purple circle covers the pulse entirely. then turn your hand on all the feather as long as you cover completely the pulse, and put it in place, and scratch the pulse from its roots.
And if you see, make a wound of a feather of rain or iron according to this form, and be subtle and run over it:
do not pierce, so it does not hurt, but press And if you see, cauterize the pulse, as it is in front or chapter of cauterization.
of the form of the cloth No once made is the cloth of silver or bronze, or of melted gold or brass; and no once made are these small or great instruments, according to those that they are to be used.
So once made are those for the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the cloth is small and large depending on its width, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
and I say there is a rift where the belly is tied together, so that you see it, and where the legs are within the cavity, and on one side there is an opening of 12 inches, and on the other 1 inch.
and let the belly be where one puts medicines from a bladder of best wine or parchment, and let it pierce all around the smaller openings,
and between each opening let there be 1/4 of an inch of space, then bottle in these openings strong thread of twisted rope in 10 or so threads around, and put together the belly as if it were a sheep; and when the medicine is inside, if the lid is placed in front of a strong tool, then make it into a ring; and that is the shape of a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil the head with olive oil or almond oil or a similar substance, then pour it lightly.
Then the ministers hold it together with their two hands until it is completely warm, then remove the oil and place the patient's legs against the wall.
Then let the medicine be poured out on the patient, as much as he can bear; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is greater help.
And if you cauterize with fire due to disease of the stomach, and the medicine is poured out quickly, then it is too much for him if he is healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or the abscess, then also the clister is too thin like a child.
and this is the form of the clister, thin as skin, so that the skin is stretched:
of wounds
We have already spoken in the division of the cure of wounds; now we will tell you the cures for hands and medicines, according to accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where they are made, and for this reason they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the impact of a stone, and the cutting of a sword or a dagger, or an ax, or a spear, or a sledgehammer, or similar things; or
or where the heart is struck, as a wound on the neck, or on the head, or on the chest, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar limbs; or
and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs or the head comes first, and the bone is not broken, if you take care to look for movement of stones or similar things, then the skin is often torn and the wound is large. and you doubt the warmth of an abscess: if it is too soon to know for certain whether it comes from a wound or not in the head itself, but rather if it comes from a wound at the opposite end from the part that was injured;
and keep the patient away from wine and thick meat.
and if he does not sweat, if his meat is not reduced, and if he does not drink wine or eat cheese.
and wet the wound, if a blister forms, soak it in oil or wine with astringent;
and if there is no blister, if it is placed on the wound, if it is fresh and not moved by the air, powder, which I will mention a little later;
and if the air has moved it, place some onions on it until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tension, bring them together with sutures, as I will say for wounds in the belly, from the stitch.
If the wound is exposed to bone and blood, and holds only for a little while, then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. And instruct the patient to eat large meat, as tested and baked wheat, also like poultry, and similar foods.
And if you find putrid flesh on the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then chop it all off, and burn it up, and then heal it.
And if he has an artery in the wound or vein, which, without stopping, and it cannot stop with medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, so that it is a thread; and if he does not benefit from it, then cautery.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the light cure is: and that you put this powder that hardens so that fire moves it.
And the way of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood .ij. parts; live fire .iij. parts, and the powder finely, and apply the wound, and the bandage forms, until it is well dried up and joins all its blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it unbound if it does not swell, for one should not bind the medicine until it is healed.
And never does one use salt at all, unless one has dragon's blood and fire oil, but the arm should not move the wound.
And if the arm has moved the wound, most certainly it is infected, so one must put this powder on it;
but put on some distilled water and honey, or bread made of barley flour, until it heals; and let them grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
For if the bone breaks with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine tweezers;
and I will tell you later about the breaking of the head.
of the wound on the neck
The wound comes from the neck and is simple, if there is no difference between it and that of the chief, but the neck where the artery is cut.
If it is the case, if there is no other obstacle to the healing process but to allow the wound to heal naturally and put nothing on it that might hinder it, for it hinders healing and makes it retreat; and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the neck is cold, and its course runs with the brain, which is the highest member;
however, if the medicine is like warm water mixed with oil and rosin, and washed with lukewarm water; and other stones according to this method, and wet oiling.
And if the wound is large, so that the bandage is not enough, then heal until it is well.
And if the wounds are deep and full of bowels and blood, and the hole or lower down;
and if the artery is cut, and the flow of blood comes from it, if the darkness and fever come, and the cauterization is done;
and if he sneezes from his throat, or coughs, and the wind is kept back, so that the meat goes forward. if the cough goes up the throat lane, and does not touch the throat but returns it to its natural state; and then he is left a few days, and is cured of garlic-based remedies as long as he is healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then it is wanted; and if there are pieces of bone, if you can't carry them all, and those that you cannot bring, leave it until the wound is rotten. and let the issue be dried up and firm;
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder that I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in my chapter on the ointment.
of the wound from a lance or a sword
If it is a wound from a lance or a sword, and the wound is deep, then examine the wound to see if there is wind coming out of it. Know then that the wound is fatal;
and if it is not deep and the wound is fresh in every part of it, then do not put the powder on it at all, nor bind it up so that it does not heal completely; and turn your attention to the patient and watch over him closely; but I met an attractive omen, and lay down. ij. times a day;
and if you have no omen, put cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture,
and let the patient sleep on the wound for .iij. days, or more often, or many times; if there is no spasm, nor a strange trembling of the heart due to the fire cautery; and when you see the good arrangement, know that the wound is saved. Heal the burns and other wounds, as long as they are healthy;
and if it cannot heal, and a fistula forms, then know that it is necessary to operate, as should be done.
And if the wound is from a knife or sword, and it is simple, or on the front or back, then know how to heal that one.
s'elle est grande, de couture ; et s'elle est petite, de poudre, et s'elle est pressée en l'os, et en a copié des pièces, si vous voulez la plaie, et les traiteras fort s'ils sont déséquilibrés; and if they are not dislocated, let the wound fester, and so will be the extractions.
and for other wounds or other members, the judgment is as we have said.
and the rupture of the womb
The rupture of the belly is great and small and small.
from the great wound there is no escape of the intestines, or the intestines are torn from within, so that the entry of water;
and the stitch is more painful, and never less painful than the small one that the great one causes;
For if we do not put them back in place immediately, we will never get them back in place, putting them back in turn; for this reason the intestines swell so that they feel cold, if they return more to needles
and for this reason the pain in the mouth is lessened, because it remains in its place, unlike other injuries
And know that the tear in the belly is according to four ways:
the common seams come into the seam of the belly,
and he sews together the other wounds of the chest, and .ij. other personal stitches are common to all wounds.
and so they are more properly sewn from the belly, and I will say each one and I will explain.
I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine out, then I say that it is necessary to sew together the chest first, then the belly, then the arm, then the leg, and then the lower member; Here is the translation of the text line by line: Because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, heat it in a certain way: moisten an sponge or .i. mol drapeil in warm water only, You cook in sharp water and cypress and spike. and raise the intestine as long as it swells until it is broken;
and no longer does this wine restraining, and is sour that it tastes of vinegar.
And when you see the swelling leaving, if you moisten the intestine with sharp water or spicy wine and cook it, For by this means is the entrance closed to a little thing.
and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the instrument by which one copes with hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is to moisten it so that the size is reduced; that we do not trim it unless there is great necessity;
and this is the instrument for splitting:
if it divides inside and out, and check the shape:
and when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines spill forth, if it is reset according to its natural shape in its proper place, If you have the ability to do this, for it is of great value.
When the wound is wide and in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you bring the patient to lie on their back. and place their legs higher than their head. and if it is in the part of the chest the abdomen,
and also if the abdomen is torn in one of the two parts, if the torn part is higher than the other,
and so it is necessary to treat what I say in great wounds and pain.
In small wounds however this treatment is not suitable,
then take two hand ministers who will rub the whole wound with their hands, and gather the lips together, and this is the common way of stitching.
and this is the common way of stitching. and that you twist a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave two spaces at the top of the wound, and I will thread a strong needle with good thread; and pierce the leather with the eyelets of the thread,
Then stretch out a doubled thread through the needle from both ends, and then join together the 20 pieces of leather in front of the wound,
and then leave .i. two spaces, and put another needle; then lay the thread down as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need with the needles, as long as all the wound is closed.
and let the needles fall, fine and thick. for the fine needles fill the whole wound, and the very large ones cannot enter well. For this reason, let them be fine.
and do not push the needles too far from the edge of the wound and the hide,
that they do not close and open the wound before the bandage.
and then cover the head of the pin, so that it does not burn the patient to sleep, and I put tents or drapes on the head of the pin to keep them from moving, and leave them until the wound is closed;
and this way of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it suffers a needle or .i.
The second stitch is common, and are joined together with the thread of a needle or i strong thread cut short; and when you have understood all these things together,
and when you have understood all these things together, and if I return the needle to the part where you have begun, in the way that you thread a drape;
and place a space of about two fingers between each stitch, making the stitches very small;
this stitch is used by the tailor;
and I sewed up a wound that had a good appearance but was in the belly.
who was stabbed with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm deep, and the wound was made by the intestines which were well
And so the wound was in his belly. I brought him the intestine and so he began to be well.  .xxiiij. hours later,
and the wound healed in .xv. days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
And the mirror told him that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and don't heal it with ointment, because I am in .i. place where they are not found, nor any medicine; and put cotton wool on the wound three times a day, and wash it with honey water until it was healed.
Or I will tell you the three clean ways to stitch:
take the needle, and dip it in the liquid from the far side only;
as soon as she feels the pain of the piercing in her right breast, if it is from the nipple or cost, or where you have pricked the needle,
and then let her pierce herself from the outside of that area to the center;
and then understand this stitch if you also sew like the furrier sews fur; and leave the stitch once the seam is completed on one side, and pick it up on the other side, until the seam is finished.
The second way of sewing, which Galien distinguished properly,
is so that as if there were no thread, which joins the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the main roots to the other root in this manner:
file an awl or root of mirach nearest, and pierce that one only, and leave the 17 joints of the body; then turn the needle and pierce it from the outside in just until it reaches the center; as 17 joints of the body;
then pierce the other one from the outside in just until it reaches the center, and pierce the other 17 joints of the body, on the other side as well;
and this is the mode of suturing, which is the most common.
The Galileo's say thus of this word, and none bear witness to it,
that the stomach be sewn with .ij. needles, or there be thread in each one;
and must one needle be pushed from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew with corroded needles;
and know that when the rupture is in the midsection of the belly that this suture is more painful than others of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as it is with other wounds:
and when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it. If you remove the intestines, and cut them up; then put the powder over them while they are still warm.
If you remove the intestines, and cut them up; then put the powder over them while they are still warm. and if it is moved, put it on any ointment that is present, until the wound has closed. and if it is moved, put it on any ointment that is present, and let the wound close. then clean the wound well as you would with others, until it is healthy.
and if you don't have medicine, put on, as soon as it begins to go away, cotton wool, and stir it .ij. times a day until it is well.
For you do not need any other medicine in most cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will not form a union with the principal members, if it is necessary for you to moisten another light with oil of thyme or hot oil. and put it between the legs, and clean the buttocks.
and if there is pain or inflammation in the belly button, and often happens, if the black wine tatsters, and sometimes the inflammation comes up to the intestine;
and the hole within, and know that when it is the large intestines, so it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
The intestine called "jun" cannot be healed when it is still raw, and this is because of the plants of the veins, and the subtlety of all the body, and the approach of its nature to the womb.
And if the scar jumps out of the wound, let it be set back as well as the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and becomes black, then you must know the place that is black, so that there is no blood flow. for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the lien; and place the two joints hanging from the side of the wound all the way to the edge so as not to hurt the extraction when it is done, and the wound is closed.
Of the rupture of the bole
When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, if one can restore it in some way,
for I have seen some who were born with a club or a belly wounded by a lance.
and the wound was on the right side of the abdomen, and it became infected and putrid, and had a discharge and foul odor.
I treated it with the medicines I had, and did not stop applying them until it healed, and I sewed up the wound.
And when I saw that the wound was healing, I doubted that the disease was still in his belly; and there is no harm, but delay in better provisions, and eating and drinking;
and they told me that when he has a small wound in the intestine, that he should be tied up in some way: take some large testicles, then spread the lips of the wound, and when the testicles have opened the mouth, so that it is placed on the 1/2 lips,
then meet again in this way after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely healed;
and count the wound. If it burns in the bowels, and causes no harm to the patient,
and can be tied with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
in this way: take the end of this thread of intestine that has been cut off, and then place this thread at the top of this cloth.i. a thin twisted linen thread, then thread the needle, and sew around the intestine, and cut it back out;
and this method of sewing with a needle is only useful if done according to the path of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, most importantly when it is in one of the small intestines, then there is no cure except with great care.
of fistula where it is knows that all wound or abscess, when it heals, is called universal "fistula". and most often when it has healed and the bowels have moved.
And the fistula is according to the theory of the nature of the tissue tough and white, and one does not feel pain there. and is also like a bird's feathers;
nor is there ever clear rain, nor thick fog; neever poking, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no cure, It is due to one of these .viiij. causes:
it is due to the small blood or pus; or because of their evil nature; or because there is hard matter inside, and on the lips, which does not allow them to grow; Where there is too much bow. Where the legs are twisted, and the matter is of bad quality; Where the medicine is not good for the cure; Where for this cause corruption is a manner of disease; Here is the translation of the text line by line: "Or if there are veins or bones:"
and I have outlined all of these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division."
"Or tell you how to treat fistula by hand surgery."
It is known that fistula occurs in all limbs of the body. because there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the liver, or the intestine, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of great difficulty of cure, and there is only labour and ignorance.
and if there is any fistula that does not come to light until now that I have mentioned it, and you have promised to cure it, and if you see the fistula clearly with your own eyes, take a piece of leather or iron and, if the fistula is straight, feel it;
and if its fistula is twisted, so the search for a thin rope of plunging. for the plunging turns to the curvature;
and if its fistula is deeply injured and you cannot well search for it with ropes, then the cautery by fire through one of the openings,
For moisture is short from one hole to another, and cleanses it.
Then clean it with your power so that you know if there are bones or nerves, and is completely shaved,
and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you really know the place, whether it is far from a joint, a nerve, an artery or a vein; Here is the translation of the provided Old French text:
Here is the translation of the provided Old French text: and the bones are broken and the rotten corroding things that are within them; and then the cure as long as it is healthy;
and its deep hole is well-founded in the right place, if it comes that you cauterize it perfectly, as much as you can, and then I soaked them in a medicated broth, and poured it up to the head of the fistula.
and then I soaked them in a medicated broth, and poured it up to the head of the fistula. until the medicine corrodes the excess that is retained at the bottom.
and then I put on garlic-infused holy oil, until it is healthy;
and if it is not healed by that, then the fire cautery as we have said,
and if his eye is corrupted by the fistula, then the patch. If a vein or nerve is injured in the main members, as we have said;
and if his eye is uncovered and there is corruption and blackening, if the king holds out until the corruption is entirely bone, then the treatment of things that are ruined, as much as he is healthy;
and if he is not healed, and returns bowing as before, for you are not yet able to move:
and if you stay in bed and rest and then restore the joint;
and if he is thus sound, then it is well. if not, know that the corruption is too perfect, that you cannot come to him; if there is no other means than to be easier by nature;
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it at the claws, if you extract with an instrument suitable for this.
and if he has several bones, if they are twisted, do not leave more than one in place;
and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no mistake or fear, if you cover and moisture and heat, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put on the wound something that prevents infection. and leave it so that the hair grows around the bone.
and then the bones will heal more easily.
and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh if you have only this corruption as long as the blackening is all bone, and then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of the corruption, and it comes just to the edge of the bone; if it comes to cover all the way up to the corruption, and then cure it until it is sealed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take an example and aid in your work.
There was a young man aged xxx-xx years who had a pain in his leg due to an internal cause that originated in the core,
as matter came out of the leg, and was escaped by a large abscess, and had no apparent cause to open it;
but he stares at them because of his madness so much on that the abscess opens. and in corroding with matter they become a fistula, and I came out of a hole so great that all was bowing and moistening the body.
and many miraculously healed in .ij years, and there was no skill in this art of hands.
as long as I was called, and I saw a leg and the medicines that he was cured with, and who runs through the openings with great speed. and his body would turn red when he ran, and had an orange-colored skin.
I set up a tent in one of these openings, and then searched for all the openings
and I found that one came together with the other on both sides of the leg.
I was hurrying then, and I hit on one of the holes as hard as I could until I uncovered a part of the bone. and I found it腐敗したそして壊れていた、そして腐敗は骨の中まで来ていた;
I knew what had happened to the bone, and I took care that there was no other corruption except for that which I found;
and I began to heal the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and it could not be healed;
and then I began, and uncovered the bone as before,
and I found the continuous corruption in the bone, and softened it, and then I held it, and leaned down to weld the place.
but I could not as much as cup my hand around one end of the bone, and I pushed it forward with all my might. and then I treated it with medicine; and it was healed and firmly welded together,
and do not wish to recommend the work for anything but the weakness of the disease, which cannot be borne. and from the fear of death that I had for him. For with blood loss there was often, but he was completely healed, and
For with blood loss there was often, but he was completely healed, and and gave birth to a hard mass of bone, and was of good temperament and had no harm or contrary in all things, nor did it affect his breath or coming into being.
and let the head be, so that you take the cart rotted on the ditch, and uncover the cart on top of the ground where you see hay, so that the hay does not damage the cart; and place .i. kindling or a pile of straw over the cart to cover up the rotted cart; and it is necessary as much as you can see and feel the corruption, and sometimes also;
And if his nose is corroded, and does not open any more, and the corrosion is in the middle or in a part, then uncover the chest completely; then put on .I. a hot coal,
and then tie one part of the corruption to the other with silk, and let the silk be long from the corruption .I. piece, as we have said;
and if the corrosion is in the joint, then disassemble the joint corruption, and tie the bone or what it contains on the other side;
and if corruption occurs in the continuation of the twenty-one joints, there is no other pain than that of the cup.
and if corruption occurs when it is poked with a hand or when it is poked with a foot, this is very strong. but you must also inquire about the corruption, how it hurts you. and wash it in all ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not hurt you.
and know that the incisor and the sutures to cover these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and the appearance of the teeth. and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. and for each kind of work there is an appropriate tool.
and know that the work will teach you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this craft. and the testimony of the ways of diseases; if you use the instrument that is right for this.
dou fire The head may be dislocated due to cold or due to heat;
and when you have medicine which is corrupted by the treatment of the medicines, and it does not benefit at all, it is necessary to cover that member until the place where the corruption comes; so that the patient escapes from death or from the evil which is greater, from the failure of the member;
so that the patient escapes from death or from the evil which is greater, from the failure of the member; and the signs are that the members become black, and that they seem to be burned by fire, and then after the blackness, then goes those corrosion of member by member, and seizes all the body; if you hurry to cover it,
and if it is by the percussion of some venomous creatures, like a sea scorpion or a weasel and similar things,
the corrosion is at the head of the two, if it covers, and does not give space to come until the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, so that the cup does not reach the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arms.
and if it comes to the arm, so that the cup reaches the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no need for a test of its strength except for the quantity of its virtue;
and completely stop it when the corrosion comes at the foot: if it comes to the first joint, so that the cup is after the other joint;
and if it comes to stand, so cover all of the foot; and if it rises in the leg, so cover at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, so there is no other danger to the patient but to die;
and the way to cover or sew the member so that you tie it above and below, and extend two ministers one of the lines downstream, and another minister the other line upstream, and you displace the bar that is between the .ij. lines to .i. spadille wide, until the bone is uncovered;
then the cap or silk, and place from each side 1. drappill of linen, so that the silk does not touch the ground; and bring to the patient other wound and abscess.
And if the blood flows out when you work, then cauterize it well. Or put on some powders that restrain it; then return to your medicine as long as it is completed,
then bandage the member with a convenient strap, and cure it until it is healthy;
and I will tell you that there was once a wise man in some town:
He had a darkness that seemed like fire burned.
and this corrosion came first in his two feet, so much that it stained all the foot;
And when the honourable man saw the corrosion, he took off all the copper from the foot, and was healed;
and long after that, the corrosion returned to his two hands, and came to me;
and I put him on reflective things after purification of the body, and cannot stop the corruption;
and he said that I should cut off his hand, and I do not say, that I had hope of reflecting on the substance; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die; For the virtue of the man was weak; and he despaired completely, and returned to his country, and he held his arm away from the copper pot, and was healed.
and I have told you this only so that you may do something else if necessary.
There comes one time when incising a lump of flesh, and delays so long that it makes great assembly of bowels; and then it rips and piercing, and springing the bowels, and staying the viscera, as our vassals; and the leather that is above it is also as soft as... drape-leads untied, and do not cut it until you reach the bone, nor until you hit the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy".
but if it becomes so long that it reaches the bone in perfect proportion, then it is called a "fistula";
and the cure is that you wrap this wound very tightly, and especially when it is thin, as with a scarf. and do not wet it for its corruption.
And if you have promised that the leather will be dried, and the corruption is not complete, and the leather is hard like a wheel, if the cure of the cloth is thus:
regardez si ses seins sont gros, et le bouton qui en est fait a un odeur puante, therefore the egyptian medicinal enema which is made thus: take oil and alum and equal parts of lime, and put it to cook in a 1/2 vessel on the fire, until the medicine is red and as thick as honey.
and then take from this according to your need, and make it with water and honey, and in the cauterization of the breast, and extract the stone; and leave the medicine on for .ij. hours, then remove it by squeezing;
make this mutton soup, as many times as the breasts are changed, and the meat is ready;
and never is clisteriized by water of ash, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you squeeze ashes from vine wood, and pour water on top,
then pour it, and clisterize it, until you know the juice is well extracted;
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither can Egyptian medicine nor water of ash; If the plaster is made of water and honey, or if it has a little bit of lead powder crushed up. or you make the plaster with honey and wine, which honey has the property to clean and wash and the wine makes the blood sharp.
and when you have done this, and you have promised that the breasts are well cleaned, If the cautery burns a wound that has just been born,
and is that you squeeze the ointment thoroughly, and make it with oil of roses and wine; or you cauterize it with certain medicines and herbs, of which I have spoken in the treatment of herbs;
and if the patient is pregnant, and the cervix is narrow, and the cautery of the wound cannot enter; If the width of a piece of iron is reduced slightly, and put between the shoulder blades from Egypt, or Egyptian base oil, so that it is widened;
and if the wound is too wide, so that the oil can slip in easily:
and if the hole where it will be inserted is above or below, so that it is: For when the bow is complete, if it does not leave a trace. and if you cannot cover the loins so as to see, so that the bow comes down to the lowest point.
and if you cannot cover the chest of a person with a sheet as you see fit, then arrange it in some way: that the bowstring runs lightly down, and do not leave anything of the bowstring; and take medicines that solidify it over the chest,
and are on a linen drape that covers the whole chest; and then chop off as much of the breast as possible. i.e. cut away more of the first, for the poultice should be on top very well over .i. another cloth according to the quantity of the breast, and put it on top of the breast to even it out, and don't remove the large cloth for at least a few days;
and one that is over the breast, remove often to check the poultice, and knows whether what comes out of the bowels is venom or pus or sufficient or indigestive;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when the medicine has spread somewhat in the chest and you see the nature that rises from the lung's surface, if you know that the breast is irritated and bring the ointment;
and then remove it in the morning, or third day, and when you remove the wound, if change .i. other cloth, and renew the dressing.
And if the breast becomes sore after many days, know that the breast is not affected. And if subtle poison comes after a long time, do not despair of health,
for the sanctity of the hour. For there are men who delay healing their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and who bow their heads down when they feel pain after many days, that their sin does not affect them;
and whose sin does not delay healing, and is enhanced, so that such medicines are mixed with moisture in a substance and dried out in virtue; so that it becomes clear, for there is much vitriol, and that is the last medicine;
Take a fine powder, and make it with olive oil, and rose it with equal red wine.
then the same is cooked and used; and this is even better when it is cooked and increased in size, when a fine powder is not present,
or you take mirr and aloes and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it on honey when it is taken from the fire; and then in a patch .i. cloth, and place it against the breast, and once I administer one artichoke long, and roots of the celestial plant, which is also like flour of times and hundred;
and roots of the celestial plant, which is also like flour of times and hundred; and in simple or compound uses: grind them, and make a powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it; and so the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure,
and so the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, and then you know that corruption is perfect, and it affects the bone, or hard members, or limbs; if the doctor of the cure of fistula, if as we have said before.
of the nail of the toe
is an abscess that arises from the thumb of the hand, Here is the translation of the text line by line:
and when it is sent away, and no attention is taken, so that it comes back with a swelling. and cut and grind it so that they cut off the root of the ointment, and perhaps they cut it all off;
and comes the corruption up to the bone, so that it comes with a painful stink, and the two cheeks are wide apart, and the color is red.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure is of no benefit, if it is necessary for you to take off all the excess that has been stored under the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
and if he grasps it with his hand, and begins to prick, and bleeds it, if you put the finger of the hand that pricks on the nail so that it does not bleed. and pour it onto the nail from above, and pour it carefully and lightly, and put on top of the remaining nail burning and corrosive medicines to destroy everything;
If the corrosion is in the bone, then saw it and trim it hard, because as long as the corrupted bone is there, it cannot be healed.
and if you see the two corrup And let the healer use onions until he is well.
and if it is fierce, and bruised, and smells of great pain, then you must first heal it. then take the nail with a spud from above, cutting across,
and be careful that the cut does not go too deep into the nail bed, because then the patient would feel too much pain;
and if there is something, put something on it that soothes.
the one that is adjusted so that it grows in the hands of some men by chance is all flesh, and by chance there are bones or joints, and never a finger,
and neither of them is born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in some of us both. He who is born with a dual nature does not move. and he who is born between two joints moves.
the size of the charnel one is so light in some way: the size of the charnel one is so light in some way:
Those who are born with a joint at the root are difficult to cure: if you hold them down with copper.
In those who are born with a joint out of place or twisted, it is necessary that you first cut the skin roundly up to the bone, Then cut the bone with a suitable knife and then treat it until it is healed.
The joints that come together by nature, or by the joining of a wound, or by fire, or by similar things.
If you take this sulfur, so that it is repaired according to its natural forms; and then place between two tents or drapes wet with oil, so that it does not stick; or you place between two thin pieces of linen, until the threads are stuck together, as is necessary.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
The vils
The vile vis are huge, enveloped, filled with superfluity of melancholy, which come from many members of the body.
and more is found in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry loads, while others
It therefore comes that you do not give any spurring of horses, and then the health of the bazaar.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; And the other manner is that you free the vein, and traie all of it.
The size should be according to this manner: raise the first leg with hot water very strongly, until the large veins are thin. Then strain the sick leg from above the knee down to the shin; then cut the vein in .i. length, or in .ij. or in .iij., of a broad size
then remove and draw up the black blood to your hand, from one side chief to the other, as much as the virtue of the disease permits the patient to endure;
and then let it rest, and instruct him to dye his meat with black wine;
and then begin the evacuation and sweating when the veins are clear, and nurse the patient.
Here is the translation of the text line by line into English: Then dip it in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red, and swell the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, heat it on the fire, and then dip the part of the leg at the ankle, or in the area between the knee and the heel;
Then spread the skin with oil, and peel the vein from each part, until it feels smooth when touched;
and it is red and black, and when it goes in or leather so looks as a white cord;
then pour the oil of azaleas until it is raised from the leather, and then put it in the onyx lightly,
then pour the oil of azaleas for another two; then scorch the leather on the vein until it appears, then cut it to the root, as you have done, and pour it in another onyx, as you have done first;
Then cut another piece of wood, or as many as you need, then smooth it, and glue it to the bottom of the foot.
then trim and smooth out the piece up to the second size; then remove it from one size to another until it is completely finished, then cut it.
and if you cannot lift and trim it, then thread a very strong double-threaded needle. then smooth and trim it, and tie it with thread, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is done; and keep it from breaking, for if it breaks, we cannot pull or lift it out, and this causes harm to the patient.
and when you have treated it all, put wool wet with wine and oil over the wound; and heal until he is well.
And if it is twisted and bent and wrapped together, and it is not straightened, as we have said, then you must split it diagonally, but do not cover it; and heal it as we have said before.
then you must split it diagonally, but do not cover it; and heal it as we have said before. The shape of iron that one uses to cut the vein if it is curved, and doesn't cut but rather cuts the vein.
and it is of a thick curve, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but being thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
of the civil vein
This vein is found in the legs, in warm places where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture;
and in another place than in the legs, and this comes from the pus that comes from the skin,
if it comes from within the body creeping and turning, between skin and shell.
And if the signs of the beginning of this disease are that it comes in the leg a great inflammation, then the legs change, and the disease begins to move outside, like the root of a plant.
Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
and leave the linen hanging down to the leg, and as many times as there is a point where it goes out, if the wrapping around the linen and the bandage; and if it is too long, take a part of it, wrap that part around again, and do not cover the root entirely until it is all wrapped up; for if you cover it, if it enters into the char, and brings about an abscess or a rash where it is, and causes great illness;
for this thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains or scars.
and once this vein is treated of .v. palm of long, or of .x., and some good people came to me, who was of .x. palm long, and when you chop it, if it is a little raised or deformed, and pierce it up to the font,
then all is well; and let the matter which is within it be voided, and put the remedies in place of corruption any day, then heal as with abscesses.
And never cut at this vein with sharp razors, and least of all when it is incised in the joint of the foot or of the leg. and it causes great pain and injury; so then it must be treated as we have said above.
Of worms that come between the skin and the hair
This disease is called in our country "buffalo disease," because it often affects buffaloes.
and it is a little worm that was born between leather and saddle, and goes all over the body going up and down. and it smells good when it goes from limb to limb, until it rips the leather where it went, and jumps far.
and it is covered with pus of some humors, if it comes towards and coils and twists and worms or insects that come out;
and one doubts its maliciousness, because when it goes through the body, and it goes up to the head, and it comes out at the mouth, for fear of entering, and destroying the oil; and such things have often happened.
When you see it cured and drained, so can one only do it when it is:
So that it may be done with a strong ligature tightly tied,
then cut off above and below it, and dip it into boiling water, and you will not find it. If the fire cautery, as long as he dies.
and the greatest damage it causes is if it corrupts the oil, as we have said;
and if you see the head coming towards the oil, then hold back the spell with your hand, then cast it away and leave it.
and use a bad medicine to clean out the harmful odors.
and are made sick with putrefaction of meat.
from pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that affects certain members, and moves from member to member; and I saw the one I told you about.
I was called to see a sick woman, and she uncovered her breast, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her breast.
and then I saw it grow like a worm in her shoulder, faster than anything else, it seemed to me to be alive and shining as silver when it cuts from one place to another;
the pain departed from the affected area, and settled in her shoulder,
and then a little later corrupted throughout the whole body, as it came to the other breast;
then he told me that she twisted all over the body again, as I saw her.
I marveled at how she moved from member to member, for I have never wanted such a disease in this way before. Nevertheless, I have seen many people who, when they had pain in one place, felt it in another. but I do not want it, if as I saw in the woman;
and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry chest and open veins, and for this reason does she seem so wind-blown and constricted;
and it does not appear to these people who are delightful, who have moist chests and relaxed veins.
And when you see this disease healed, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we said, If the wound is cleaned and bandaged well, and then it is covered with a cloth so that the wind does not blow on it. and cauterize the wound; and if you do not see the hair,
if the cure of this disease, if like pills that are rotten, and pills of serapin, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the places from which they come.
The diversity of them is that there are some with great points, and small, and curly, and welded; and those that have .ij. angles, and those that have tongues, and those whose pieces are separated; and those who are injured in any limb so long as they are not injured according to .ii. manners: or if the limb is injured in principle,
as brain, heart, liver, pancreas, kidneys, intestine, bladder, and similar limbs. When she is injured in any of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later: if it is necessary for you to remove the arrow, for death comes after a number of preparations; and when this bad sign does not manifest itself to you, and if the arrow has not been fully extracted, then turn it over, and heal the wound.
and the sign of the skull when the arrow catches and pierces the bone, and the surgery that is on top of the skull, is when cutting and turning and twisting and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of speech, and vomiting of food; and perhaps it is a loss of smell or hearing; and perhaps it loses its speech and voice; and salt from the wet wound that looks like pus, and also as if it were burned with fire;
and this sign will warn you, if you keep the cure, and remove the arrow if it is not embedded.
The sign of the arrow when it pricks or hurts, is that it is near the left breast, and also as if it were stuck in something hard, not hollow. and the arrow might also be like a bird, and in black blood, and cold sweat comes and faints: And so there is doubt of death.
And the sign of the arrow that does not have a poison is that there is no foam coming out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he breathes heavily and trembles with fear.
And if the arrow enters into the shell of the chest, then the small ribs ache; and there is great pain and sorrow and breathing; and all the limbs move with a tremble.
And if the arrow enters into the stomach, perhaps there is no foam coming out of the wound, indicating that it has entered into the digestive tract and caused a disturbance within.
And if the arrow enters the belly, and there is no hope of cure or extraction of the arrow by the route it took through the intestines.
And if the arrow enters the bladder, and urine flows out in spurts and the patient feels great pain, know that the wound is fatal.
The other member - if it is the face or neck or throat or shoulder or arm or spine or leg or foot, and similar things - are safe according to many considerations. When the arrow enters a nerve or artery, and it is not poisonous  - as I will tell you about my own experience - then do otherwise.
There was once a man who had an arrow stick or lance, or something like that, at the root of his neck; I tried it, and tore off some of the fat from the ear, and was cured without a trace of pain.
And I tore off a stick that was in his neck, cutting through some of the fat from the oil with a paper knife, and the stick was returned, and I only felt a pricking sensation on my finger. and this arrow is great of a turquoise arc, that is to say, it is lighter than the ears; the game was sound, and there came no bad accidents.
And shot an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and this arrow was Arabic to the ears:
I let them grow beards, and I hid them until they were shot, and the Christians remained sound.
And I shot an arrow at a man, which was an arrow of death, and I thought he would die;
and then let it pass for .xxx. days, unless it changes its condition; I cut off the arrow and extracted it, and tied it tightly, and I did not leave a bad mark.
And if there is a hole in one's heart where an arrow has passed through, and the wound is closed over;
and let the arrow rest within it, and do not change its natural state, There is no harm in any of his natural works.
And I see another man, to whom an arrow struck in the face and was seared;
And it stayed there suffering great pain; and many others.
And he threw an arrow at the king of the nobles, who was hit in the eye with an arrow. and there was one declining to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded.
I was called to treat it after it had been shot three days earlier. I found the wound to be very tight.
I treated it with a strong substance, and did not feel it at all; and he felt tingling and pain in his right ear. I thought that it was from the tip of the arrow
I put on him the plaster of the attariffic digestive, so that his legs do not swell; and I felt his legs from the arrow.
and I felt his legs from the arrow. I put on him the plaster every day, and quickly heal the wound, and prolong the life of the patient.
as long as he feels the arrow .i. inside his body; and he told me. I put on the wound a corrosive aqueous medicine by hand, as long as it was open,
and I tried it, and felt the tip of the arrow which was fixed in place; then I applied to the opening of the wound the corrosive medicine, as long as the tip of the arrow was clearly visible;
and properly define the terms before .iiiij months,
and then stretch it if the wound that I put the pliers on, and pull from both sides, and cannot get out;
then I stopped from subtlety and devising of tools, until I took .i day with well-made pliers, according to this person whose form will come at the end of this chapter of chalk, until I stretched it, and brought back the wound.
And I tell you, the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or you have said the quality of extraction of certain arrows, so that you put your cure on those which I do not say, for the books cannot take all into account;
but the master healers compare a very small number of things, and on those that are present and weakling. true there are nine works, and nine instruments, for the removal of foreign matters which come in this craft.
I say that arrows do not come from the limbs except by the following nine ways: or through the place where they enter, or through another part;
and those that go out by the side where they enter, are arrows going into their flesh, and do not go out at any time nowadays.
And if it does not go out now, let it stay until the flesh is rotten inside, and the exit is cured;
And if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, let it stay like this for some days, and change it every day;
and then let it go out, and if it does not go out, let there be a small hole everywhere inside the flesh, as long as the inside of the leather is wide, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is reinserted into the neck of the body so that it cannot be seen, and one seeks it with all one's strength; and if you feel it, and if you treat it with any suitable tool;
and if you cannot by stretching out the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and if there is no bone, nerve or vein, then the wound must be very large; and train the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place,
and train the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place, so that the bone is broken at one of its ends, where the arrow is lodged, and then break or rain the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it out.
and then break or rain the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it out. and carefully try to break the arrow, so that you might pull it out with more pain.
And if you cannot do it once, then take it back to the place where the arrow is located, and try again, for the extraction is painful. And if the pain of the extraction makes you faint, then administer what we have said in this chapter about the cure with its ointment.
and to guard against injury to the nerve and the vein, and place it so that you can remove the arrow without danger;
or is dried or cooked well or firmly or thoroughly; and place the patient in accordance with the form he was in when the arrow entered; For this is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot do that, then place it according to what your sign shows you.
The arrow that comes from elsewhere, where it opens nothing, or the leather is swollen in place so that it can be seen or felt apart:
Therefore, cut it off as long as the jaws can take hold of it, and then extract it: if not, do so now.
If it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly as long as it enters into the bone and widens it, then remove it.
If it cannot be extracted, let it go for a while, and then begin the extraction again as long as it comes out.
and if there is an arrow in it, shoot it out completely.
and if he has a fever, and you see that it is not administered, then administer it with an instrument made of wood, so that the point of the arrow enters into the wood of the instrument; and then pour out,
and if the arrow is cut, pour out the instrument with the point entering it, to rejoice in the extraction.
And if the arrow touches, so that you cut all the cart around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as he thinks fit.
And if the arrow is in the neck or back or bladder or ribs, and it is close, and you can cover it, then you cover it; if you don't,
and beware of covering the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound, that is a job. and treat it until it is well.
The form of the pliers used to extract arrows is like an eye, and here is the form:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
common veins of the body The veins from which one heals are: xxvi., from which there is a head of xvi.
This is a medical text in Old French, and the line you provided translates to: "It is known that: .iij. batans (veins) which are after the ears, which are called the 'douz herbech'." and the 19 arteries that are in the 19 temples appear; and the 19 veins that are in the 19 arms of the hairs, which are called "aspirates"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the head; and the 19 veins that are at the neck; and the .ij. veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augerich"; and the .ij. veins that are on the tongue.
The veins that are commonly talked about are .v. in each arm:
the one is the cerebral, and it lies on the left side of the body, and it is called by the lay people "voinne du chef"; and the pain is called "fast", and is composed of the cerebral and bazal. and they call it "vein of comfort"; and the bazal if it is on the right side, and they call it "vein of the belly", and is in the light. and this is the one that is heard, which opens clearly on top of the chest.
And the little finger is the vein between the thumb and the index finger, and if it is at .ij. inches;
and in the leg and where the foot are .iij. veins: one is at the edge of the pocket of the left cheek, and the second which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein that is called 'nesse', which is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg are .iij. veins beside those.
The pain in the veins that are behind the ears, if it is helped by the ancient catarrhs, and migraine. and the qualities of the disease, as I have told you, are that you remove the head of the sick person,
and the qualities of the disease, as I have told you, are that you remove the head of the sick person, and rub the spot where the veins are with an abrasive cloth; then hold the neck of the patient with a vise, while the .i. veins appear behind the ears in .i. two lines depending on the head: Here is the translation of the text line by line:
"Then take the lance and pierce through the vein until you hit bone, then lift your hand up to where the vein emerges from the upper arm." "And cut and bind the flesh and the vein very carefully. Make two cuts through the skin and the vein, and then pull it away from the meat as much as you can see."
"Then stretch and tie it, so that it is healed."
and I have already said the incision and cauterization of the first book.
The two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is old Migraine, and headache, and blindness used to be, and in the eyes tears;
and the quality of the patient is so as I say: and let the patient strip his neck until the veins appear clearly. and put on a poultice of ash and then sign with salt;
and then apply hot poultices to your chin and neck; and then take a needle and thread, and tie it tightly around the vein at the top of your index finger, and cut the thread, and then cut the vein above, and tie it up, as you did in the other 15 veins, and make a hole with your finger according to your need;
and then lay down the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it.
and then let it form, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their treatment and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
The healing of the vein at the forehead is as effective as the healing of the facial diseases of old, and for headaches and torments.
and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears. and take the instrument which is called 'trowel', whose form is this:
And put the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or another thing, and let out blood according to the quantity that you see; Then cut off the neck of the patient, and tie up the vein until it is stable, and never use a wide flame.
Nevertheless, the flame must not be too hot; and the vein is cut across, because the bone is close by, and the flame may break when it is thin.
The saint blood that is in the two veins of the face, help with hair, and with scrofula, and with redness, and with the oil of the ear, and with diseases of the face;
and the quality of his blood is that the patient should pull out his tongue by twisting it with no chain, as before.
Then he shall suck blood, and let his blood flow a little from the tip of the flame, a little wide, because there is no fire.
And if his flame is thin, by chance if it is broken; then he shall make the blood run, as much as you need, and then he shall lay it on a cotton wool, and he shall lay it well.
The sick person of the birth pangs is worth water, and also sudden fever, and diseases of the face. such as migraine and pain that comes in the face, and even when it is old.
and the quality of the sickness is such that the patient twists his neck, then pulls his navel towards his left hand. and take a long, subtle flame, and put it in the space between the i-ith nostrils, For the vein does not open well now, and the blood will begin to flow soon.
and do not apply too much heat, and let the blood flow according to your need, then leave it for a night, because it is soon restored.
are the seven principal diseases:
and the quality of health is that the patient extracts his hair from both sides, as we have said; and the master standing over the head of the patient, and the patient cuts with .i. scissors,
then cut the vein from the long side a little widely, then tie up the blood vessels temporally, or as much as is necessary;
then make another in the other vein, then loosen the knot, and extract the blood vessels gently, that the patient does not choke; and leave it until morning so that the wound is healed.
Of the healing of the limbs Of the healing of the mouth and its ailments, including gingival problems, lip defects, and mouth ulcers and their treatment.
And the qualities of this healing are to have the patient sit before you, and to hold his neck as I have described. and turn the lip, and look at .ij. veins, one is on the right lip and the other is on the left and know by this that they are black, and by this that there are small veins near them that are black: then know both of them, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt,
then know both of them, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt, then choose the larger of the two, and do likewise with the 2 veins that are above and below, for this is a similar way.
Of the heat of salt water, the tongue Of the heat of salt water, the tongue so helps after the heat of the head, and it is to the extraction of the throat, and the diseases of the eye, and the diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the doctor is that the patient dies between your hands before the sun, and he lifts up the tongue, and looks in each side a black vein:
So then heal one and the other, and do not become too perfect, for the veins are black.
The veins which are commonly treated are done so according to .ij. ways:
where cut with sharp flame or small oil droplet, and is called 'aneil'. and are wide and thin according to the width and thickness of the veins. The shape of the flame is named as it is, and is wide as you see it:
And it is a skill to open the veins that are thick with blood, which is evident and troubled. and this is the form of the olive flame:
and it is more subtle in point, and it is to save the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
The cure for the basilic, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases of the throat, collar, chest, and abdomen;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to wash the wound, and to bind up the artery that is severed. And if he stops the artery, and blood comes from the cut, if it is necessary to stop the blood flow, as I said; and should not be struck with fire, but cut in a way like this.
And if the base is not clearly visible, then it is necessary that you extract it and change it. If you see any bleeding from it, or if you feel pain at its base, you will need to cut into the vein in order to save the arm. It is clear. and hold the fire to the wound, as we have said.
And if you can see the site of the injury, then it is necessary to extract the arm, touching the site until you feel the pulse. Then mark the site with chalk, and then cut the arm off, holding the fire to the wound.
and beware that you do not wound in the artery when you see the edge open, for it is in the artery: avoid it then.
and if you see coming up above as urine of a child, and the sap is red and thin, know that it is sap of an artery: then hasten you, and put your thumb on it for a long time, then open your thumb so that the sap comes out, for this often happens;
lie down, and leave it alone, and do not move the patient; and be afraid, and do not move him until he is well.
And if he does not stop bleeding, and the medicine is not present, if you cut the artery, for the head of the retort stops it; stop the bleeding.
And take an bark of fennel, and cut it, and take one of the halves and tie it well until the other day;
If he stops bleeding, it is good; if not, use the powder that stops blood, as we have said,
and the stopping of blood is not done in many ways for the small size of the wound and the ability of the vein of the arm.
The blood of a vein is to be drawn when treating with the head of a staff, and the base of the neck. for it is composed of the bazille and cephalic, as we have said;
and the surgeon must be careful of the nerve that is exposed, and if he cuts too much, it will split the nerve; and it swells and the patient's health is compromised, and perhaps it cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man by its subtlety, then you must take away the tool from him; and avoid this nerve to your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
The healing of the cerebral wound with fire, so that it is attracted to the head and held in place;
and it is necessary to heal with fire the wound of the cerebrum, because it is attracted to the head and held in place; and it is necessary to use olive or tin flame, for it is the most healing of all the veins, since it does not destroy the nerve or artery.
But nevertheless, it is necessary to seek the lighter cure first, and do not worry if one fails at first time, and start again. and by chance the limbs of some men swell up, but it does not matter if it fails the first time, but there is no harm in that. The quality of health is as you think it is.
The first thing you should know about a healer is that healing should only be undertaken to maintain health.
and to prevent the diseases from coming. and let the surgeon make the cut in one of the three veins that are located on the head, which is to say, the cephalic, facial, and basal vein; and the surgeon must prepare in advance by fasting for three days and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears;
and the surgeon must prepare on the first day or third day, after 2 hours or 3 days.
The saint who is free from disease has no fixed fever, but whenever he needs to eat or drink, at all hours and in all seasons.
And it is not necessary to keep the children until they are .xxiii. years old, and women except for four months until the seventh month. And it is not necessary to sanctify those who have passed the age of .lxi. years.
And when any one is sanctified, in whatever way it may be, if it is necessary that he defile the entrails of a light clister, s’il a mouth of fins retained, so that the veins do not attract the intestines the superfluities porries harmful to the principal members;
not heal at all those who are too sunburned by meat, nor those who are drunk, as much as it is necessary, nor those who drool;
and so heal after a colic passion, and vomiting, and stomachache, and multiple childbearing, and sleeping, and fasting, and this all the virtue, or by a weapon or the heart;
and then subtly the humors, it is thick outside, by meat and by drinkings and by medicines, if you have any doubt about it;
and between or bath, if anything offends him, for subtilely offend him blood.
and heal the wound from within by the third, as we have said;
and protect him from work, food, lust, and similar things;
and be tied and jointed, and be higher than he who heals him, and rub his arms .ii or iii times,
then remove the ligature by means of a slight pull, for when it is too tight or loose he cannot run without;
and then rub the wound with his hands, until the veins swell and can be felt;
and then soak the wound with a little of old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein for a moment or two; so that the vein does not run and does not bleed. For there are veins that run like strings, and if they are such that they are easily winded up, So that when one puts it on fire, if one takes it off fire, and cannot open the vein, then it is of this type;
and if one opens the vein, if the wound is too tight, so that the surgeon must be warned in these matters.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, if it begins again after a while either on the field or in hospital, if the injuries are inflamed.
And if his arm is swollen, and the patient expects, let him stay .i. day or .ij., and do not tie up his arm: So that the abscesses may come out; do not go into a bath, but begin to sweat if it pleases you;
And if his fracture is small, or the pain subtlety and you doubt that it will not be as much pain as you see, so firm in this fracture right to all flame;
And work a little hospital, so that the arm is swollen; for this often happens, when the wound is small.
If you see the wound open, then don't put salt on it, but put a little oil on it, for it softens the course of the blood in this wound and is moisten by this oil that lies there.
and then apply the oil to each wound that you heal the veins, so as to stop up the course of the blood;
and then it also makes a three-edged and beaked awl when it is put on the wound; if it is too large, then it splits gently when it is put on.
And if there comes a big abscess, which often comes, moreover when it is not healed only once or twice but when the opening of the vein is small, If you hurry, and put on the bed a wet sponge of water and of linen a little warm, and hold it for an hour;
and you must do this after the flow of blood from a vein, and if it remains in place for several days without any bruising or discoloration, then it does not harm him; and if you see, put on any thing of aloe or myrrh made into a juice of calamus, or mirrhe, or some sort.
And many times there is incision and appearance in the site of the basilica: then put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, that is the appearance of evil. Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.
And treat everyone with the amount of medicine that matches his virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it run until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for those who are sick and need bloodletting, make the wound larger, and let the flames be wide.
and to those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to cure them little and often, and they must be cured by cutting across, not by stabbing;
and this way of curing is saved from the decay of blood and the severing of nerves, and it is better than the long cure or the broad cure.
And to those whose course requires curing, it is necessary to give moist wine in pomegranate juice; if they are heated, if they have a strong smell of blood.
And if it is of a cold complexion, if before the cure moist wine is given in muscatel syrup, or in honey syrup aromatized with spices, as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
And if it arrives at the head, after the flow of blood, it is appropriate that he hums a brew of wine, and a subtle scented syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the division or paste of syncope for the evacuation of a vein.
And if he vomits up his stomach contents, and sometimes gets better again, but it is appropriate, when it is weakened by great pain, that he heal little by little, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
And if he vomits up his stomach contents after the first pain, and he is very strong, but he heals after .vij hours after the first pain, or after the ninth hour.
And who is to be healed on another side, if it is necessary to heal him the second day or the third.
For he has blood accumulation within the body which is already warmed and brings fever. If so, there is a need to extract large quantities and widen the breach as much as possible with small blows on the bone; then you should treat all the conditions for healing, and put your hand on his pulse as it heals, so that death does not come from the hole; and if this happens many times, when the healing is neglected;
and it is not right when you see the arm dislocated, and make the blood come out a second time, and the hole is closed, that you press firm upon it; if he is broken, that he extends the arm carefully, for that would be bad;
but let it be until the second time he heals; or you put to the tip of the flame as long as the blood that is frozen to the hole of the vein comes out; and place on it a little of salt water, and press lightly.
And if the wound is infected, let it alone and do not bind it, as long as the abscess is subsiding.
And if necessity requires drawing out the blood a second time, whether it is in the same vein or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein under the arm is drawn out at the arm's base, not at its tip, because it is composed of a different nature.
And the manner of drawing out the blood so is that the patient holds his hand in warm water until it turns red.
Then cut it off with a sharp knife, so that the vein appears clearly, then tie it now with a knot, not wide nor long.
And let the wound open widely, and heal it well near the joint of the hand, and do not draw it out, but put the hand in warm water, and leave the blood running in the water, as long as you have enough of it.
And if it is cold, do not put the hand in warm water, for one puts it in more in winter than in summer.
And the healing of this vein is safer than any other vein, since it does not have an artery or a nerve.
The salvation of the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and it is as follows:
Draw out the hand, and dip it in hot water until the vein has gone, if you can see it. and bend it across, and cut it all off, if it doesn't hurt anything;
and don't cut too much in the middle, because the nerve are very thin all the way down;
and then put back the hand in hot water, it is not unwrapped from the wound, and cannot be taken out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, if you put oil and thread to sew it firmly together, and do the same for each arm.
The surgeon should then go to the left side of the patient and make an incision, following the path of the disease, and do the same on the right side as I have told you.
The surgeon should then go to the left side of the patient and make an incision along the spine, following the path of all the diseases that are located below the corset. As for the diseases of the mare's milk, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the cubs and old legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of his health is such that the patient drinks some warm water, and rubs the vein until it stops. and rub the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins;
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And if you treat it with fire, so that the skin is burned off and the wound is clean; and let the flame go out.
And if he cannot get it out, put the foot in water, and let the vein bleed well.
And if you treat it for the first time, start the second time above a little, because the leg is salty; do not doubt about the nerves, as we have said, and do the same for the other foot evenly.
The legs of the sciatic vein are at the ankle, and its sap is the pain in the thigh, when it is for blood heat.
And the quality of this sap is that the patient goes or bath, and pulls out from the ankle .iii. days in twisting,
For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, so that you can put your finger on all sides, and crossing; and worth more than you can imagine, because the leg is out, and it is very red when it is moved by hand.
and worth more than you can imagine, because the leg is out, and it is very red when it is moved by hand. And if you do not heal it, neither does any rain of him who opens or closes the foot, and towards the little day, and keep away from the wells.
and do so much to the blood that you see, and then loosen the ligature, and put cotton on it and tie it up; now he is healed.
Wound suction with a pump
Vacuum wounds with a pump are made from horns, or bronze, or glass; and vacuum therapy is performed in one of two ways: by injuring and drawing out blood, or without injuring.
And this ventilation which is not to hurt if so .ij. ways: or it is all fire, or without fire;
and .ij. others on .ij. sides of the neck; and the windpipe is above the chin; and the vacuum of the shoulders; and the vacuum above the hips; and the vacuums of the arms; and the vacuums of the legs; and the vacuums of the ankles; and the vacuum treatment does not work for big veins, but only for small ones that are scattered throughout the body.
and therefore do not try this on anyone who has a large vein, as you would with a small one. and it is not necessary that it be anesthetized, or with any fire or heat, in any disease that comes from over-fullness, until the whole body is voided.
And if for necessity of disease it is necessary to vaporize, or by habits, if we anesthetize each hour in the beginning of the month, or at the end, and vomit and in each period;
For there are those who, when they need to vaporize, become very heavy;
and if there are those who have repulsion and blush in their face, and in their hair, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who drink a drop of blood in their mouth, and have fled the tongue, and thirst for blood; and if there are such who dream, and see nothing but blood and nausea and death and similar things.
And when we saw these signs, and especially when it is nearly midnight, we order that you should not breathe for 3 hours.
The saint of music helps with the headache in the head ... that comes to the eyes, and does not come except after the evacuation of all the body.
and this ventilation if it is in place of the blood of the cerebral,
nor does it concern anyone of cold complexion who uses it, or who has had a fever, for that does them great harm;
and therefore it does not concern anyone who is ill with a cold or who has recently had a fever;
And those who are recovering from such an illness often become confused, and for that reason the fire cautery should be placed a little further down by the doubt of confusion.
The wind-sucking enters the throat at the tip of the tongue and because of this it goes towards the extraction of the bone. and in splitting the channel of the palm, and all, and filling;
and it is necessary to push it back, because if it holds too firmly, then by chance or stomach or body.
The wind-sucking causes three pains in the neck: one at the tip of the tongue, and another at the throat, and another at the roots of the teeth.
and is in the place of the shrine of the basilica; and it comes that you command to the saint that he expresses his hand to put, that he does not grasp the artery, and does not come running with blood.
The winds from the north bring with them diseases of the mouth and decay of the gums, and similar diseases that come to the mouth; and they are in the place of the shrines of the two lips.
The winds from the shoulders bring with them a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
The winds from the neck bring as much as from the three veins of the arms, For blood draws from these large veins.
And command the surgeon not to sew it too tightly, for the vein is bare of hair and can easily split the skin and arteries.
The suction cup that is on the back so fits well to the foundation, and to the abscesses, and it must be large and of iron, for its work is to milk well; and perhaps, if it were too thin, it would break; and it would make great wounds.
The suction cups on the legs so easily open, for they draw blood from all the body, and are good for old pains of the joints, and of the toes, and of the bladder, and remove flowers; and they are in the place of the .ij. sophenes, and of the .ij. cheeks, and moreover they weaken the body after long use, and bring about many diseases.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
"And if the wound is large, then you must cut it twice: first to open up the deep part of the wound with a sharp instrument."
"And if the wound is very thick, then you must cut it three times; and when we want to extract the arrow point by point, we must only pull lightly once."
"And if we want to extract the arrow from the wound, then let's do it often; and if the wound is thick, then we must pull hard, and the end should be that the arrow comes out suddenly,"
and cover with those who have thick skin and tough, that you oil the wells of the suckers of oil-opening and dissolving: if it is in this state, of oil purple, or of oil of sweet almonds, or of oil of seed of melon;
and if it is in the state of a goat, of oil of sorrel, or of lilies, or of chamomile, or other thing.
And if the surplus is thick and cold, then take oil of almonds, or of balsam, or of fennel, and similar things.
And if one has a sore that is tender and swollen, then there is no need to put oil on it.
but it should be washed after the inhalation of red water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or porcelain water, or other similar water.
And if one has moisture, if it rises like this, or with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And if one has large excesses, they rise with old wine, or water of oak, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or other similar things.
and is not suitable to go into a tub before the bath or take a bath; but after the bath an hour or two and does not sleep after the ventilation,
and it is necessary that he warm up, when he should be ventilated and when he has been ventilated. And guard against those who are coleric, and whose blood is too hot and inflamed; if he prunes cold things, like pomegranates, endives, lettuce, and mint, and similar things;
and also small fish, and a chariot with wheels, and moist meats.
And those with a cold complexion, if they drink honey syrup, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and small fish and birds and pigeons;
and let him drink more than he eats when he becomes winded;
and it is necessary to give to some men three times or four times a day before or after the wind, to strengthen the main members; and be careful with the sun, but it is good for those who are hot to drink water.
The leech that is used to hurt is that which is put on the liver, and the midge, and the podagra, and on the belly and the bowels and the rain and the hound, for that member does not suffer to be hurt on the skin,
and do not make it except to attract blood from one member to another, as we put on the breasts when the baby is sick; for the viscosity that is in the member, as we put on leeches on the belly and the bowels to ease the member;
and bone the pain, when there is an operation or stone, if by its virtue it attracts the operation, or deserts the stone from its place;
and so does this, when you put it on the liver and on the mouse when there is repressed wind,
and these suction cups are emptied only for sucking; and never are they together empty, and never is there a plainness of water,
as such as the diseases of the lungs, and in this way one fills the suction cup with hot water, or with water in which he has cooked herbs suitable for this;
The form of the suction cup is administered to fire thus:
And it should be 3 inches wide and half a palm long, and it should have a small hole in the center about as big as a needle is inserted into
and it should be of brass, smooth before so that it does not hurt the patient when put on the member;
and it has in the middle a crossbar of brass or iron, to put a candlestick between
and let there be great and small ones according to the diseases and the age of those who take them.
For the suction cups of children are different from those of old people, and those of the thin from those of the fat.
And this suction cup must be placed on the limb:
take the wax candle or .i. liquid, and put it in the center of the suction cup at the base of the member that is placed in the center of the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient.
and then put it on the member, and your two are on the hole that we have said, so that when you see it, if there is steam, and then take off the suction cup;
and take the lining away as before, and restart it often, if you need to.
In the suction cup that is adapted for pleurisy, with all water, there is no thread or hole, and it is only adapted when it is flat with water, and put on the member only slightly;
and this is the form:
are not opened except in limbs where it is impossible to put a suction cup because of their smallness, as in the mouth and gums, and similar parts; and in bare legs, if there are two or three toes, and other similar things;
and the quality of use so that when you find suction cups that are in clear, non-muddy water, if you take them;
and put them in a sweet water nut, as long as they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies; and then be cleaned from the vein and the suction cup, and then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the poultices;
and when they are clear, and they cheer up, if it is possible to put a suction cup there, you put it there, because this is worth trying again later;
If that doesn't work, then lift the head up from there, and then dip it in water, very well, and then squeeze it out;
and if he leaves it too long after the heart of the saplings, so that moisten .i. a linen sheet in cold water and put on it, until the sap is dried up;
and if there are many saps, then put on them crushed vitriol or scurvy and similar things, until they are dried up;
or you put on half of boiled peas, and leave them until they burn at the heat, so now they will be dried up;
and if you have more work to do, then take other saplings.
And if the blood does not want to come out, so rub the place of the vein with fresh blood, or you put an needle into it as long as there is blood out. and then place them on, and soon as they feel the pain, so they become numb;
and when you see that they are crying, so powder on a little aloes and rosewater, or ash, if they will now stop.
Here begins the book of fractures
The chapters of this treatise are many times necessary in the art of medicine, and are the restoration of broken bones and dislocations.
Know this, dear son, that the wise men never wrote of this chapter, nor did they read any letter or book about it;
and for this reason the science is strange to us in our land, for I have never found any good book about it;
and I know nothing, except that by the science of ancient books, from which I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter the contents of the balm, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly set forth the forms of the tools that are prepared, as I did in the previous twenty chapters.
It is therefore appropriate that we say in this book the summary of the words and the chapters where the mind of man takes refuge and stays on truth, so that those who are proven can learn and teach this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when there is a fracture or dislocation or torsion or strain in any part of the body, it is necessary that you hurry to save the sick person from both sides, unless something prevents it from happening, as weakness of the trunk, or paralysis, or age;
or if the tension is too great or too frequent; and mild cold winds, and a carriage made of wood and leather, and do not drink wine, nor drink any fatty foods, and do not fill the joints with food, until you have no doubt about the aphorism, nor about the expansion of matter in the member; if the disease returns to its first government that it has used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meat that is very fattened, or viscous like cooked wheat, and rice, and peas, and cakes of milk, and oil, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with very fat meat the break is repaired more quickly and sooner.
And know that broken bones of the old and the infirm cannot be repaired or strengthened according to their nature by the heat of the members, nor those which are too soft, as the bones of small children;
but do not cure, repair on the broken bone. i. large tender meat that hardens and joins the member together, as much as it is necessary; and do not at all cure it with thin meat, and for this reason we have said that it is necessary to feed it with thick meat.
And know that breakers are many and varied in many ways.
For the break of the head is another than the break of the leg, or of the arm, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks. For there is a break that goes up, and another that goes down, as when the blade of a pen is sharpened to write.
For there is a break that goes up, and another that goes down, as when the blade of a pen is sharpened to write. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break that makes a small crack.
And each has his own way of preparing it, and its own instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes in its place.
and is cured by turning the bone, and opening it well from both sides, and pressing it with the hand;
and when there is no torsness or twiste in the bone, and the patient feels no great pain, it is not broken;
but it may have torsness, or a crack, or a small break. If it is not necessary for you to move it with your hand, but put on medicine that comes later, and then hold it now gently.
And know that the break that has come in the shoulder, and there are the three parts separated, it is now necessary to put them together equally, so that the abscesses come forward.
and if the abscesses come forward, so that the shoulder is at rest for a day or two, as long as the abscesses are calm. Then put it together equally with the medicine that you can use easily and cleanly, and know that the restoration of the shoulder is easier than the restoration of that which has pieces; then hold it, as it comes later.
And if in the bone there are pieces broken, if it is four parts, it is hand or foot, or with your hand a small member, or with four strings, or with one string and with your hand;
and set the member according to its natural form, so that when the parts of the broken member are healed, you remove all additions from their places as much as possible, and keep so that by your work there is no injury or pain for the patient;
and set well together the two bones according to the best forms.
And feel well by the hand if it seems to you that it is not yet right: if the dressing is done well and does not come off too much, do not press it so much as those who work with fire and contraction at the member, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limbs are set in place, instruct the patient that he not move them, neither while waking nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way. and guard well that the limbs be so secure that they feel no pain at all. For when one feels no pain, then it is set in place, and the disposition to move must be such that one feels no pain.
For when one feels no pain, then it is set in place, and the disposition to move must be such that one feels no pain. and guard well that it be placed correctly, so that there is no tortuosity when it is reset.
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
I know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
For there are small members, such as arms and legs and resembling things: it is necessary to wrap linens of molls and subtle ones.
and those that are thick, such as feet and legs: it is necessary to wrap a wide and sturdy linen, for the wide linens embrace all of the large member, and constrain it evenly from all sides, so that there is no stain.
Then he stooped lightly, 2 or 3 times or according to the member, and tightened his hand a little at all the joint, then went up over the fracture and tightened it less, so that the fracture then moves a little away from the fracture.
and soften the joint a little and a little, until you press much of the sound place, then take again .1 other joint and turn in chief over the broken place;
Then go back to the sound part of the fracture, and tighten it a little way, not too strong or too lightly, as we have said in the first step above;
Then put between the light joints of linen or drapes, until it is all even, then lay it all above .1 bend, and then put your well-made splints on, if there is an abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or an inflammation, place on it a warm thing to soothe the inflammation and let it remain like that for some days.
then extract it from your joints, and let them be half a foot long, or from a pole that is used to make cleats, or from palm fronds, and let them be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the stake that one puts on the fracture is a little larger and wider than the others;
and be as long as necessary for the member, whether small or large;
then hold it on the staples also as you did at first, then tie up one side with a thread going forward, like in the first case on the breach.
then make it narrower again, less so; and let the thread be fine, not too thick nor too thin, and let it be made of wool;
For if the thread is too thick, as I would want for works of the fools who make string-like ropes with linden wood, and that is a great mistake, because the ligature cannot be even if it is too thin, and it only deserves to have between each staple half the distance of two inches.
And if the patient is pricked by the staples of the joints after they have been stripped, then he should be wrapped in linen, or woollen cloth, so that he does not blister.
When the wound is with the bruise, and the cure is broken, I will tell the cure hereafter.
And know that it is not good to extract all the members of a broken body on the first day. For when the members are large, it is not good to put on stirrups before 2-3 days or more according to the severity of the abscess, especially if hot;
and here is the way of the ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: and it is that you take flour so that it holds the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and put this confect, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plasterer restoring the fracture to various dispositions, especially for women and small children, for it is not good to be too fine or too rough.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Autre maniere d'emplastre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. Z.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. Z.; acaice vi. Z.; bolic armenic .x. Z., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d'uef, et l'aministre.
Autre manière d’emplastre qui vaut à desévrez de leurs lues, et apaise la douleur soudainement, et le taille utilisent de l’os, et la briseure : pren lainne novele, et la moille en aissile et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cet emplastre ne restaure miie, mais il est bon pour apaiser d’apostème chaud, et ostre proprement les douleurs.
Another method of plastering broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-p avol leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method of plastering broken bones and to reduce the remaining swelling at the root of the aposteme. Take roots of mallow, chamomile, violets, timothy grass, each in equal parts; grind them together, and confound them with wine, and heat the limbs, then confound them with coriander seed water, or water, and use it.
Another method of plastering broken bones, which is more effective than the first one, when the swelling at the root of the member comes to rest. Take roots of mallow and linseed, borage, melilot, and marsh mallow, and violets and chamomile, each in equal parts; grind them together, and confound them with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its need for rest.
In his book, Ypocras states that for the restoration of a broken member, one should not put anything but wax and oil on it, and nothing else; he also says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galien says that we must put hot things on the broken member to restore it, dry things, as mirr, aloes, incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to make plasters which is useful for lesions and pain: take wool or hair of the same size, or feathers of birds, and bone marrow, and yarn evenly, and grind them, and make a plaster with it and lay it on him.
And then let him lie a little while, and take care that the patient feels no pain, or that his bones do not move from their places; but let him lie by day.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, or restlessness or swelling, then take care to remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and wet it with sea water, and dip it in fresh water, and raise it up, until the itching ceases, and the pain is allayed. and leave the limb to rest for an hour, then put on another dry, wet with water or oil and bind it with a bandage, until you are sure that the abscess is hot.
and rest the inflammation of the limb, and ease the pain, then begin again gently, and a little plaster, and do not extract it as strongly as before; and gently until he is healthy.
And if you see that the hot, redness, pain, and swelling have all disappeared, then you should begin again, as you did before, with the plaster and binding.
And if the limb does not come back as described above, then do not remove the plaster and binding until after 2, 3, or 5 days have passed; and do not leave it on for more than 10 days, according to what you see, as long as the wound is breaking open, and the treatment approaches that of the char.
And then restrain him more than first, and let him fatten his flesh, as I said before; and if you see that he is getting wet above what is necessary, know that natural sweat cannot come. then let the hot water arise for him, every time you dislodge him, and this be every third day, and wash a little by the hour;
for this dislocation let the member be cut short, and gently remove what the twisted limb has made, which is wrong; it is unpleasant, and if there is a lot of it, I see no other way but to let it drop and perform the operation correctly.
of the various ways of breaking Many ways of breaking are there, and various forms, and the causes are diverse.
for it has breaks that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collar bone all the way down to the shoulder which is out of place, as if it were broken or not; and for this reason this type of break is called "haichure".
For the sword pierces the bone from above, and this type of break is called "absolute"; and there are wounds from these two great breaks or from a small one.
And if it is an enclosed impact, or a crack, or a collar of stone, or a fall on stone, or similar things.
And if there is a break that touches the membrane which is on the bone, or it is on the bone itself, and this wound is great or small.
And if there is a wound that has broken through the bone as thin as a hair, and this break is small, and therefore it is called "capillary";
And if the wound is made by stone, or by hitting, or by a similar thing, and it enters the bone, and the shank becomes bent as the blacksmith does to the kettle when he strikes it on the kettle; or if it enters between the stones.
And if there is more than one joint affected, so that the head of the bone is wet with moisture, as the head of a child;
and all these types of fractures, which are feared for small pieces as they are; and I will speak in his place.
And let us know all the types of fractures by traction on them, and inquiry at their ends, and by the broken cart which is above them.
The hair-like appearance is known because when one discovers the bone, and rubs it up, then opens the fracture blackly.
In the cure of the fracture, take care of the accidents of the disease, and if you see any evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of reason, extension, palmsiness, and feverishness, and the eyes become red and white, and other similar signs in many diseases, then it cannot be cured doubtfully.
And if you do not see an accidental prediction, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the baby is born first with you, and it is in winter, then you must break the bone before the fourteenth day at the most.
And if it is in summer, you must hurry to break the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh does not decay, and the accident that we have spoken of comes.
And if the break in the bone comes just to the hair that covers the skull, you must split the part split thus: and it is that you press the head of the patient, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more gently than you can.
and the pain of a wound leads to discovering the bone, or an abscess, so help him with that which is appropriate, and it is that you fill the place with wet rags soaked in oil. and let the wound rest as long as the abscess is calmed, and are sure of the pain of the wound; then begin to cut around the bone, and this is done according to 1 . i j ways: one way is that you chop at the narrowest end in front, and this is the form:
And then I cut another length that is larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have several different lengths, some narrow and others wide, and are pointed, and are made of iron; and work lightly, so as not to wound the head.
And if the tooth is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce it from within, so that you also prepare it with files, not completely so that it does not pierce beyond the bone of the testicle, and must have on top of the tip a margin or.i. circle, so that the tip does not pass beyond the bone; and it is necessary that you have more, so that each comes to its place of the end of the bone, so that you have files for all testicles; and this is the form of the three ways of filing:
And the quality for piercing within the bone is that you place.i. file on the bone and turn it with your two hands until you feel that the bone has been pierced; then remove the file a little bit further, and do so everywhere, then cut off the space of the bone which is between the pits, and do it more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw out the bone with your hand, or with any of the tools that you have, like pliers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the syph.
And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, if it is necessary that you retain the apex which is retained by the bone from all.i. other tool resembling a scalpel, but it is necessary that it be more soft and finer than the other scalpel:
and if it does not delay any of the small bones, nor any scales, if the bone is slightly broken with instruments; then cure the wound with tent and ointments that we have mentioned.
And the other way of cauterizing is what Galen says, which is more effective; and he holds it very firmly, and this is his word. It is first necessary that you discover a part of the bone, where the fracture opens; so that when you have discovered that part, you put on the end of this lens-shaped scalpel, from which comes this form:
And do not cut from one side, and is the part of ague in 2.i. sides, so that the trenching is toward the bone; then fier with a small mallet on, so that you chop lightly the bone all around, and give yourself well guard from the fabric that desoz;
If it is broken through the bone, then let the bone be made light, for the bone that is broken well does no harm, and there is no fear.
If the bone is broken only to the tendon, and the bone is cut a little from above, and there are small pieces, then cover that roughness with a sharp razor of which you must have different quantities, in order to adapt them according to the work and the shape of the break.
If there are large pieces, then start with coarser razors, and then use finer ones, without stopping until it is smooth.
For each different type of cut and subtle fracture, you must adapt your razor according to the shape; and this is something that has not been fully answered by those who have studied this craft.
And if the healing is done with a poultice, then you should squeeze out .i. linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and dip it in oil, and put it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled up in two or three layers, and soak it in wine and oil, and put it on top of the first drapeil; and make this lighter than you can, so that you do not damage the healing, then add a third linen cloth, and do not remove it until it has soaked the wound completely;
and leave it for a day or two until the abscess has healed, then remove it, and add to it roots of herbs, and flour of times, and powder of incense, and alchemical substances, and similar things; from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and add to it medicinal substances without any taste of bitterness;
and be sure that the wound is clean, so you should not leave it oozing, nor should you let it gather dust, for when blood gathers on the cloth above the head, if it gets into the wound and comes out again, it will cause great harm to the patient; because when you put a bitter substance on top of healing, it may be harmful if it gets inside.
Take care therefore, that no bad accident comes upon the patient, as we have said, if there is any doubt without doubt.
And if blackness comes upon the patient only because of the medicine which we have put on him, of which it is said that it has virtue, then you should press out one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and one scoop of resin, and lay it on the medicine. and then treat in the manner which is appropriate for his illness until he is well.
Know that the six joints of the neck are never broken when one falls on them, for these are six bones; and this cartilage is not broken unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
And if one of the 19 parts is broken, it is necessary that you press your little finger or thumb in place of the nail, and make even this break inside your index finger, and at the knuckle away from the nail, until the nail regains its natural shape. and do so lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain because of your work.
and if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and it cannot come back to its place, it is necessary that you make even the tip of a small piece of hair.
and if the break is in two parts, if you do not restore it right away, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or ninth, when the abscesses are calm, then bind to the head with linen bandages, if the break is in one part.
Or you bind another to another part, if the break is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the apertures of the neck.
And say that one should not moisten the bandages in oil, and each day; it does not seem to me that this is good, but it seems that they are moistened with sheep's fat and powder of molasses; then leave the bandage, until the bone is hard and the joints hardened.
And never bind neck wounds with goose feathers in place of bandages, and if it is so warm that the wound breathes, and holds the breach open, and blows upon the patient; or else do as you see fit.
And if abscesses come up near the birth, while you are working, put cotton or a wet cloth in oil, or in .i. a little of water-weed.
And if abscesses do not come up, put a plaster on the skin, of flour and si-samen, and powdered incense, cooked with honey from bees, then put a light cloth on it, and do not tie it tightly around the birth;
and if the birth is small and broken into small pieces, so extract them with suitable tools for this, then cut it in half, and treat it with suitable ointments and oils for this;
and if there is no pain inside the birth, so treat it with suitable remedies, and put strings of thread on it, until it is healthy again.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the break is not very severe, and it is not broken in two, except that it is bent inward, then one should take care lightly.
If the break is on the right side, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left side, insert your index finger from the right hand, and push the break inward lightly, and make it even with the other hand, pushing outward.
And if the break in the jaw is of degree III, then it is necessary that you maintain an extension of III parts, as long as they are even.
And if the pains move from within, or a rupture, if they are pulled from a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw a cerote, and put on .i. double cloth; and on the cloth put a large, well-made stake, or a piece of leather that is long and wide according to the jaw, and fasten it to the hook you have, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the figure has changed, if it relaxes on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and apply plaster, of flour from the mill with a lot of egg or flour from wheat, after having taken out the cerote; and put on another light plaster, and if the plaster dries, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times are healthy in three weeks.
And if the abscesses burst, if you apply what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and a wound together, take out the piece of bone that is broken; if the fracture is subtle, use the appropriate tools for this.
And if the wound is narrow, then make it broader with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and do not delay at all, if the wound is wide, put on it plasters suitable for that, so as to avoid infection, until it is healthy.
of the force of the shoulder
And the repairs if it is when the fracture is without pain that you have 2 ministers, so that one bleeds him the shoulder that feels the broken force; and the others extends the neck toward the part; then place equal the fracture at your sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance nor hair.
And if you have more to extend it, so put on the shoulder of the patient a round spike made of cloth or linen, and make it large according to your need; and stretch and hold the broken force, and hold the spike in your hand, so that you place equal the fracture, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder away from behind, because it is broken, then let the patient lie down on his back, and put the shoulder under one ear, and hold the minister's shoulder forward, so that the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then place the fracture at your sides, and if you find it difficult to split it, so let it split easily; and pull out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join because of any obstacle, so put on the instrument that is near to the patient.
and appears like a spoon, and is not a nail, and should be as large as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has .ij. chisels, if you see, and one is wide, and the others are narrowed, like the breaking of the wound that you made when you treated the bone;
and when you are sure of the abscess, if the wound breaks, and the rupture is small, or you doubt about the abscess, if it covers the wound with cloth and tents, according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, if you soak .i. drape in oil and ash and wine, and put on it.
The dislocation of the bone, when there are wounds and no cuts, is that you put on the bone the powder from the mill and ash of egg, and place light staples on it, and place a spike in the socket if you need one; puis prenez une très grande bande d'une palme de large, puis mettez .i. drapeil double sur les épaules, et le fustragez; puis prenez une estele fine de .iij. doigts de large et de long, et l'enveloppez autour de celui bendeil, de sorte que la tête du bandage soit suspendue; then take a very long band of palm width, then put .i. drapeil double on the shoulders and splint them; then take an estele (small thin stick) of 1.5 fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that splint so that the head of the splint hangs down; and place the estele on the break, and loop the bandage around the neck, and secure the shoulder at a healthy angle, and secure the shoulder joint with the bandage; and then remove each part, and when you see that the splint holds well in front of the break, and you can see clearly that the estele does not move from above the broken bone, then you should adjust it every day, and when you feel that the neck is loose, then release the restraint slowly.
and let the patient sleep on his side, and put 1/4 of a palm width between the shoulder and the collar, to support the dislocation; so that the break is kept stable by the shoulder being supported, or the neck is held at an angle by the bandage around the neck, and this does not cause any problem unless there is a sudden movement, until 20 days have passed.
then restart the splinting, if you think it is necessary, and secure it and leave it like that until it has healed; and it is healed in about 26 days, and some men heal in less time.
of dislocation of the shoulder
de la brisure de l'épaule
If there is a piece of the bone that comes forward, and do not remove the seam, then mend it as we have said in the chapter of mending an abscess with hot wax.
de la brisure de l'épaule
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.
The dislocated shoulder should be reset as soon as possible to prevent further injury and pain for the patient. To reset the dislocation, the patient should lie down on their back and have their arm dangling over the edge of the bed. The doctor will carefully move the arm, trying to return it to its normal position. If this does not work, or if there is pain or an abscess at the joint, the patient should be taken to a surgeon as soon as possible. The surgeon will use corrosion or pruritus, applying heat or pressure to the joint to loosen it and then carefully move the arm back into place. Once the shoulder is reset, the patient should be immobilized with a splint or cast to prevent further injury while the joint heals.
the breaking of ribs
says that the break in the ribs only occurs in large bones near the back, and at the top towards the center, and feels good to inquire about it.
And let it be even if you make the break even, as is right. And then put on the plaster, and restrain it with a splint, if you need one.
And if the break is in the ribs and goes inward, then the patient feels great pain and sharp pain as well, like to cry, because the bone rubs against the membrane; and it causes great vomiting of blood, and this is a sign of bad health, and the old one has put much effort into it.
And if any of those who serve to administer meats that swell the belly, to push the break out.
We do not make this, because hot abscesses do not come, unless they have come. And if he has come, then let him heal.
And they said that no one should put ventosas on the spot, for it seems reasonable, but there is doubt that the ventosas will not attract the excesses to the place of weakness by their disposition of fragility.
And they said that one should cover the spot with another dry cloth dipped in oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the area even, then it is cured with the cure for plague, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain in the bone that touches the fabric, then doubt is on the patient; so it is necessary to split at the base of the broken rib, and to put there 10 ounces of iron instrument to ward off the sickness; and afterwards, one must cut the bones, and pull them lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound together, if they are large, and treat them with unguents until they are healed. And if the abscesses come out, then put there drapels dipped in oil, and place them on the spot; and cure while the spot is infected with that which has caused the abscess, and let it rest on the side where it hurts, until it is healed.
of the break of the neck
No time comes that breaks the bones of the neck, and so it would not happen; and also to the spine of the back. And when it has come to anyone, and you know that he will be well or not, if you see his hands soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you pinch them with a pin, then do not feel pain. Know that there are many deaths; and if they do not move and do not feel pain when they are stretched, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the sick person is cured, if one puts the cure on it.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you know that he will be well or not, if you see his muscles soft, and the accident that is in his hands, and on his back it swells and moves without will; and when it has been soothed on its belly, then does not move. Know that there are many deaths; and if it does not move and does not feel pain when it is soothed on its back and does not clench, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the sick person is cured, if one puts the cure on it.
And if this accident does not come to him, then it is a lighter thing.
And the cure is that you rub if there is an abscess, oil or butter of sheep's milk on it until it calms down; then put one of the poultices comfortingly and drying, and tie it with a string, and order the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels pain until he is well. And if any bone comes loose, cover it with poultice; then set the bone, and sew the skin together, if it is large, with stitches, then clean the wound with poultice, until it is well; and if the bone of the arm is broken, which is called the "armbone", pour your poultice from your left hand, and put it level with the other hand at your disposal, then apply the poultice and stake it down, if you need to do so; then hold it in place, and if any bones have come loose, push them back together, and cure the wound until it is well.
For the break of the bone of the hip
If the hip joint is broken, and if so, only a little reduction in the head; and let it be long, and declining to the side, and gives pain to the patient at the site, and makes it swell where it is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it as long as you are above it; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the head, then make it equal to the natural shape as much as possible.
And if the break is long, and it declines inward, then make the patient lie on his back, as much as possible so that the restoration of this break is made known to you. And when you have made it equal, if put upon an axe, then place upon a beam of wood or of timber, and stretch the break, so that it does not move; and employ the place of support on the sides, as long as the position is equal.
And command the patient to sleep on his back or sides.
And if the abscess bursts, if it is not infected, as long as the abscess bursts, and put on what we have said before; and then return to restoration, and hold it as it should be, unless there is some bad accident; and this is the way.
from the dislocation of the shoulder
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And lay 18 shoulders and ties, and set them high up, and chop the sick on one side; then pour some broken branches into a basket, and set any heavy thing or his ministers down it; then put the knife the same as his hands together, until the cutter returns as it should.
And the other way is that one should put the sick person on his back, and tie his hand to his neck, then order 18 ministers that one who is on the cutter's hands should cover what is on the cutter's hands, and the others cover the shoulders, and spread each one in its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then extend 18 shoulders out of the cutter, and on the cutter, and spread each one in its part. And if the cutter is close to the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put a legible tie out of the shoulder, and another one towards the person's side, out of the cutter; and also if the cutter is near the person's side, it is necessary to put a light tie, without effort, until the cutter is level on his own, and then extract him, if the apophs are not closed.
And if the apophs are closed, then do not extract him until 7 days have passed, and put on the cutter a wet and oiled cloth, until the apophs are calm; then extract it, and the way to extract it is that you put the empurplement on the cutter, then assemble the arm on the ajutoire, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the back; and put the drapeil, and extract on the arm, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a good position, unless something hinders it, or its bone is broken.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use a pole, and put on the fracture a pole wider and stronger than the others, and have between each pole 1 . i . two of space, and let each pole be so large that it passes the fracture . iii . two of its parts; then strain on the poles, thus as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the paste on the fracture, stronger and less by moving away.
And if you see the seat of the poles and the strain, so as we said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the incision warm, let it rest for seven days, as we said; then look each 1  . i  . day at the knot, that itching does not grow or come to place where it is too tight. If it is done, so as we said.
And if such an accident does not come, let it be undone after 1   . i  . days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and take off the aid 1  . cussin made of wool evenly, and look each hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or is not softened by the bonds; if it is done by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food that we have before put in a certain way that the food be at the first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick. And it is fitting that the aid and the leg should be recovered in 1  . x  . days or more; and then he must be undone and administer baths and medicines of ointments to cure the wound. And if the stricture is ugly and blocked, delay undoing for 1  . jors or 1  . months.
of the break of the arm
The arm is made of 2 bones, which are called the "humeri", one small and one large, with the smaller one being at the end near the shoulder, and the larger one being below it; sometimes the larger humerus may break by itself, or the smaller one, or sometimes both together.
When the smaller humerus is broken, the healing is easy and quick; and when the larger one is broken, it takes longer to heal properly than when it is the smaller one that is broken; and if only the smaller one is broken, the proper thing is to stretch it a little and make it even.
And if it is the larger humerus that is broken, then he must stretch it more strongly; and place it on .ij. cushions, and tilt the arm up higher than the other arms, so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then extend the other ministers' arms to the affected joint at his side, or with .i. band, and another minister at the other end above it. And then make it even according to its better form.
And if in the break-up into pieces, let each one be put back in its place, and if there is no one who can pick it up right away, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do so on the bone, as we have said above.
And if with the break-up into pieces, I have spoken of it in the chapter on singular cauterization; take care.
And if in the restoration of the broken joint comes the incision of the aposteme, take care: make a cloth of cerote oil and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft; and place the cloth above it subtly, until the aposteme is calmed. Then wipe off the cerote, and put the plaster of the powder of the mill with much ash, then put the splint, and let the splint be closer to the break than any other; and know that it should have vj. splints or more arrangements: whether the break is in one bone or in 2.; and strain it more up than anywhere else, all the time less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on cauterization; and let the cloth be soft and moist that is above the break, and do not make it too hard or too sharp; and let the thread from which it is pulled be made of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And wait for the member and the joint after a few days. And if some bad accident comes to the member, as itching that comes to the member, let it be soaked in hot water until the itching is calmed; and let the member rest without confinement. And then begin again to strain, and if the ties are soft and the bones seem good, go forward with the treatment.
And if the joint does not respond [to treatment], so that it is too constricted, then you must soften it [by applying heat] little by little, and leave it like this for a few days, until the joint moves and then hold it fast.
And if neither of these things that we have said comes to the patient, so do not loosen him up until .xx. days. And when he is entombed, then he will bend his hands to his neck, and keep his necks even, and guard against movement and turning over, and sleep on his back; and know that this healer is restored in .xxx. days or in .xxxv. days, perhaps in .xx. days, according to the compositions and the complexions of the virtues.
of the break in the hand.
Know that at the back of the hand and towards the two there are few breaks, and only comes a little bit of water many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or rained on, so that the patient should cross his hands and sit straight before him evenly; then he puts his hand on the cloth spread out, and extends the broken bones, and puts them even with the mirror, until they are well joined; and puts the plaster and the staples, if there come an abscess, then he puts a stake according to the quantity of the place; and let it be wrapped in 1.i. linen drapes.
And if the break is in the back between the belly of the plant, so make a stake of drapes, and instruct the patient that he should strangle it to his broken plant; and then strain out of a long drape, and let the stake of four-fifths be as large as the plant of the hand, and strain it, as it comes.
And if the break is at the end, then you should put a stake above it, and another under the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie them together tightly around the hand, and fasten the ligature between the two.
And if the break is at one of the two ends, then you should make it even, as it comes; and hold it with the plant, and see if there is a twinge; and if the break is between the two ends, then you should make it even, and tie it to the healthy end; or you should tie them all together in 1.i. hold, that they do not move, or you put a stake on it, as it comes; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of the apothecary carefully, and mend what comes, as I said.
of the broken rib
of the broken rib The bone of the rib is often bruised, and we can clearly see it when it comes forward and behind; and the cure is this: you tie one above the break, and another below it. And the patient lies on his face, then extends the ministers of his bond equally to his sides; and this is when the break is in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the rib, so that one of the links comes forward to the fist, and the other links are behind the break; and also if it is near the knee, and then either put the bandage on the knee, and then extend it upward; then place the mirror on the bone equally on both sides, according to its natural shape, and then put the plaster, and tie it up, so that the apostemes [the joints] do not come forward.
And if there is an abscess, let it be calmed down and then return to your opening and treatment; the time has come in some way. And if there is an abscess, wrap it in a dry cloth, bent double, and wait for the excess to come out; then return the leg as far as the heel comes to the root of the toe, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, freeing the knee from the joint, and bring the thread up; then return to the leg and the thigh with the cloth, and put on the splint, and put an Splint on the bone of the leg; then employ the bandage tightly, forming ii or iii torments on the splint; and as you go higher and higher on the splint, lessen the stretching; then tie on the ii or iii strings that are above, then return to the joint where you brought the thread up, as far as you come away from the foot; and the stretching, if it does not move out of its place, then leave it there, and if it comes back or swells or has any other appearance.
And if it comes out and turns back, as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone that grab hold, if one can be pulled out, let him pull it out; and if he cannot pull it out, let the joint be split and taken out with force; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And no matter how the cloth is wrapped around the hip where we put splints, as for the shoulder and arm; however, in this case, when it is healed, do not strike the hip.
And know that the cut is healed in .1. days, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
of the knee joint
For in the joint of the knee there is sometimes little fracture, but it often breaks many times. And if it fractures, it may be just a split, or .1. hole, and feels very painful; and when it does not break, it hurts less.
And the restoration is such that if one of its two ends is made equal, as it can be joined together again, then put plaster on it, and put a round bar there, if you need it, and fasten it as we have said for other fractures, such as the ankle and others; put on each accident what is necessary to make it well.
of the break of the leg
that in the leg there are .ij. bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz", and the others are called "foscile"; and all other breaks are similar to those of the arm; and for this reason is the restoration as much like that of the arm as possible, and the work is all done
And if the two bones are broken together, so the leg turns around from all sides.
And if the thin bone is broken, so it turns in front.
And if the large bone is broken, so you feel great pain and see it well; and turn back to dislocate. Then make an extension, and put it equal, and tie the stars equally; but, nevertheless, it is necessary that the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, so the extension is smaller and lighter; and align according to your virtue.
And when you have finished your work, take .ij. fair reeds that purple the leg on one side and another, and be long of the leg from the knee to the foot; then wrap in .ij. leus .i. bonds above and below, and do not let the leg fall back in the center, and at this lieure cannot go down to the right or left, and so it is good; and no one administrates .i. reeds long of the leg, and if they are of reed, and put on the leg to prevent movement, and properly do they put them in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg to see if there is an abscess or another accident; if he cures until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bone of the foot there is a fracture in two places, and only in some cases does it cause pain; and it is necessary to know that there are many reasons for this pain.
And if it happens that the bones of the foot break, and you see these bones overhang one another, so place this patient flat on the ground, just as if he were going to walk, and then now put your foot on his leg, where the bones have risen, then press them down with great force until they come back into their places; then apply the plaster and stamp it on, and attach a small wooden block to the sole of the foot with 10 flat stones, then secure it in front of the foot, then when you have wrapped him up in blankets, and other things that you need.
After three or four days have passed, if the joint has healed, for you will find that the bones are even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two are broken, if you set them back in place, just as we have said for the two of the hand; then attach a piece of wood to the broken part according to its length, and make it a little wider, then attach the sole of the foot with the block that I mentioned, and draw it forward; and if there are any more than two or three that are broken, attach a piece of wood to each one according to its quantity, wrapped in a cloth of linen, and draw the block away from the sole of the foot; and let the chief of the block be under the sole of the foot, so that it is well covered.
And remember not to forget any of the other things that I said for the broken ones, whenever we have said it; and take care of each injury as it deserves.
from the fracture of the bone through the knuckle
When the woman's bone is fractured, if she is set down enlarged, then lean her to the back of the neck, and hold her there; then fill the cavity with cotton, and put in also as much hay as a pound weighs; then turn the woman over, and push the neck up and down, and then let the cotton fall, until it comes to the entrance of the cavity, and the bone returns with the hay; and when she has urinated, if the bone be pushed back, and again when she has urinated, put in the hay, and blow into it, forming it until the hay is gone from within: the fracture will then be healed; then fill it with cotton, and leave it there for some days, until it has healed.
And when the knuckle bone of the man or woman is fractured, if it is restored as we have said in the chapter on the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from that one who devotes himself to study and practice, and reads my book. For the fracture indicates many things concerning the right way to restore: hear them now.
In the vagina, when it is fractured, take a goose's neck and fill the vagina with it; then wrap clothes around it, and leave it there for .iij. jors or so, and it will be healed in hospital.
from injury with wound
For those who have injury with wound, even if it is great, such as the bone of the shoulder or arm or limb, let it be healed now, so that the healing which we have spoken about bears witness.
And if the wound heals, except for the vitriol stain, then you may start again to restore the injury at that very hour, or on that day, unless the apothecaries' potions come.
And if the potions come, then you may start again to restore the injury at that very hour, as long as the potions are calm, and don't touch them on the third day or the fourth, for you would bring bad accidents.
And if his nose is broken, it appears on the cheek when uncovered, so that you put it into place with your hand gently, with small extensions.
And if the extensions do not fit your hands so that they are equal in length, then take this iron instrument which is 2.5 inches long and 0.5 or 1 inch wide; and according to the quantity of the wound, you will use it with three or four, according to what is needed for each breaking cure; and let them be thin and a little thick, so that they do not press on the member at your opening, and let them be pointed in front, and thick in the middle:
And it is called "palainche", because the broken shoulder should be placed on the top of the apparent bone; and it is tapped once, as long as it revives, and made even one against the other. And if the break is slight, and the instrument cannot easily take hold of the bone, you must chisel the top of the bone until the instrument can have power.
And if you cannot bring the bone back together, as we have said, if you have an appropriate instrument, or scalpel or chisel, at your disposal; then use this to cut the bone in a direction that is smooth and even.
And when the jaw is brought back into place, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position. If so, then it will be moist .i. drapeil in red wine vinegar, and properly if it is in an estait; and do not put on the wound wax or any other thing where there is oil, lest it should come to putrefaction and corruption; then administer air, when you have restored the jaw, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover all around it according to the quantity of the wound, and do well in guard that the wound is not strained with the break; and many times this has been done by the foolish mirage, and has come upon the sick one or dead or corrupting none of them; and be the extractions more soft and more soft than other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a good accident will not come, since we have said, and you feel pain at the site, then it does not seem right to put on air; but wrap around, in place of air, hard drapes, and tie them. And when you see after 1 .i. or 1 .ij. day bowe at the wound, if oste that which you have put on all with wine, and i put on poultices healing wounds, as poultices tetrafarmaçon and similar.
And it is necessary that you loosen the member 2 times a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limbs are arranged in such a way that the bow can run down lightly.
And if someone hits, and he cannot hold it but it returns to its place, knowing that there are small pieces of bone, so you must open the wound with a probe, and remove all these troublesome pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula appears at the place or any other corruption, then you must treat it according to what he says in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and opened on the limb, as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and other similar bones of large limbs, do not pull it out, because many die; but leave it until it putrifies: perhaps it will heal by itself. But if you can't, then let it go.
Of the bruses that come from the sweat
We come often after the health of the broken, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a ugly thing to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps cannot do the natural work of the limbs.
Take care therefore if we come to you: if the ministering of medicines is stinky, as is the case with aloe, incense, mirr and sarcacoll, acacia and other things; so that you do not apply any of these things, or all together, and confound them with wine of stinkiness or with a lot of urine or with honey; and put them on the nodule in piles, and bind them well, and do not release them in hand for many days; and then release it, and begin again another, until the nodules are hardened; or you release it on a piece of plaster very well made; because the property of the plaster is that it hardens all the swelling on the limbs; and if the nodule has already become hardened like stone, it needs to be cut, if the flesh is removed above it, and the superfluity appears; or you take it to any barber, until it has been hardened, and cure it until it has healed.
When the fracture of the bone is healed, and there remain weak and delicate members after gaol: either because they were too tightly bound, and were not bound as they should have been; or because they had too many bindings, and could not receive the circulation of the blood to the member; or because of many wounds; or because there were too many movements, not in their proper time; or because he had much pain in his body, so was weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the corsage firm, until the sanies multiply in him; and give him a bath, and give him food and drink; then put wax on the limb, so that the wax attracts the great swelling, and moisten it often with fresh water, until the swelling passes into the limb; and return to its natural shape.
The tortured member after sickness
When the member is twisted after recovery, and the bone is broken, and the form of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish people who say that one should break the member all over again, and many fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and they bring great harm, and perhaps death; but if the nodules and the torture are fresh, then it is fitting that they be moistened with hot water, or with mild herbs that are cooked, such as ox-tail leaves, roots, and melilot, and similar things; and you make an ointment of the following: take soft muscled vismove, and confit it with ghee or oil of sesame seeds, and make an ointment thereof; or take fat figs, and grind them with hay from a stable, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And never is the bone moved by rubbing continually and for a long time with moist hands. And let there be movement in the member every hour.
And if the twisting is stiffened and hardened, as in the case of a stone, it needs to be opened with a sharp blade lightly; and put on care and study for the cure.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, if it now brings back sensitivity,
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le déplace a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;
For if the swelling increases, and by chance it is placed back in its place; for this does not come into being unless one moves it from the hour when it is swollen: many times brings forth spam and other pains; however, once this has happened, if you make the patient well, then leave him, until the abscess has been calmed down; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then move it lightly, and cure each member as the cure arrives in its place.
And I have ordered the remedies for dislocations of the shoulder joint until it is broken.
the jaw
The following is the translation of the text:
"For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die."
"When it is whole and complete, then you must take it away from the hospital quickly, without hesitation."
The following is the translation of the text:
And he holds the meat even, as long as it comes to its place.
And he brings it back gradually, especially if the two jaws are together, and with hot water and oil, as we have said. Do not delay bringing it back, however, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the sick person is closed well with a softening liquid, put it on drapings soaked in oil and wax made from rosewater and wax, then lightly blow on it;
and let the sick person sleep on their back, and have their heads between two pillows, so that they do not move to the left or right, nor strain themselves, but eat light food, as long as the pains are gone and the jaws are no longer painful.
and then, if it is necessary, cut lightly; and do not work to open the mouth for eating and drinking until the jaw is well tied and healed.
If the two jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour, and they do not return to their places, then fevers and normal heat of the body come, and by chance belly fluid comes up, and by chance pure vomit comes out.
And when you see this, then you know that it is a loss; and many times the one who has it dies, in seventeen days.
of the fork
The forceps cannot dislocate from the costochondral joint within the rib cage, and it dislocates at the end only and one can feel it well.
And the restoration is that the sick person lies down on his back, and extends his arms; and then he presses the joint with his palm, and it returns; then put the plaster and bandage on him, and binds him; and draws him back.
and the head that is next to the chest cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it dislocates at all, put on the plaster and bandage and hold him back, and order the sick person to rest as long as he is well.
and also we bring back the shoulder of the shield when it is taken away from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
That the shoulder is dislocated only for three reasons: one is that it dislocates at the joint of the socket; and the second is to the part of the jaw; and perhaps it dislocates at the top, and this happens little.
And do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the neck; and many times dislocating out of the socket towards the assembly, but perhaps it dislocates at the top, and this happens little. For those who have little money, because at these he goes to the hospital; and for those who have enough money, let him go, and come back.
And perhaps there are those who hit or break, and the shoulder of a hot wound; and thinks that it is dislocated by him.
It is therefore necessary that you test it, as long as you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And is known when it turns downward toward the shoulder, and makes a difference between the sick and the healthy shoulder, and you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find a hole at the head of the shoulder, and take off the shoulder from the neck, as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot move his hand back to its place or make any movements.
and also, if it is dislocated upward, so that it is not hidden, because you will find it clearly at the neck;
and this method of dislocation is not to be used unless it is new, or when the patient is ill.
And the manner is that the minister hold the hand of the sick person up, then put your thumb over the joint, and bring the joint to its place with force; and let the minister hold the hand up, and extend it upwards, then let it fall again; so there will be immediate relief.
And if it does not come as we have said with the hands alone later on, so it is necessary that the sick person be bathed in hot water; and let a soothing and relaxing infusion be given, such as an infusion of althaea and fenugrec and mielote in water, and be administered.
then let the sick person lie down on his back, and put a cloth of equal size over the shoulder, not too soft nor too hard, then let the minister put his foot on the cloth, and bring the hand of the sick person upwards with force;
and others ministers taint the head of disease, so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns now, and you see how to do it according to this way:
and so that you make present a.k.a. someone who is greater than the patient; and set it right down to their side, and pull up their shoulder off of the patient's body, and raise the body up, so that the patient hangs by their armpit; and other ministers drag the patient's hand downward from their stomach. And if the patient is too light, then pull them down with something heavy, and the dislocation will come back now.
And the ramming is also done in another way: and there is a long matchstick on the ground, whose tip is as large as a pistol, and it should not be too thick or too thin; Then treat the patient with fire, but let it only be a little burn, and that the hair remains long; then extend his hand on either side, forming an arch, and the joint returns to its place completely.
And if it does not return to its place for all these things that we have said, then make this cure: take .i. beam of .ij. arms long and .iiij. fingers wide, which has the head resting on it so that the arm can easily move into full dislocation, according to this form:
Then place it on the top of the head, so that it does not hurt the patient, and then put it in dislocation; and extend your arms up the long side, and place the shoulder on the beam, and the hand on the top of the arm, and then place the palm of the hand on a stone of a certain size, and let it hang down from the other side: the joint will now return.
And when it is in place, in whatever way, then make sure that you put a piece of wool yarn on the shoulder; then set the plastron with powder from the mill, with incense and alumen, all over the shoulder and around it; then remove it from dislocation and tie it to the plastron, and embrace the hand at the collar, and let it remain there.
And it is necessary that he drink a little, as long as the members are comfortable, for he will heal faster; and then he drinks more after .v. days or .vij., and moves it; and if it is firm and it does not become soft, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, it is necessary that you treat it with three punctures, as we have said above, using the cauterization before or after applying the ointment.
And if you do all this, and it does not stand after .vij. days, and the joint cannot hold up the arm or raise it forward, then you know that the nerve in the shoulder is cut, stretched, or weakened; and you know that the joint has never been put back in its place.
The dislocation that is opposite the loins, and the breasts, or behind, is made by an impulse, and stretching of the hands, and I administer another place; and treat until it is healed.
And if after healing comes greasiness to the member, and late moves, so that the patient often bathes, until that greasiness is eliminated, and returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation of the neck
Saves that the joint of the neck is dislocated in two places, and returns to its place; and if it is dislocated from all sides, most of all before and behind, and the dislocation is not properly restored, for we can see and feel it well; and dislocate according to each figure. And when you join the dislocated neck with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly open. For the joint is bent, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder from all sides.
And you must bring it back in the same way as the shoulder joint comes out, because if the shoulder joint comes out, then a great deal of grief would result from bringing it back; and by chance it cannot be brought back all at once, but especially when it is behind; so much more than other dislocations, and causes great pain, and by chance it leads to death.
And the restoration is this, as soon as it is such that you can bring it back, that you extend its hand to your 2 hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands from the palm according to the wrist joint, upside down and upside down, and press the joint into its small bones together, or at the root of its palm, until it comes back to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then return when it doubles its hand over itself, and firm at the root of the palm the wrist that is upside down.
And if it does not return to its place, then give it strong extension; and it is that each minister extends the arm, and ties it with a double long and wide cloth, so that it does not move in the extension; then turn the arm of each part, then you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth.
and when he draws his hand up to the joint, if he does not grease the joint with oil so that it may be smooth, then draw the joint firmly until it moves again.
and when it is in place, if put on dry plaster with ash of wood, and draw it firmly, and bend the arm at the shoulder of the sick person, and leave it for some days, then loosen it gradually.
And if the joint is firmly in place, if loosen the ligature, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not move well, then begin again with the plaster and the ligature, and leave it in this way for some days, until it is firmly set; then loosen it.
And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or put on the joint a layer of sheep's wool, then leave it. A day and a night, then the bone, and let it enter or bathe. and when he sweats, then rub the joint gently, then put the new one on top, and then insert or bathe it; and so do .ij. times or .iij. until it is well; and if you see it, then put it on the end of a wet cloth heated with butter, and strain it over; and it will return to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
the dislocated hand is loose, and its return is light, more so than with other joints However, it must be brought back to its place immediately after dislocation, even if the joint is swollen or there is an abscess.
And the remounting should be that you put the bad hand on a table, and extend your fingers, and make it even, so that it puts its palm over the joint, and presses it until it comes back to life.
Now therefore, you should look to see if he is in the right place; then put the patient's hand on a table for extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, put the patient's hand on a table, and you must look at the appearance of the joint. If it comes back now, it is good.
If not, then incise the abscesses gently, and let him leave like this without pain.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot set it back after a few days, then the dislocated joint will return to its place.
and will not hold any instrument in his hand as long as his hands are wet, and cannot extract anything at all: therefore know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other reason for extracting by fire except to remove the case, and perhaps there is nothing else.
And when the hand is in position, put fire on the plaster we have mentioned above, and then remove it and leave it for a while, and then loosen and leave it like that.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no crack, then the hot water, and rub until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the two hands
No time are you dislocating the joint of the hand to each side, no time at the back of the palm or at the belly;
Then are you putting the joint back in place at your fingertips until it comes back to life, then hold the head of the joint and move it towards the part where it is joined;
and then leave it for .ij. days, and then put it back in line that day; and from not moving it, as we have said, and dislocating it again that day, and making it move, and relinking it; and do this often, until it is tight,
and also do this if it is dislocated at the base of the hand, and do so as you have done before until it is well; and also do this when it is dislocated from the other side.
How to remove the skin of the foot without hurting it
When the foot or neck is dislocated, or several dislocations occur, without treatment, for fear of death, the patient will soon die.
And the signs are that the excreta come out without effort, cannot be held back, and often soften one or more limbs, or both legs or arms, or one of them.
And often the foot is mute in three parts; that which is mute at the back is called "gilboise".
The dislocation comes from childhood when the child's limbs are not properly formed, and there is no cure or healing for it altogether.
And those that come from sitting down or from blows or from similar things, the ancient ways of cure with big words don't help them at all.
But I have simplified them according to my intention, and I have made instruments in various ways.
I say that in the childhood that comes before this one, there is no cure or healing.
and also say that what comes straight to the back is what one can cure best, as I say;
and so the patient lies down flat on his back with a long and even face, and he is unstrung in such a way that he does not get bruised;
then put a 1/4 inch-wide stick in the patient's hair at the back of the head and another one at the bottom of the neck, and tie a ligature across the patient's body from one stick to the other, passing behind the ears and around the waist; then place one foot, then another on top of it, and finally wrap a strap around both feet and fasten it tightly;
and the two ministers know the ties, one at the top of the head and the other at the bottom of the neck, among the 1/4 inch-wide sticks;
and are well shut, the twine so as we have said, and the mirror puts its palms on the spine, until it recovers.
And if she does not recover with this cure, take a table of 18 inches long, and shave the side off it, and let the patient lie on one side, and pour the top of the table over the spine, then put the middle of the table on the spine. and put the mirror's palms on the other end of the table, and press firmly until he recovers his position; and if you see that it does not work, then do so at the turn of the hand.
And put that there be two fire pokers on the head of the patient with one arm, and put them one next to another, and between each poker, back to back, a palm's width of space;
and let in each beam .i. the pit, where it turns, and let the beams be firmly grounded so that they do not move, and between each two beams let there be one beam turning, because the tie turns, and let in the two turning beams .ij. small beams of a palm's length to turn the tie.
and then let the tie that is among the beams at the turner's end toward the top, and the other tie toward the pegs on the other turner, and each of the ministers turns his turner on all the tie, and the master puts the spike equal as we have said.
And when it is equal, put on dry dung with much ash, and then the stakes, and then the stake of a tablet of 1.ij. cubits long, that by purifying his place from gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then tie him with a rope as we have said, and use subtle nutrition for him until he is healthy;
and if anything comes to an end in the health of the end, so administer soft and soothing medicines with the stake that we have said before; and do not give him a piece of lead,
and there is never an appearance in the posterior spine of the back, and one thinks that this is dislocation; and this is the bone which opens, so that one must not have any presumption: by chance it might bring about death.
of the hips
come only dislocations, not otherwise; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iii. parts: inside and outside, and in front and behind; and more inside, and less in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocations inside is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is further away, and opens more the diseased knuckles than the healthy ones, and cannot double the diseased kneecap on fire; and the loins are swollen with heat from the abscess; because the head of the thigh comes from there.
And the sign of that which comes to him at the end, if this accident is opposite to those in front.
And the signs of that which comes before him, if his leg is well according to fulfillment; nevertheless, it does not double on its own, and if he has to walk, he cannot go forward, and holds back his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he steps on the heel.
And the signs of that which comes behind him, if he cannot spread his knee, or double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is soft, and the head of the thigh is at the place of the sides.
The ramening of this dislocation is that if you treat it when the dislocation is old, and it delays according to its condition, there will be no cure; and it only comes with presumption.
And in that which the dislocation is fresh, and it is of the three ways of dislocation, if you hasten to put back the joint, and it moves inward and outward, and turns to the right and left; perhaps it will come back, and there is no need for any other cure.
And if it does not come back in this way, then you must have at hand the minister who is strong, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or with one ligature that is tied to the loins; and with other ministers extend their hand above in such a way that they press their hands together, then tie the ligature over the knee; and one of the ministers ties a knot on the thigh;
and extend upwards and downwards all at once, as long as the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains in that position.
This manner of extension is so common to all four appearances, and when the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is quite good.
If not, then put the cure to his appearance. When the dislocations are in the parching, if you put the patient on his back, then place the bandage on the root of the buttock, and the line that is separated from the anus, then extend the bandage upward toward the anus, and upward toward the forceps;
then have others ministers hold his arms, and embrace the large line of the buttock that is ill, and extend it in the form of an S: now he will return to his position; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this way that we have said, then you should tie the .ij. feet of the sick together with a strong thread under the .ij. heels, and on the .ij. knees, and let the sick leg be extended more than the other two;
Then hang him by the head on a pole, and let him be 5 feet above the ground; then command 1 minister to embrace the thigh of the sick, and let others hang with the sick, who embrace the thigh firmly, for the joint will now come back soon enough.
And when the dislocation is away, let the sick person lie as we have said in that which has gibeligheid, and stretch out a thread properly on the sick leg, and on the foot also;
then put 2 torches, 1 at the head and 1 at the feet, then set a torch between the legs of the sick person in mi-forme; and set up wet drapes around, so that he does not hurt the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and let him put the dislocation in his hand.
If it returns, that is good. If not, put him on . the table, and press him in such a way as we have said in the dislocation of the shoulder, and place the patient on his sound side.
And when the dislocation is in front, extend the injured leg carefully, and according to what I have said; and let him put his pain on the sound leg, then press with the other hand, and bend towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is on the side, do not extend the injured leg backwards, nor lift it up from the ground, but rather let it fall backwards as it was when lying down, as we have said in the couch of the two hips; and: and let it rest on its face, and let the limb be extended as we have said above, and must all be pressed upon the joint to the table;
and will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then remove the splint, apply the plaster, and extract a piece of wood so that the shin does not move;
and rest for three days or four, then remove it and apply the plaster; and if you see that they are even, extract it as before, and let it be. three days; then remove it and make it walk loudly until the limbs are comfortable again.
from the dislocation of the hip joint
The dislocations come about in three ways: within, behind, and before. They do not dislocate in front.
And the signs are these: instruct the patient that he bend his leg to his knee, and if it does not touch his knee, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all these is that you make the patient sit upright, and if he can extend his leg, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your legs;
then take his knee with your palms, and draw them together, then bend the two knees with your thigh; and other ministers extend his foot, until the genoux returns to its place, and the signs are that he touches his knee gently with his leg;
and cover it with the plaster, and make sure the leg is well supported in the socket, and keep it together firmly.iij. jors ou iiij., then release it; and do not work the patient to walk, as long as the limbs are comfortable.
And if the limbs are not in place, then administer stretching firmly, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation at the heel
The heel is never dislocated, nor fully displaced inward or outward.
And the signs are such that the ankle is dislocated, and test before the part where it is dislocated:
they shall bring him if he is light, and they shall stretch him lightly to his hands when he is very much in pain.
And when it is dislocated from above, so that you make the patient lie down on his back and tie him up by his legs, above the ankle;
and then turn the foot to you with your right hand, and then to the left, twice, and then stretch it upward, and blow on the foot upward;
and do this 19 times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, it is good; but if not, then begin again the work, for it will return.
and if it cannot return in this way, then let the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put a stake firmly into the ground between his knees, and tie the sheets around him so that he does not hurt the patient.
then tie the minister's knee, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with .i. a strap, so that he lies on the edge of the foot; then extend each minister equally, and place the stake firmly between the patient's knees to keep the patient still while you work;
Then place the mirror evenly with your hand, and other ministers will dip the healthy leg in the dye, and the dislocation will return completely.
And when it is dry, put the plaster on and let it dry, and the splint form, and fasten the foot to the leg, and guard the tendons behind the ankle, so that the bonds are not too tight;
Then leave it for .ij. days or .iij., and let the splint form; then remove it on the third day and take care not to walk; then after four days, go out and walk slowly; and if he walks before that term is up, it is not yet certain that he will dislocate again.
And if abscesses come, so it is necessary that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
the two
When the two are dislocated, if it is well extended without work, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in the small of the back or in the foot, so it is necessary that you make the patient sit down on a flat surface or on a table right up, and put your foot on what opens these joints, then press with your foot form, until it comes back;
and when it is even, and there is nothing opened, then set the foot down on a table at 1.5 feet, and stretch it out, and leave it for .3 days, then remove it; and let it rest, until it is well.
of wound and dislocation together
When the wound comes with the dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times the patient has died:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to anger, do not be overbearing:
and use at the beginning of things soothing paste, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see any hope of health; and when you see hope, if I restore now the limb to its place, so that the sore comes;
and when the limb is in its place, if you apply soothing paste to the wound, and treat it with dry ointment, as it should be done;
and if there is a fracture with broken bones, and the small bones are displaced, then make what we have said about simple diseases;
and you shall not enter the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this will cost you much, according to your Creator, and for the sake of the preservation of your arm and your body. Amen.
