O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of medical knowledge together with its fulfillment, and have ended it by means of its explanations and declarations. And to me came a vision that I should complete this book with this treatise, which is part of the work by hand, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work by hand is well-established in our region and is widely known from one place to another, it is very difficult to find such a science and understanding, and there is nothing left of the knowledge of the old that hands have moved. And from this comes error and vanity, and intentions are closed and knowledge is removed.
Or I seem that I will return it to life with the organization of this healer according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and come together with the forms of the cautery instruments, and other tools of the work with the assistance of the declaration and preparation of him, as it is fitting.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our land, the art of medicine is prolonged. And it is necessary for him who deals with this to surmount in the science of anatomy, as Galileo says, as much as he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and connections and separations of the organs, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of vessels, and the movement and rest of the veins, and the place of their issue.
And for this reason, as Hippocrates says, no one is good with his hands alone, and with the work he is poor; and most of all in the art of hands.
We say to you in the introduction of this book that he who is not familiar with the things mentioned above should be careful not to err and not to deceive people; for I have repeatedly seen many of those who meddle in this science, who abandon themselves to it and to their experiments.
For I have seen a foolish man who cut out an abscess from the scrofula of a woman's neck, and he cut into the arteries of her neck; so much blood flowed that the woman died in his hands.
And I have seen another foolish man who tried to extract a stone from the bladder of a man who was very ill; but he brought out with him a piece of the bladder and killed the man in three days.
And I have also seen it used to extract a stone from a man who was very ill; and I have seen the state of the patient and the size of the stone; and if one tries to extract it, he will surely die.
And see here another example of a patient who was treated. I. one duke of our land, who had his leg broken, and with the breaking there was also a wound. The doctor, ignorant of medicine, pulled out the break from over the wound with great care, leaving no scar behind, and finished so; and ordered him not to remove it at all; and delayed it so that the leg completely healed, but the toe was lost in vain.
I was called to go to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I had dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But every way of corruption was confirmed in him or in the member, and he could not be cured; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until all the members were lost.
And see here another example of a patient who was treated. I. one duke, who had an abscess that burst open; and then inflamed because of the badness of his lordship.
For chancre, when it is purifying from melancholic humor, there comes none but if one touches it with iron if it isn't in the right place where one can take off all what is corrupted.
And because you, fine young men, it is necessary that you know that work of the hands is divided into 2.1 divisions: that is to say, work where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each of them in this book where there is fear and danger.
For because it is necessary that you guard yourselves, so that the foolish man cannot speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons with caution, and undertake your tasks lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are loosed; and refuse those diseases that cause grief health; and despise those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien warns against this advice: "Do not take up the treatment of a bad illness unless you are called to do so out of pure foolishness."
I have devised this treatise according to .iij. chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medicine, and the subsequent chapters are ordered from top to bottom regarding the head, arms, torso, legs, and feet; as well as forms of instruments, tools for cauterization, and anything else necessary in this work.
The second chapter is about tailoring and sewing, piercings, leeches, and extractions of arrows, and similar things; it is also ordered and provides forms for instruments.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Thus, in order to remember the work, it is necessary that I speak about the quality of help and the harm of each color.
I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtlest science, and its responses are hidden; many wise men would speak about it, and they would agree with it; and I am short of words, because I reduce the length.
I say that fire is a universal aid to all colors, except for two colors: namely, hot matter and dry matter.
In hot and dry complexions together matter, some devise and say that cautery is great help; and the other say the contrary: that cautery is not worth for disease that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire so is hot, and must not be used for a hot disease by heat, nor by dryness; and said those who said the contrary that cautery does great help to a hot and dry disease that comes in the course of men's bodies. For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have never found this by experience.
And any path, does not mix with it but he who has experienced it and who knows by long practice the cauterizing paste of the treatments, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their remedies and the space of time; we have no fear of other complexions, however much they are cold and moist. And all this will come together and agree with the cauterizing.
And know, children, that a fire cautery together is better than the extractions of remedies, and of greater goodness than an ardently burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and comes not further than to the member which is burned, and does no harm to another member that way.
Burning medicines come from one member to another by distance, and bring about disease in the member through healing; and perhaps it causes harm.
Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not cause heat, unless there is an excess of it.
And I have found this by experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for that reason I ask forgiveness of the length of speech, for it does not please me that I should reveal the secret of fire, and the quality of the work, how it defeats diseases of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates in his proof; so receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that these cauterizations should be made at what times, and they are to be prayed over.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all times, since the resulting harm caused by the aid of cauterization; and especially, the cauterization is for necessary pains without delay that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And I do not think at all, son, as they do so foolishly; for in a disease that is healed by cauterization, there is no return; and it serves thus: but it is not like what they believe, since cauterization is nothing more than medicine that changes the appearance of the humors that cause pain, and it is effective in such a way that it moves faster than medicine, and for its virtue and excellence.
And it is possible that the disease will not come again according to the appearance of the illness and its place and its virtue; and the excesses are joined in it by the acquisition of meat and similar things, unless cauterization is administered at the right time or there is no excess or moisture, as with cauterization of the inside for pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return; but that happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut. And yet most people do not understand that the cauterization of wounds is a part of medicine, and that is clear; but they do not believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intention is wrong, and it is true that cauterization is a part of medicine because when we have administered ways to treat diseases in any disease and they are not worth it, then we administer cauterization, and it is worth it.
The old people said that cauterization instruments made of gold are gentler than those made of iron, and they only said this because of the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that the heat of the cauterization does not cause scaring, but that is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that in some people it does; and gold cauterization instruments are worth more than those made of iron, as they say.
And yet when you heat an instrument made of gold, you are not like when it is heated by the color of gold, and it often cools down; and if you heat it too much, then it goes out to the fire; and so there is enough impediment.
And for this we use our fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or you should read this chapter to the end, because the path may be lighter to find.
and a olive oil cautery
This text describes the use of an olive oil cautery for certain head injuries and illnesses. It mentions that it can help with symptoms like headache, dizziness, and pain in the teeth and ears, among other issues related to cold and humidity.
The form of this cautery is that the sick person should be purged by a solitive medicine, speaking of the head iiij., according to what the virtues and the ease and the custom of the sick person can bear; and then do again the head of the sick.
And then put him to sit with his hands between your two palms; and place the roots of his two fingers on the root of his neck between his.ij. hairs; and let those two palms come together, if it bleeds from one side, then heat up the cautery which is called "oliver", of which this is the form:
And place it on the ink spot, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little in turning; then release your hand gradually, and look at the bone that you see, and if you do not see it, then start the cautery again as long as you see the bone, as I told you; after take 1. poc of string, and put it in woolen cotton, and place it on the spot, and leave it 1.iiij.; after put wet cotton inside the yarn; and let it be until it is hot to the bone; after cure the wound with an ointment which is called "tetrafarmacon", as long as it is healthy.
And say the ancient, that when the wound is left open longer, the more it purifies; and for this reason let it be open.
And none of these said that one must let the cautery burn so much of the bone that it is burned, and then put back what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
And the other said that one must let the cautery burn so high, and press it so hard that bone comes out as wide as a fawn's foot, so that the humors come out; and one must let the wound remain open for a long time; after which one must cure and patch up.
And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem good to me in all cases except where there is doubt; and it seems to me that I should let it burn; for the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we see in other limbs; and even more so when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first impression of cauterization is gentler and milder for me, and of this I make use in a general way to save life.
of the old pain of the head
When all the head comes to pain that lasts long, then must use herbs and pills called "cochier" and purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one does the fire cautery that we have said above, and it does not help.
Take care that the patient's head is of strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then apply the fire cautery as little as we have said above.
After making the fire cautery on each corner of the head as we have said above, and making the fire cautery at the base which is called "vasselz"; and this is done because one puts the ventouses; and align your hand so that you do not see it up to the bone: The patient feels too much pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary that the fire cauterys of the horns be more subtle than those by which one cauterizes the base of the head, and this is the form:
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else: When in one part of the head there is sudden pain, and it extends to the oil, and the head is cleaned by medicines that are good for all diseases, and other cures have been made as I said in the division of diseases, and none of them help: then make cauterization according to .ij. ways, that is to say, with water medicine and fire.
When there is sudden pain in one part of the head, and it extends to the oil, and the head is cleaned by medicines that are good for all diseases, and other cures have been made as I said in the division of diseases, and none of them help: then make a water medicine cauterization, take out a piece of bark and peel 1.1/2 pieces, and then apply it to the temple or pain in a way that you can place the bark on the skin; and when it has been placed, let it rest firmly and leave it like this for 10 hours; and then remove it and treat with fresh garlic, and leave the wound like this for 1.5 days or 2; then put cotton dipped in butter on it as long as it is possible to do so.
After the ointment treatment as long as it is healthy; and if you see that any of the medicines I have written or alternative treatments of burning medicines are needed.
The fire cautery: If done according to this method, heat the cauterizing instrument as follows:
And is called "clos" for this that the chief is made in the form of a clo or he has there .i. poc de corbeure, and is middle at a small appearance; and puts it on the painful place, and takes your hand and turns the fire a little lightly, as much as the half of the flesh of the cure is burned; and lets your hand that the artery doesn't burn, which is defuers, and runs an abundance of blood.
After met cotton in aw of sil, and puts it on the place for 1:3; then I moil cotton in oil, and then treat the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery which is called "cultellare", on all its tip, and keep yourself from capping the artery in this headache which is not old.
of headache
When you treat headache as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and does not benefit, and see that the cautery ahead speaks of medicine and of fire does not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called  "cultellare" until it is white; and so write on the painful place a line of half an inch long, and takes your hand once, and pulls it out so that you do not cap the artery and that you come back; and keep yourself from the mandible that mutates when one bites, and the neck does not move that comes with the mutation and spasms of blood from the artery when it is capped, or capping has a great fear and more often to those who do not know and study and test; and leave the work on its own way; but I will tell you how you hold back pain when the artery is capped, and I will show you in this book where it comes.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the head as well as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the extract of the artery with the cautery that has .ij. tools; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
from pain in the ears due to cold
When pain in the ears occurs due to cold, and one has applied the remedies we mentioned in the previous chapter, and the pain does not subside, then heat this poins cautery, from which comes this form:
After heating the poins cautery, apply it all around the affected ear, or around both ears where the pain is located, and move it away from the root of the ear, then have 10 points around each ear; after treating the area until it is healed.
of the mouth torture
Torture which must be cured by cauterization is only effective for those that move with flame, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not apply cauterization to similar things which come from scabs and filth of the sea.
When you treat this torture of the mouth that moves with flame from sea scabs and swishing, and the third should not be used - one at the root of the ear, another a little further down the temple, and the third between the lips; and place the cauterization in the healthy part, and let the half of the burn be consumed; and this is the form of the cauterization:
And is the appearance of the scalpel that we have put before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the blade be a little thicker; after he has cured the place so as to make it healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one where it is called "vesselz", just as we have said before, and also a cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and treat in this way as we have said before.
Of argyle
For this disease, give the patient great and powerful pills to take for the brain; then, after, treat the head of the sick person with the mustard paste that we have described above; and here is how to make the fire cauterization: if you do so as I said.
If it is cured in this way, it is good; and if it is not, then make three cauterizations of the middle part of the head descending to the collarbone, leaving space between each cauterization of about one inch; and treat as we have said before, and if he stirs, and the patient suffers, then make one cauterization in the middle; and if it is necessary, then 2 others on the two horns, and treat as long as it is healthy; and let the cauterizations that are called "olive" be made as we have said before.
of the cold head de la froidor dou chief
of epilepsy
of epilepsy
And if it is an infant that the father cannot bear, he makes gargarism and mastication of the brain often with bones; afterwards he takes it in his mouth, and makes the fire cautery according to what we have said before, and the fire cautery on the neck, and on each horn; and if the patient is outside and suffering, he makes the fire cautery as I said to that who had paralysis and softening of the spine and of the neck, and let the cauterize be olive according to the way that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, he makes a subtle fire cautery according to this manner:
When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupting moistures and thick pus, then the half fire cautery as we have said to that who had paralysis:
And if due to melancholy there is a declining excess towards melancholy, and the patient's spine is moist, then he drinks something so that his brain is purified, according to what it is before in the division:
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
If you see cauterize the head by making several points all over the cautery. This method of cauterizing dries the skull gradually; and then put cotton wet with butter and grease of fish-oil on it.
of the eyes When the signs come first as eyes by the things that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient thing that purifies the head, and keeps away moisture, and makes him sweat or bath several times while fasting.
Apres he commands him to raise his head, and he makes a fire cautery on the head, and he makes .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if he loses his hair from the top, or all together, one cautery being on the top; and he covers all the cauterizations with the vein and arteries that are behind the ear, and the cauterization is long according to the width of the temple; and you guard against the escape of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, so he stops it with his power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision how to stop the fire; and never is a cautery made or stopped from behind the 2 bones.
The two courses of tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or deplete the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outwardly; and one can see that it is cold and phlegmatic excesses, therefore he does the fire cautery that I have said at the beginning of the awen descending to the eyes: 1 fire cautery on the head, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries where they are detached from the bones; and if it is needed more, so the cauterize carefully above the cicatrice a little cautery.
to stop the tears from flowing through the eyes.
when you have completed the medicine as we have described in the division, and it does not benefit, then done so to drink bad water for illness .iij. times; after that he takes off the head, and makes cauterization with olive cautery; and makes .ij. cauterizations of the cautery called "clavilis" on the .ij. fingers, a little bit of hair; and guard against the artery so that you do not cover it up. And this is the form of the cauterization which is called "clavilis":
When the oil paper is softened with illness and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called "olive"; from which this is the form:
And if you see this, make 18 cauterizations on the 18 wounds as long as the hair is; and do not let the hand rest except that as much of the paper as the third part is burned, according to the way I have said.
And this hair that points to oil For no time does the hair of the oil become converted to the pardern, and takes the oil, and it makes on cauterizations according to .ij. ways: that is to say of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and even, then put the patient on your side; sign on the paper of the hairs a figure that is also like the seed of the mirth, and is the beginning of the sign to remove the hairs; then put cotton wet in the glue of the egg and muskellunge of the persillion on the oil, and heat up the cautery where there is this form:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have signed little by little several times, let the wound be blackened at the place; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs rise to the point of the oil; then lift your hand up, and leave it like this .ii. days, then put cotton wet in butter as long as it is heated; after the cure with ointment until it is well.
And after these come the hairs, and the paper is softened then start again the fire on this same place, as you have done first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and even, and do not touch the hairs with the oil.
The medical fire cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make on paper the shape of the seed of mirth; then take French soap and hot water, each one a 1/4, and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool down, then pour over the shape that you have made like the seed of mirth, and put on the paper of the hairs; and if the patient has only pain in one oil, then act in 1/4 also, and in both; and dip cotton wet in egg glue; and the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. If you have this for a long time, keep the medicine to your mouth. When the mordication has passed, lift up the jaw, and test if the paper is raised as if it were lifted by fire or incision; and if so, well done. But if not, put more medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your hairs are long and even, and then apply cotton wetted in oil to the sore places for a while, after which cure the place of the sore which is called 'dyafenis' and others, until it is well.
And if you must take care of your jaw by great effort so that it does not fail to respond to the medicine at the hairs. And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then start again the medicine on that place which has been softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; after which cure until it is well; and this is the form of the fuelle of the mirte:
And know that the hairs of men are diverse in length and shortness, and according to this your constraints; and do not reply to the right path for him whose study is this art.
about the treatment of fistulas by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you use cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and dip a cotton ball or some peasepod juice in oil onto the scalp; then heat the cautery until it is red hot; and apply it to the scalp as if it were a feather, together with the tip being pointed at the scalp; either way, the tip should be placed on the scalp for your treatment.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and treat the porridge and dry it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and apply hot oil to it. Then hold the cautery close to the scalp, and keep your hand still with the cautery at the part of the head where the oil is applied; and put the cautery in the oil, and let it corrode.
If you come to cauterize up to the bone, that would be good. If not, start cauterizing again once more, and if you need it, let it be .iii. days; after put it on cotton soaked in lye, and cure the wound until it is healthy, and if .xl. days pass without being healthy, put on medicine with corrosive water until the bone is exposed; then treat according to that which has come to its chapter.
And I have a way of cauterizing a fistula that no one of the ancients has spoken of. Listen to a fistula, and pierce the place; then put in the piercing 1. a very fine needle, so that it is this form: and I make it in the quantity of 1.Z. of mercury; and hold your hand firmly where the needle is, so that the melted drops do not run to their oil; and you put on the oil cotton soaked in wine or water: the drop should go into the fistula, and heal with amazing health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to cut the nail, and bring back the fistula to the root of the nail according to what it is necessary in its own place.
of the crevasses in the lips Mouths of times have had crevasses in the lips, which are called “hair”, and sometimes in the lips of children.
When you treat these crevasses with what we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then heat it with a small fire-caulter according to this form:
And place it carefully in those crevasses until it comes out clean; after the cure, wash it with ointment until it is well.
from the abscess of the throat
When the abscess comes to the root of the throat or the palate or the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and become swollen and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it does no good: then you must have 1.1. a fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the bottle or hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes to the root of it, and do so behind it; and make this once or twice, after the cure as we have said in cures, until it is well; and if he is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the root and remove the corrumpted bone, according to what you will find it in his chapter.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the sick person in your lap; after heat the cautery so that its form will come out as described above in order to place a chain on the tooth; and place the cautery hot inside, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after remove your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will; after fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and leave it for an hour and wash it thoroughly.
And so it is said that those who were moving should be restrained, and the gums softened, and the moisture dried up.
of the teeth pain
When tooth pain comes from cold, either because there is cold in the mouth, or vision, and medicines do not help, then there should be a remedy according to two ways: and fire cautery and butter cautery.
For butter cautery, if it is so that you squeeze butter from a cow's udder, and the tip in an iron or gold knife; after take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a needle, and soak it in butter, and put it on the aching tooth carefully so that it cools down; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and you see if the wool and cotton soaked in butter freeze, and put it on the tooth, and put on 1 gold knife as hot as fire comes to the tip of the tooth.
The fire cautery should be used if the patient has a toothache that is so great that the fire does not come into their mouth; after heating the cautery, which will take this form later on, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this frequently, for the pain will get worse the next day or the day after. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good butter in anticipation of this cautery, and then swallows it; and here is the form of the cautery:
For scrofula, when the scabs are of cold sweat and do not submit to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery that comes from a goat's testicles, and has 1.3 openings for the fumes to rise to the cautery on the other side; and place the cautery hot on the abscess once, or as much as is needed to come to the root of the abscess; and leave it in this state for 1.3 days; and put cotton wet with oil onto it until the burning is over; then cure the wound with ochre and tent until it is healed.
When the moistures prevail over the skin and even more so when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be voided first by means of restorative medicines; after that, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and keep back from coming up to the throat, and do not be afraid of burning, but only a little. After that, another cautery, made at the joint of the neck with the head of the spine, and let these cauteries, which are called "clavicles," give us the form in front; and cure the place as we have said before until it is well.
of the toast When all and disease of the skin are cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an old disease, then you make iij cauteries on the forelock in the vjs; and another cautery emmi between iij mamilles; and let these cauteries, which are called "clavicles," give us the form as it is said before.
And if you see, make a cautery by piercing all the cauteries which are called  "poins," of which the form is here in front in the disease of the ears; and let the poinss continue to xxx., or enthor. After that, cure the place according to what is said before, and let the cauteries be iii rains according to this form:
And so are the fire cautery lighter, for the same you do it.iij. to kop.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, lie down on your back and stomach; then take the hammer that is in two parts at the top, with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery that has .iij. nails; there is the form:
and cauterize the wound as long as it pierces to the cost, and the figure of the cauterization comes together with the cautery; iiij. cauteres; and for this reason is made the cauterization with the cautery which has .iij. nerves, for the figure of the cauterization are placed cauterizes; and are the nerves according to the subtility of a tent and it is the form of the cautery which has .iij.
And never is placed on this 1 nerve for there are 8 cauterizes.
After put on the fire with a small rod; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs by long time until they are well comfortable.
And if it is dislocated above, let a thing come out of it, then make cauterize on the thickness of the cautery clavicle, or many cauterizes in puncturing. For the jointure is closed, and is bone the moisture and it is healed the diseases.
To cure weeping
To cure weeping they used to say one should make cauterization with roots of aristeology, and in this way: take a root of aristeology that is long, the longest you can find, dry it, and also make it as big and as long as your two hands; then soak it in oil, hold it over the fire, and cauterize.i. cauterize between the chin and the collarbone, and .ij. small cauterizations a little down in the part that is under the beard; and .ij. cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, going down a little; and .i. cauterization under the nipple, and .i. another over the stomach, and .i. between the shoulders, and .ij. cauterizations between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but open it widely as when you are smelling something.
And no ancient one said that any man should use a fire cauterization similar to a razor, and scuff it and put it between the ribs, as long as it comes to the aposteme of the liver; and he jumps because of the pain, just as we have said in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is doubt and fear that the patient now dies, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
After the seven have been boiled as much as the sound can be heard from the other side, and then carefully cut the cauterization, and so on until seven. And if you see, cauterize to the whole sound with the other one said before. After the cure has been infected for a long time, and that's all the other cures in front of it.
of dropsy
For the fire cautery is not good for dropsy, except in the way that is called "asclytes." When you cure it according to the ways we have said in the divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you do 22 cauterizations around the body, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back along the spine, and one at the breast; and let the cauterizations be well placed near the cure.
After leaving the fire cautery to go for a long time without cure, and not leaving the cure of the patient after the cauterization, and health would hurry, and both the 17 intentions would be achieved with the help of God.
The form of cautery for the abdomen is the claw that we have in front of us to grasp; and what is for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is before placed.
of swelling of the flesh When the flesh is swollen on him who is ydropical, and is pale yellow in color, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and middle fingers; and do not turn your hand over with the cautery so often. And do not go too deep, lest the pale yellow color be forced out, and the cautery be done according to this form:
After doing so on the legs, do 2 cauteries on each leg at the end of the toenail; and let the cautery be long, one in front of the knee and the other behind it, leaving the cauterized place covered for a while, lest the blood come; then cure the others as we have said.
of the house
For the remedy for an upset stomach due to cold and moisture, as long as the digestive virtue that is in the stomach and in the intestines remains whole, and cannot be cured by any methods of cure; and you will see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, so do it. i.iij. remedies around the navel gently to all i.iij. remedies with a small key, and ii.iiij. remedies on the hips
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, do a cauterization on the wrist, and i.iij. cauterizations on each finger, and ii.iiij. small cauterizations on the stomach. For the remedy is profitable when there is good assistance.
for the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are or fundament, or one or more, and are old and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit if you make cauterizations: .iij. on the spine of the back, that which is all out is seared little by little in triangulating, and 1.i cautery is seared on the buttocks;
When the hemorrhoids are or fundament, or one or more, and are old and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit if you make cauterizations: 1.iii On the spine of the back, that which is all out is seared little by little in triangulating, and i.i cautery is seared on the buttocks; if you think that his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swell the face, then the face receives i.i great cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse to all cauterize clavels; and let the cautery be open for a long time. After cure the place until it is healthy.
of the charnality which is called "thelul"
When you copes althelul, if you heat the cautery which seems 1.i sharp, and then put it all burn on cel althelul copeit; and I leave so long your hand that the cauterizes come to the birth of the vein, from where li sans cort; do this once or 1.j., and if there is mout d'althelul, if you cauterize each one as we have said; after the curings of profitable oilmens until they are healthy; and if you cauterizes with a large cautery on alchatim, it will have more aid.
of wound badly treated
When the patient cannot endure a cut or an opening, which we will describe in its place, then comes a disease that cannot be cured except by fire.
When a fistula comes and causes pus and moisture corruption, then provide an entire tent of subtle remedy, and be careful that you know the full extent of it. Then heat the fire which seems sharp, and pour it into the fistula according to the amount that the tent has entered, and begin the fire again as long as the corrupt and corroded flesh is burned, once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of the tent; and be careful of the nerves which are involved, and do not do this but in a bare place, and know that it is not permanent; then cure the place until it is completely healed, and if the matter has been ostended long, then know that the fistula is threefold, and the bone is corroded at its root; and thus as one of these which we will describe in its place.
of kidney disease When the pain of frost comes with heavy wind and does not take the form of a woman, then it is necessary that you make a fire cautery on either side with the clavicle cautery that we have mentioned above; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be 1.3 cauterizations in line, and greater aid will result.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak due to frost and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you should make a fire cautery in the upper part on either side of the bladder, where the hair grows at the base of the penis, and each should be as long as one finger; and make a fire cautery on either side of the back, where there are 2.1 (two with one added) cauterizations, and each should be as long as one finger; and make fire cauterizations clavicle-style according to the form described above.
of the uterus Here is the translation of the text:
For the buttocks
For the viscous moisture descends to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints are found out by touch, so that you cauterize the patient on the hip socket with.i. a ring-shaped cautery, and mark in front of the joint around the socket as it comes back, so that the socket is within the circle; and if so, then the cauterization is like those with which we have cauterized the stomach.
And if this cauterization is not present, then make.iij. cauterizes with large olive-shaped blisters, and let the cauterization be as perfect as all the others; and the treatment until it is healthy.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of the large humors with fetid pills, or other bad-looking pills.
After the fire cautery, and the method of the fire cautery is according to 2.3 methods: that is to say together with fiery medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to mout de manners, from which these are such: you make the cauterization on the hip joint according to this form, and you make a good depth and a wide one, and between each cauterization there is the thickness of a thumb, and it is olive-colored; never do you make cauterization in the middle on the top of the hip, for there are 3 according to this form:
And if you see, if the cauterization with the ring of fire that we have just mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the hip; but do it in a way that the ring includes all the hip, and all the space of the knee is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a deux dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».
And this is the manner in which one proceeds in sciatica, when the pain lies in the thigh, and does not reach as far as the leg. And if it reaches only as far as the thigh and leg, then one makes 11 cauterizations, where the patient says that the pain lies, and 3 on the ankle; two on the left side, and one cauterization cutaneous, or one burning the thickness of the callus; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the foot or near the instep, then cauterize where he feels the pain. 11 points or 13 at the cautery which is called "point."
And I myself have seen many who made a cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and left it so that the leg was completely drawn in, and the foot too, and it became pierced and corrupted all the toes; after which a solution of the abdomen gave them death.
And if the pain is in three parts together, make cauterization on one and on the other, according to this manner.// And the sages said in the cauterization of the hinch, of which this is the manner, make a single spike of iron and let it be as large as a thumb nail or a little less, and place it between the joints and from one joint to another space the quantity of an egg; and may the joints be covered on both sides, and also be like thumbs, and each have a single well-made spike; and this is the form:
And be heated until it is all red and dry, and then place it on top of the box of the sore hinch, and turn it around on its back side; and make cauterization one time with a single spike and leave it three days; and then make an ointment of grease, and keep the open wound long; after the cure with ointment until it is well.
Albucasis says that we use little of this cauterization because of the danger of its regurgitation, and few people use it; however, this is a good cauterization that one can bear, and leave it where it afflicts.
of the pain of two
When pain comes to the back, or by catching, or by impact, or by too much discharge, or by the appearance of expanded cold material, no one of these appearances is worth remedies unless it is that which comes from the infusion of cold material.
It is necessary that the patient take three lines of ointment on his back, where the pain is, and in each line use a different remedy according to its virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and do the remedies according to the one called "poins"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 remedies with the clove ointment according to this form:
Many times this disease attacks small children, and the signs of its onset are that they become stiff when they wake up, and they cry; and you find on the last spine of the back and on the others the appearance that comes on the first one.
When you see this person and you treat them, then cauterize them with fire according to this form.
When you see this person and you treat them, then cauterize each part of the spine evenly. And if you see a joint, then cauterize it with fire sharp and hot, one line or two lines apart, keeping the points close to each other. After treating the area, make sure to take care that you do not use cauterization in gibbosity which is in the marrow of the nerve.
of the joints' pain
When pain in the joints is due to moisture which spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes from the foot, which is properly called "podagra," and when it is due to cold and cannot be cured with medicines, then it can be cured with fire in this way: Make fire of the cauterizer at the joint of the foot, and use olive fire according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you should grasp the face of the foot, make a fire cautery on all fire cauteries which are called "point". And if pains come up to the genitals and other joints, and this happens many times, make a fire cautery on each knee. iij. cauteres or iiij. of each part, to all olive fire cautery; and if you need more, do more, but don't hold your hand firmly except that the flesh of the heel is burned.
And if pains descend up to the knees and back, administer the cautery we have spoken of in our chapter. And if pains are in the hands, make iij. lines around the fingernail; and if there remains a point of pain in the two, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and govern well the patient and apply medicines. For if you govern him well and you bring forth the flux, he will be healed with the help of God.
of the rupture of the syrup
When the rupture comes in the anger, and the bulge goes down to the crotch and it is new, it is convenient that when you see him being healed, he does not have to drink anything; and he uses things that leave his belly, so that the end descends from his belly; then make him sit down on his back between your hands, and command him to wash his beard as long as the bulge is repaired, and bring it to your feet, and sign of above the spine on the bone of the hand, and at all a sign which is similar to half a circle on top of the body; then heat the cautery in which this form is:
As long as it is white and has no feeling. Then return the balls to their place; and the minister will put her hand on so that they do not turn back; and work well the legs of the patient, and put a cussin and a sergeant on the legs, and another one on the foot that she holds the hands; then put the cautery on the mark to your whole hand, and hold it steady and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, keep trying again until you come to the bone; and take care carefully so that the ball does not move when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or another evil.
And know that when you come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their measure, and also of great people as large according to their measure; then 3 days cure the place with the butter cautery until the burning is over; then treat with other ointments until he is well, and lay the patient for 10 days on his back until the wound is well sewn; and it is necessary that his nurses be left for a long time, so that the ball does not move when he wants to go to bed.
And after 10 days, when he wants to get up, he is given a well-made faixe, and he spends another 10 days; and he has good rest, that he works little and takes care not to drink too much and eat too much, and not to drink too much ale; and when he follows this teaching, he will be completely healed. And I will say here after the cure of your haircut in his chapître. from a tear of the belly
When tears come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, do so .j. cautery on the cautery according to its quantity, and let him be burned on the third; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the elders said that it should be cauterized at the cautery in .iij. angles according to this form:
but the first sign is the place of the navel and make a line on the width of the tear, and another on either side, and with your hand press down very hard on all the cauterized area. But the first cauterization is lighter and more painful.
from old pain in any member Here is the translation of the text:
Here is the first sentence translated:
Here is the translation of the text:
And if there is any pain anywhere, it becomes obvious, so that you must cauterize all of these places we have spoken about with the fire cautery: one in the navel, two on the spine of the neck, three on the spine at the back, one great one on the skull, and another delightful one; three on the shoulders, and two on the blades of the hands, and two on the knuckles of the hands, and two in the pits of the hands; and guard yourself against those that are under the feet, so that you do not burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the hand, or another one on the bone of the stomach, or another one on the liver.
And know that the more cauterizations I make, the greater the help and benefit; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as much as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already very corrupt. And know that the cauterizations should be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons. After this, cure him with flour and other cures until he is healed.
de enfleurer
When inflammation arises in any member and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not yet healed, then do fire cauterization on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauterization be a little bit within the skin of the cure; then treat with ointments until it is healed. And never do cauterization and hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that silences the member, and so if it is swollen; and yet, no one interferes if he does not know the members and exits of the moving nerves.
I cannot provide a translation for this text as it contains unknown or obscure characters. Please resubmit the text with proper spelling and punctuation for an accurate translation.
When the disease called "albaras" is alleviated, and the medicine is worthless, then cauterize with a small fire according to the quantity of the skin of the cure until the blotch is opened, and change its color; then treat with flour of times and lentils, with oil of roses and leaves of plantain, and blood of lamb and blood of almond, each in part; and mix them together, and bind them with a cloth, and apply to the affected area until it is healed.
Here is the translation:
When the chancre begins to appear, and you have stopped your vision, if the cauterization is done at the cautery that seems 1. i. a circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And anyway, the safe people say that cauterization should also be done in the middle of the chancre; and anyway, this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will become an ulcer and rotten, and I have never wanted to do so once; and a more right thing is that it be cauterized around, at the cautery that is called "circle", as we said in many cauteries.
of the inflammation that cannot die
When someone has a disease that is called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to die, or because of the surplus of blood in them, or because of their old age and little blood, or because of their strength; and you see her hurry to die: then cauterize her from top to bottom with very small cauterizes by piercing; then leave her like that. Because she will hurry to die.
And if you pierce her all over with the cautery, let the cautery be very hot of which we said above.
And hold your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauterization has been fully applied, and make such cauterizations that the patient feels a distant pain in some way so that the course of corruption is chosen. After the cure as long as he is perfectly healthy.
The cure with fire by iron
Another form of disease that is called "corrodens", and is nothing other than a putrefaction of the limbs, because it corroded the limbs just as fire dries them out. If you see this disease in its beginning, which can be treated with fire, then heat the cauterizations carefully, big and small, according to what is suitable for the place where the disease is; after having cauterized all sides until the corruption has been completely eliminated, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corroded is healed. Then leave it for .iij. days, and put oil on the cauterized places so that the scabs caused by the fire are healed, and all the corruption. After the oil cure, if health does not return after .iij. days, then start the cauterization again on what is delayed corroded. And this putrefaction is never cured with medicinal water instead of fire cauterization; but certainly fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already spoken about the cure of medicinal water in the division: take it when you need it.
Of porrones that come from the root
Mouth times has come that the pies by default do not bring a disease which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large, healthy thing that bleeds the foot. And the cauterization of this disease is in 2 ways: that is, fire cauterization, and water cauterization. Fire cauterization is that you heat the cautery as much as a penknife is heated, to be made of good iron according to what it can poke the nail from all sides, and that there are narrow margins; then put it hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and leave it so for 3 days until it begins to move by corruption; then make an ointment of wild thyme crushed with water, and leave the ointment on all night, and let the nails dry up and will be pulled out from their roots. Then cure the wound by poultice as long as it is healthy.
And if the body is converted by default, and many times comes and goes in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you bring fire cauterization; and there are 2 ways: take a piece of iron or metal, or a penknife, and put it on the nail and the splint, which means to burn warts; and put the piece on it so that it burns all around, then put some hot water on it, and firmly hold your hand, and turn your hand so that the margin of the piece comes to the root of the nail, and can find the warm water a deep path up to the root; and let the patient feel a little of the burning of the warm water for an hour; then leave it, and it will be pulled out all its roots. Thus do one after another, until you have eliminated all those who are in the body, then cure the wounds by poultices that generate heat.
the cure of trembling
iiij. cauteres or iv. on the spine of the back, i. between each spine; and i. cautery on the foot, and i. on the stomach with the olive cautery. This will stop the shivering, and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
pustules that emit a pungent odor
No times appear by defects in the body, or pus-filled pustules, that come from large corrupt matters. It is fitting that at the first appearance of them a fire cautery be made on each head of the pustule: a subtle fire from myrtle wood, which is held to the fire, or from the root of arista long, or with the lens-shaped cautery. And no times are these cauterized at the beginning when they first appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow pus any further, but are broken up; and they are healed, but it is fitting that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
When an artery has been cut off Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.
And so, when it is at hand, if you quickly place your index finger on the vein wound, and carefully strain out as much blood as possible with your other finger, then spurt a little or much olive oil onto the injury and the area around it, until it is all red; then grasp it firmly, either large or small amount according to the wound, taking care to place the fire cautery where you hold your finger, and keep it in place while the blood stops.
And if your finger slips when you hold it over the vein, and the fire cautery goes out, take another fire cautery that is hot from the fire quickly.
And do not cease to make one after the other as long as the blood stops; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is delicate, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when the artery has been cut short, it cannot be well stopped unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction if it has not yet been treated, or by firmly tying a thread, or by medicines put on it which have the power to stop blood; and bind it and strain it well.
Who will administer a strict treatment of bandages or burning things on it, or other similar things, if he does not benefit from it, then let him try no more.
And if this happens to no one and he has neither seen nor heard of medicine, then put your second finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly tighten it over the wound and the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it often with cold water until the blood is frozen and thickened and hardened; and make incisions in front of that which needs cauterization and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter all the diseases for which fire cauterization, burning medicine, and the tools, shapes, and techniques of cauterization are used; and I have put that chapter at the beginning, and I will go on to this chapter by the same means as we went through the first.
And so, as I begin to teach you this, it is necessary, O son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason greater caution is necessary.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you that you do not undertake folly. For such ways of people come in cures. If they come from those who have so much pride with their disease that they die easily because of the foolishness of their illness, and because of its great severity; then one should be afraid of them. And of these I have who give you your sense, and say: "Wait, I am going to die"; and the disease is deceitful. It is not good that you consent to those who come to you who have this way, but put more great confidence in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but carefully from whom you are certain, and from whom you could have taken it and used prophecy and indication in the cures of your patients so that salvation may be converted; and he who will help you to obtain a good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Three times blessed son, may our lords give you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish for it, may the holy inspiration of his hand come upon you, amen.
I have ordered you this ointment in talking about ointments, according to that which is before you, the ointment of the cauterization, that I have devised from the head all the way down to the feet, so that you may find it more easily that which you will need.
The head full of water
I know that this disease often comes to infants, and when the baby cries it is because the head is too tight; and never comes from any other cause that we do not know.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen die quickly; and for this reason it seems to me that I should rather delay the use of this potion in certain remedies.
And I saw a child whose shoulder was swollen with water, and the head of the shoulder twisted every day until he could not hold it up; and he believed so much of the moisture that he died, and this moisture is so gathered around the bone on top of the shoulder, between the neck and the bone; and the use of the potion is so great that the moisture is gathered between the neck and the bone, and the abscesses are small, so cut into the head with a large knife; and be also far away from me as much as 20 steps, until the moisture runs; and see this form of the sputum:
If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, then make 20 slashes in the form of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is outside the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head opened on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not respond to you: then you must cut into the head 20 slashes in this way:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture. After that, remove the bandages and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it for five days; then take it off, and cure the wound with tar and ointments, and let the head be removed equally, and feed the patient with dry meat of little moisture until the member is healed and healthy.
And another way to incise is that you look at where the great opening of the abscess is, and its insertion into the bone; for it is never before; it is never behind; it is never on the right; and it is never on the left.
So cut there where the abscess opens, and its insertion into the bone; for you have the power to do so; and guard against covering the artery; and let blood flow from the wound, so that the patient dies with a clean death from blood and the evacuation of moisture.
And in conclusion.
When there is a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or in the nose, and the disease is old, and the medicine treatment does not help, then the second treatment is to cauterize with what you cover the .ij. arteries.
When the patient has a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or in the nose, and the disease is old and the medicine does not help, then, when you cover the patient's eyes, he should hold his head back; after that, he rubs the area with an asperous cloth until the arteries appear, and then pulls out the patient's hair from all sides of the cloth; then look where the vein goes, and the veins on either side are close to the ears, and they have been removed; then sign the veins on either side, and cut them with a sharp blade from both sides at the same time until the cut reaches the bone, and this is done by the wide part of the head.
And if you see it, pour the blood out and cauterize above it, cutting as well with the same two blades from top to bottom.
And when the vein is cut, then let it flow continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open on feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space for .iiii. dos, then sign off and cut up to the bone; and that which is necessary to put blood outside is 1 3/4 c/o, and by chance a little more or less. according to what the patient can bear, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone without a syphac, if the cut that apostemes does not come, then drain the wound and tie it up, and the cure of the poultice until it is healed.
of grinding
When the ancient emaciation comes, and catarrh obtained, because of the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old-fashioned feverishness and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of medical treatments and all that does not benefit it, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
And the way of extracting them is that the patient makes a re-growth of the hair on his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little repented outwardly than in some men who are too cold; and if it is repented, then take his colander from some drapelz, then rub the place with any sharp drap, and raise the place of hot water as much as the artery appears clearly; then take the spatumile where it is the form:
Then peel the skin lightly as you come to the artery, then turn it upwards as you would pluck a hair, and remove the thin membrane that covers each part; and if the artery is small, so cut it off with the point of the hook according to the quantity of twenty years. For if it is not cut off, then there will be no saving for all.
And turn the blood of the 20 years old child upwards until 13; and if the artery is large, so tie it with two strong threads of silk, that there be no burst before the wound is healed, and turn away from the blood; then cut off the surplus between the two threads at that moment, and then, if you see, so cauterize with the fire cautery until the bone as long as the head is cut; and this is the operation, if the patient does not have a fever and has a hot complexion.
For the cautery is help for finishing the moisture: for what is it of greater help to the moisture? Or it is good for extracting the arteries that you fill up the space with fine cotton and put on tents made well; and when you take them off, so cure them with dry medicines that make a new beginning, and of the tents, as long as they are healthy; and if there is no cort of the artery as much as you can do work, so heat by cautery, or you employ the leach of vitriole and strain it in your hand that the juice be strained; and if you have not this, so put on the leach your finger as long as the juice be frozen, and raise the leach of cold water as long as the juice cease, and is extracted as it should be; and that which is wetter and lighter in extracting the artery is that you cauterize the veins with a sharp knife of 20 parts, but the cutting should be well kept so that it last longer in heat. For when the instrument is too soft, so does its heat hold. And there must be between the .ij. tools .i. an inch of space, and then when you have signed off with your 2 knives, and you put a sharp fire on it as long as it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in 2 inches; and are distant between the .ij. joints because he is not bonded by this cautery all around; and that is the shape of the cautery:
tears
For when the tears of the eyes are flowing out from the veins that are above the head of fire, and it does not benefit at all from medicine that we make, and you see the face of the sick person turn black, and feel or pain if they are tight and moist so that the hair of the papers falls off, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, so there is a need for this cure.
And they called the ancient "cure for contusions", and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease in his hair or forehead, then cut.ii. slashes along the forehead evenly according to its length; and make one of the slashes as two whole heads at the top of the forehead by drinking down until it does not smell, and the other two on either side of the bones, and keep from cutting the arteries that are on either side of the bones; and remove your hand from the connection of the two jaws, and each wound is what.ii. pairs by joining;
from the first incision which is on the temple until the second incision; and peel off all the cur that is between the two slashes to the bone, then do the same on the other side from the middle incision until the other second one, and then pour out this spa water.
if in the first slash you use the instrument that is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and soft on the other, and this is the form: And cut the cost of bending towards the horse's back at its tail, and the cost of bending to the bone, and let it bend as far as the middle cut. And cover all the vessels that descend from the head with hair until the incision is continuous until that which opens at the tail, and then do it in the middle cut until the other end; and then take out the blood evenly, and express the place for the blood taken; then put a tent of old cotton into each cut, and put drape on them wet with wine and oil and honey, and keep that the abscesses don't come; and on the third day undo the ligature, and bring a great amount of water to drink, then cure him with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures that heal wounds until he is well.
to the tail
When there is a catarrh by custom, and you see the eyes watering and small papules, and the vision grows dim, and the papers burn; and the hair falls out, and at the head it hurts greatly, and the patient sneezes; then know that these matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the moist heat cure that I have described is good for this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to stare at himself in the mirror, then make a great cut across the forehead, and another from side to side. Then begin with the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples that move when he sneezes; and when the bone is uncovered, if you wipe all the blood with a sponge, then tie cotton wool and linen thereon; then lie drapes soaked in wine and oil on it, and be careful not to burn the aposteme. When it has been raised, if you rub the bone until char starts to form, then heal with drying substances that produce char.
In this manner: take .ij. parts of wheat flower, and .iiij. parts of kohl, and make an ointment thereof; and apply it to these wounds in order that char may be produced everywhere.
of the sticking up of the ears
All that is stuck up in ears is one of the .iiij. things: or grain, or beast, or small stone or similar thing; or seed, if like grains, beans, peas; or flowing thing, if like water and similar things.
If the stone is in the ear or another thing that does not fit into the ear and does not stay in place when put there, then put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, then distil a little violet oil or sesame oil, then it will be extracted; and when it is being extracted, then the nose will stop up, and pieces of cloth or wool will be put around the ear, and the ear will be brought up. Many times this treatment brings relief; and if it does not bring relief, then it should be extracted with very small forceps, from which comes this form:
If it comes out with forceps, that is good; if not, then extract it with very small forceps; and if it does not come out with them, then make a thread of air and put the tip of the thread or some other thing into the ear very strongly, and stop up what is inside the ear with soft wax so that it cannot enter with the thread; then try again, for many times this treatment brings relief; and if it does not bring relief in any way, then take a drop of gluten, as it is taken from the oats, and put some cotton into it; then press the gluten onto the stone or whatever it is, and try again. If it does not come out with any of these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear so as not to leave an abscess or spasm; and the way to split it is that you make the first incision on the head of the malady according to the measure of its virtue, then put the malady between your hands and turn the ear up, and make a small split at the root of the ear in the fat or where it depends; and let the split be as wide as the moon until you feel the stone, then take hold of it with your power, and suck it carefully into your mouth; and the treatment is to continue until it is well. And if it is grain that is stuck and swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot be removed, administer .i. spatium ileum in this manner:
And administer incision of that grain. But do not make it when you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces; then extract them finely and at the hairline, as we said, so that the extractions are orderly.
So that the patient uses a stream of water in the first place, and widens the ear with old cotton. And let it rest on that ear where the fluid is. If it jumps out, it is good. If not, take many stones according to your finger's length and make them light; and heat them a little on the fire; and put one of them in his ear and cut one from the other end, and keep doing so until the fluid comes out entirely, and thus let it all go; and if you see that, take 1.i. straw, and bottle one of the ears, and the other ear take from the fire as much as the straw is burned; then make another straw again, and heat it on the fire until the more burning straw is black; then refire another, and so on until the fluid comes out entirely, as we said in the stone.
In the extraction of the best, if it is a small course, such as a flea or similar thing, cure it as we said in the division; but if it is a large course that we can feel it, administer extraction with the pince-nez; and this is the lighter thing to extract which is in the ear.
When extracting worms from the ears, if the cure does not work as we have described in the division and treatment of distillation, and the ear is open to any worms, then take them out with subtle pincers, and if they are not seen, take the root where the shape is.
And make it narrow at the top and wide at the bottom. Pour in the subtlest oil into the ear according to the amount of suffering from the patient, then suck out the form completely; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not want to come out, stop between the roots with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not rise up as we have described, administer distillation which has been tried by the old for extracting worms, and you will find it where the distillation is treated; and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, then this is the form as you see:
And make it of silver or gold narrow at the top and wide at the bottom, and for distillation; and for pressing the distillation inwardly a tool of silver well made for this, and if you see one with a razor and wrap cotton around the tip; then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you have in the cainne (cannibal), and let the cainne be in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or draining from the ear; and smell the patient's breath, and let the distillation be heated on the fire as it is distilled in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
For the stumping of ears
No children are born with any ears missing; and the same thing happens to men by accident of a wound, or a cart falling in their ear, and such accidents never completely come out of the ear, if one cannot see them; and there is no such thing as a small hole in it, and he can see very well.
So that which comes out completely, if one cannot see it, is of great benefit in many conditions, and in this it is necessary to put the ear of the sick under the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the wound has completely cured all this pus, from which there comes this sputum, from which comes this form:
And be sure to clean and trim the hair in front of and behind completely, so that it does not cut the ear; if the operation is a cart falling or a corn in the ear, if it has many small pinches, and lightly cover it, until that corn is completely healed.
And if the operation is completely in the ear, take a very fine and light razor and heat it slightly, then put it on the corn of the ear. If you feel the operation that the sick man feels as a grating at the hearing, cut lightly, and be sure to not injure the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Make no fire for as long as the wound is still hot, or take a tent and soak it in rose water, and powder with vitriolic broth; and if you see that it has flown into the ear, then remember that you must take the tent and move another tent that has been soaked in wax, which has been made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling has gone down; then cure it until it is healthy.
And if the pain comes from fever, dip an sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that are made from distilleries to heal the fever which causes the pain, which are or are treated with distillations.
of the paper char
Take the althel (a plant) which comes in paper-like forms when it is moist and dry, if it reminds you of tiny nails and pins, and cut it with a scalpel from its roots; then place it on rose water broth.
And if not chopped off, if the fire cautery of the lenticular cautery, and the cautery maker after incision moves away; and many times they grow back again, none of them stays put in their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned, and do not come back.
of the sore
Makes the hair fall out in patches, like straw, in shape and hardness resembling the latter; therefore this illness is called "hay fever," and is an assembly of moisture, thick in the hair above it; so do: take care that the hay does not drop from one side to the other, and burn it lightly, piece by piece, then pluck it out with tweezers, and if you cannot pluck it out without piercing the hair, do not worry about it; and if it is a big split, sew it up, and cure it as long as it is healthy; and if it is small, do not force it, for the oilmen will restore it soon enough and cause trouble.
And if the hay falls down inside the ear towards the top part, turn the hair over, and pluck out the hay with tweezers, and cope it and press it from both sides; and if the paper is moved by the incision, do not worry about it; and when the hay has been plucked out, leave the oil of salt water, and cure the place where it itches until the patient is healthy.
of the fat of the eyes
is made from the fat of the eyes, and this happens more often in children who are not yet weaned, and it hurts their eyes very much; they have a lot of mucus that comes out in the morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears come quickly to their eyes; and because of this, they lay down their faces and sleep, and their eyelids are moist with the exinach which is made into oil. And when you squeeze the fat between your fingers and feel the exinach come out.
The way to do this is so that the sick person puts his head in your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and make a tent out of it in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exirnach in each part, and put it over him; and press with your fingers from one side and from the other, so that the exirnach is gathered together in the middle; then cut with a sharp knife an opening of the right size for the wound that you are making on the side of the head; and make the skin all round so that you come to the exirnach; and in several places the exirnach comes out of the opening, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Take away then all of a piece of linen cloth between your hands on the right side, and turn your hand to the left and to the right as it becomes scattered; and be careful not to stir in the opening, that you do not come to the spatumile jusc'à l'huile, que vous ne le faites pas.
And if he does not emerge in the beginning of the split, but rather a little bit more, split it lightly until it appears; then extract it as we said, then wet the cloth with water and place it on its place, and pull out the splints.
And if such men who grind salt and put on top so that this moisture that has been delayed is corrupted. Then heal them until they are well. And if it comes to the base of an abscess, if the healer soothes it with poultices until they are well.
of hair from papers
When paper hair comes out, it should be thrown away or burned; if it remains, it will harm the eyes and cause all kinds of diseases as do tears, soft papery things, and albinism, until they are destroyed; and the cure is according to the following four methods: either with fire cauterization, or with medicine based on what it is in front of, or a chapster of cauterization, and it is done by incising and suturing or by cutting, according to what I will say.
You should place the head of the patient on your healthy side, then take the oil paper in your left hand; if it curls, that is good; but if not, pour an needle into all i. a thread over it; and be this deliciously at the margin of the paper where the hairs grow out of them, and run the thread over all the spatula, filling up the great wound to the little one; then remove the thread, and put the paper away for a little bit of cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper a figure of an ear, like a mirth leaf, and anyway it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised for all.
And if there is a lot that needs to be done with the paper according to what you see fit; then make on all the spatula over the ii. lines that you have signed, and begin from the great wound to the little one; and let it be like the size of a root in the crevice near the hairs, then pour the oil into one of the ii. angles of which, then scorch it all; then join the ii. lips to a stitch of a needle over all i. thread of fine wool, and wash away the blood, and make to fly the surplus of the threads over the ii. notches on anything sticky, if you see to do this; and if not, if you are not concerned, then leave the stitch and the threads until ii. or iii. days; then cure the wound without a stitch of dried and constricting things, because the paper softens at the touch of the wound and its gathering, but the stitch is old (as they say), and it is work with doubt and fear;
And if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is also like the shape of a mirth leaf, as we have told, with iii. needlesdevised according to the form which is here:
and then cut those that surmount with small forces evenly according to the form that is here:
If you cannot hold the forceps and the thing is not even, then take an awl or there is a thread, and bend it to the shape; and another thread of fine wire, and another thread of thick wire, and assemble them evenly between your two hands; then lift up your hand evenly, and lift up all the skin where you have tied it, as we have told you, then assemble the 16.i. lips of the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then anoint it with cerate and similar ointments that soothe;
and there is no time when the hair of the paper has been converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitch in one and in the other is more artificial.
The cure for the wound is as follows: and it is necessary that you convert the paper and place it within according to what I have said, and then make 16.i. stitches, and 16.i. threads slightly thicker than the thread used for the paper, and tie them together slightly above where the paper ends; and let it rest for some days, and the skin that has been stretched will become firm and will heal, until it is healed by itself.
If he is delayed, if the cope has forced him, then treat him until he is healthy; and when the wound is closed, and if the paper is lifted, and they cannot grow more hair; and this is the form of the two legs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
If he is delayed, and the cope has forced him, then treat him until he is healthy; and when the wound is closed, and if the paper is lifted, and they cannot grow more hair; and this is the form of the two legs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide: li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aiguille subtil, et i boute 1 fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l'un et l'autre subtilement, et soit la longueur des fils une palme de long; puis ordonne en la chasse 1 autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li maliadous son chef en ton sain; et soit délez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit déclariez, car c'est uns ovraiges subtils et menus, puis boute l'aiguille a tout la chasse en la racine du poil ajosteit, et la fais percer en la papiere hastement tant que tu lat tire desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s'il en i a 1 ou 2 ou 3 ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz venent fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.
And if the wound is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then draw the wound away to all the thread that you have ordered, until the wound comes out by the perforation on top and you can see it by the vision of the oil; then draw the wound and the thread, and let the oil and leave it 1 or 2 or 3 or more; then draw the hair back with that which you leave behind, until the hair is standing in its place and grows up; and if the hair is small, then accompany 1 long hair from the natural hair, and let it hang with that which you leave behind, until it is stretched out and then let it down.
of the oil fever
When this disease, called "aleacrati" or oil fever, appears in two ways: one is natural and the other is unnatural. And it happens suddenly through wound, or injury, or fire, and similar things.
And the way to treat this is to cut and separate the lips of the wound and insert linen cloth inside, and let it remain until it heals; and do not use anything that dries and constricts. For if you do so, the disease will return worse than before. But use things that soften, such as fenugreek; and water or ale or linseed oil be boiled, and an ointment made with melted dyal-oil, and wrap a cloth around it, and treat with it.
And the treasures of your cure are that you do not let it harden in the form that it was before; and the herbs we have mentioned are only to be used as a remedy for this disease, so that it does not return in the form that it was before.
from the horse that comes to the oil
This is the translation:
Here is the text translated into English:
And if the disease comes from wounds, cuts, or cauterization, you shall insert a needle with 2 threads into the left armpit until it reaches the right, so that the thread emerges at 2 chins on the char; then lift the char above all the needle, and put a spatemile with a wide base.
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Here is the first sentence of the text:
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
And the way of the incision is that the patient places his head in your lap, then he works the hairs; and take the paper to your hand, then coil the unglove on the little double-fingered fingers, and raise it up; then take an needle, and I put .i. hair of a horse, or of a she-ass, or of an ox, and .i. strong thread; and double the point of the needle a bit and let the unglove slip off the thread, and pierce all the needle, and tie the unglove with a thread and raise it up, and peel off all the hair the cost of the unglove which follows the seed and the silk to the hair jusc’to the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the larmier to all the spatumile subtle and small forces, and leave the tear natural or larmier, so that by the incision does not come out the cors des larmes acostumeement; and never raise the unglove only, and on the thread, as we have said; then peel off all the spatumile suff of coi here is the form:
And keep that the spatumile does not touch the charnual canvas and break it, and that the seed is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little bit of oil of seiwet, and of colier made of litargie, and leaves it until the next day; then cure him as much as he is sane.
And if the unglove is not nervous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the uncines cannot enter, this resemblance of the unglove of medicines is often cured; and are born sicom I have told in the division, and if you see it coper, then work the oil of the patient, and take the spatumile light poc according to this form:
And raise the finger slowly, and see that it does not become thinner and its root becomes more pressing, so pour from your mouth oil of the ring made of litargite and red dye and stop the oil until the next day; then begin again another work according to this same work, until it is all boneless.
And if nothing is opposite to it in oil, as an abscess, then the milk, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healthy, then begin again the work as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm hurts a lot in oil due to great damage, then suspend it for a long time, and take a part of it and not all at once, so that tears do not come; then pour into the oil ring red, which is made of litargite.
of the flesh that comes out on the apricot
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l'incision de l'ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cet chapitre lou demostre.
Now let's begin with the translation of the first sentence:
However, it is necessary that you adjust the cure for each weak oil of the natural path; and of the accidental path, in fire ovulation; and do not put your hand into any of these ovulations until you see that the limbs are suffering from that ovulation.
the hairs of the body
the hairs of the head
And let there be two oncines in width in one course according to this form:
then coiled the delicate hairs together with care, and washed the blood away hour by hour until you see the hairs removed completely from the oil; and be careful not to burn the oil at the tips of the spatulums, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very careful in your handling so that only the hair is burned; and when you have finished this, distil into the oil green and red essence to corrupt what remains of the hair.
And if you cannot catch all of them in that hour, then make a paste on the oil of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days as long as the pain is soothed and is assured by the apothecary warm, then begin again according to this method which is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
of the fistula of the oil
Here comes the translated text:
And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackness, then reset all the instruments of which this form is composed; it is called "aspre chief", and let be made from there to 1.5 chief, and be pointed as a lime, as it is in the present form:
And place it on the top of the bone that is rotten, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand upon it a little while until you can feel that the corruption has stopped; and do this once, then return to the top of the medicated poultice.
If the bone is tight and the wound is closed, and the cors of the bow is tight, and remains so for two days, and does not open again and cause harm, then know that it is healthy; if not, then there is another device than to bring the fistula back to the perforation of the nose according to this form: and this is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with medicines that are bitter, and when it is uncovered then take it .i. forethat according to this form, and let the iron be at .iij. angles, and let the string be thin up to the top so as you see here:
Then place the iron gently on the bone of the nose, and keep your hand away from the oil .i. little, then turn completely back until it pierces the bone and the patient feels pain through it so that his hand remains on his nose; and then return to the top of the dried medicines, as I have taught you, and when the char is born and hardens the leus, if the material goes into the nose; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the oil's issue
When the hairs are completely removed from all parts, and do not come back again until they grow, then you must put on a hot iron so that it may open; then, when it has opened, apply oil to it made of acacia, and aloe, and incense, and myrrh; then draw out the oil, and anoint with it bandages and cloths; and the way of the cloths is this: you must twist them together enough so that they are double each one, then put one on top of another according to the quantity needed for the hair; then draw them out over a hard cloth-like object, and begin again with the oil-drawers without hurting; then take off the oil-drawers and leave the oil drawn out day and night, and if it becomes thin, you must draw it out more; then take off the bandages after the day and the night, and if you see that the oil repairs itself, it is good; if not, then begin again with the anointing and the cloths and the iron and the oil-drawers until they are well.
When the web of silk that covers the body is torn away.
When the silk web that covers the body is torn away, it will look like grains of resin, and you can see it; then if you cover it with a cloth, the treatment is such that you pierce a needle into the root of the part just below it, then you take another needle where there are two threads from the arm part; and let the first needle be according to the disposition, then take one of the threads and tie one side of the silk around it, and draw it tightly, then remove the needle and put a drop of oil on the other thread; and leave it until the thread vibrates with the silk, then cure the oil with soothing things until the wound is healed; and never restrict the wound with silk circles around each part until it is healed.
And if the hairs are long and even, let them pierce a thin spikelet that comes perfectly from the oil, and run the moisture-white albinous and draw the hairs, and insert it so often; then extract it until it is healthy.
from the oil bow
This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is nothing but a bow that is assembled in oil, resembling water descending, and yet it is not water; and the manner of its appearance in the chapter so is this: you make the patient sit with his seat apparently upright, then take his chief between your hands from both sides, and hold the hair as much as you see the bow come up to your hair; then let it sit firmly, and do not descende or move it, and see the light of the patient's hair, and know that it is water, and that the descent of the bow is not apparently appeared as we have said. If you make the patient sit with his seat apparently upright, then take the thin spikelet and pierce it into the cornee film 1 par .i. poc through the continuation of the connective with the cornee film and the crown, until it comes out; and when it is issued, let it be distilled in hot honeyed oil, or water or fenugreek is boiled and honey added, then let it be cured by other means until it is healthy.
of the oil bow
We have the appearance of needles in the division, and what is necessary to pierce it; if done according to health. It is necessary that you sit the patient between your hands, away from the light of the sun, and bind the healthy oil tightly; then place the paper of the oil on your left hand if the nails are left-handed, or on your right hand if they are right-handed; then take in your right hand, if the nails are left-handed, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand, if the nails are right-handed; then place the point of the instrument at the crown of the oil by its thickness in a ray in that bright part of the oil to the less wound, and then bottle the instrument called 'almagda' well, and turn your hand around until it pierces into the bright part of the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the path of almagda be at the perfect measure of the space which is from the plumule until the end of the darkness; and this is the crown of the oil. Then you will see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the cloth cornified, and then place the instrument up to the level where the needle is, and express one path after another. The needle now comes out, so look at the patient before you and the instrument in his oil.
After a short rest, and the needle rises again on the second path, put force with the instrument, and when it is firmly in place and no longer rises, draw almagda lightly by turning your hand little by little; and then put a little of the oil of sweet bay leaves into the needle, and remove from that oil inside. Then place by the side the dried oil or a moist one in oil rosin and in much smoke, and bind with healthy oil. We, and those who are of our time, let us put on common broiet with much smoke.
If almagda cannot enter the oil because of its hardness, since there are some men who have too thick nails, it is necessary that you press the instrument called 'alberit', which has this shape:
And then cut the conjunctive only, and don't overdo it too much, but make it .i. thin, then pour in the almond oil, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient .i. the sleeping one coming, where he sleeps on his back in .j. dark place; and he should be deprived of all movement, and press light meats, and do not move his head nor to the right nor to the left, and bind him according to his disposition until three days; then unbind him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then rebind him until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you bind him, for he will go up quickly.
And when the abscesses have come to head, you should unbind the oil before the seventh day, and address it from that which softens the abscess; and when it is calmed, if you unbind the sight and put on his face  .i. an edge to cover any day, and remain in that same dark house. And then go out little by little, and turn around in his cases; and know that no one should meddle in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Land of Yraq, who told us that in their country they used to pour almond oil, so that it would suck up the water, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the signs of the nature of alchemy, so that those who do not know them may see them; and let them be pure brass.
And let the head of this middle substance be water, and the behind in three angles dry.
of the stone on the fire
And here are the various stones that emerge from the fire: some seem to be scorpions at the tip of a needle; and if there is one such stone that has been charred by fire and colored, and another stone that is soft, then you should set the patient between your hands towards the sun; and open his nostrils, and pour the oil on those stones, and warm them well; then take the oil which you have kept aside, prepared from the subtle essence, as long as you know that this stone is completely hard.
And if there remains nothing that cannot be covered, then open all the vessels subtly and lightly, so that nothing stays; and if without rising above, or an abscess, dry it as it should; and if these are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize them until the swelling is dried up and all the pus is drained, then throw or pour easily and quickly.
And if there remains nothing that cannot be covered, then open all the vessels subtly and lightly, so that nothing stays; and if without rising above, or an abscess, dry it as it should; and if these are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize them until the swelling is dried up and all the pus is drained, then throw or pour easily and quickly. If there remains a sore, and moisture comes to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture penetrates as it should, know that it has not entered the bone above, and so the instrument will not cut: therefore it is necessary that you put a piece of linen thread of medium thickness, and tie it tightly with hands, and space between each knot about an inch or less; and put the thread into the sore at the power of the hand, and draw it out while smelling it frequently until it comes out through the mouth; and many times do this to the child in school, and this is a light thing for him who does it; then hold the thread that comes out by the nose with one hand, and the other hand holds the thread that comes out of the mouth, and know which comes first as we do with the threads; and if you know that the knot has corrupted that cord, then draw the thread, wash the sore, and dip the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the hole as before; do this for three or more days until the ointments have eaten away whatever is held by the cord; and then put a string of cork some days longer until he is well, and if he needs drying medicines, then use them. And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nose, whereon oil and medicine are distilled in the nose:
And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, like a cord, and conduct it also; and if you see, make a closed cord, and be the instrument plain to purge the nose; and have one always with the nose to hold it while the oil or any liquid is heated.
of the neck from the nose
many times a disease occurs in the neck from the nose which is called "throb", and grows and becomes very big until it can be seen with the eye; and for this it is necessary that you cut at the beginning of the bone, then put fire on it; and if you delay to do so much as it is big, if it is hard, of red color, of poor smell: if not touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, because when you cut it, many evil come to the patient; and this abscess is to be touched gently, not with iron of red color, and you see that you can cover it completely, if you empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the place with drying and restraining things.
When the neck has been cut and cured
When the neck has been cut and cured
The way of the stitch is that you gather the solution together: or with needles, as we have said in the stitch of the belly; or with thread, as I told you.
the sores on the lips
For in the hands, sore-like blisters appear on the lips, small and large; then cover them with a patch, cut it into each one, and wrap it with plasters; then apply the place with vitriolic broth, until the sores are dried out; and then wash that place with water, and cure that place with dry things as long as it is healthy.
the teeth
Maitres often naissant on the gums with a sore that the old call "albulus"; if it is necessary for you to hold them with tweezers, and tie them at their root, and let the bowels or blood run; then put over the place vitriolic powder, or other restraining and drying powders; and if this sore returns after the incision, and often comes, if the powder is laid on again, and cauterized: if it does not return after the cauterization; and these are the forms of instruments to bind.
of remedies
Of remedies: No times are assembled at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, knots that are ugly and rough; and no times are the tooth black and citron and wormy, as soon as the corruption comes to the gum, and are the tooth stinky; if it is necessary for you to make sit the disease between your hands, and its roots lie in your hand, and pluck out the teeth or knots that appear, as long as it does not stay anything; and thus do of blackness and verdure, and of yellowness and other taches, until they are clean; and if one is at the first razing, it is good; if not, if it begins to rase again on the second day and third, as long as you have all plucked out; and know that the tooth has need of diverse forms of instruments to pluck out, according to what the operation demonstrates, because of the rasor with which one plucks out the teeth have other forms than those with which one plucks out between the teeth; and these forms and others are with you apparelled.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you wait to pull it as long as you can, because this must not be done at all; for it is a high-spirited substance until then there is no excuse to pull it. And now when the disease is constricted by drawing out, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth that hurts. Often the pain in the disease leaves, and he believes that it is the sound tooth, and he makes to draw out the good tooth; however, the pain does not go away because of this, until the disease comes out, for we have already tried to do this with these elders; and when you are certain of the tooth that hurts, so it is necessary that you file around the tooth on all sides with a strong file; then you move it with your fingers or small pliers at the first poking and poking until it is well drawn out, then you tighten the pliers well; and let the head of the disease be in your saint between your knees, and he holds fast so that it does not move.
After you have drawn out the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not fit, then take any of these instruments and squeeze it in from all sides lightly, and move it as you did first. And if the space is narrowed and closed, then it is necessary that you fill it with swabs, where the teeth are; and if you hold it firmly with small pliers, so that it does not break when you draw it out; and it is necessary to work carefully around the gum to pull the tooth out.
And do well to avoid breaking it, and if a part remains, and return it to the disease by the malice of the root, which causes greater pains than the first. And do well that you do not act in this way as does the ignorant elder, who, by his haste and boldness, often breaks none but the cart, and never makes any but the ones we have described; but brings about nothing but the question of that great disease at the roots that he delays, or by the cart that he breaks, just as we have often wanted to do; and when the tooth is drawn out, if it is washed with wine or garlic and dill; and they escape from without, so often does it come about, if one employs the vitriol brooch; and if this does not work, then cauterize.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
And be of large members so that they do not bend while pulling, and be of good cast iron, and be tooth to hold fast.
of the root of the teeth When the root of the tooth is painful to pull, if it is necessary that you put cotton moistened with butter on the spot, as long as the roots are soft, then the pliers which are called "algefri" should be used; and let the shapes be made like a file, for this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, it is necessary that you uncover the whole char [a type of vehicle] around the root, and put the instrument which is called "al-thalī' " [in Arabic], that is to say palainche, by which this form is made:
And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and the root jumps out by this [the instrument], it is good; if not, help yourself with all the instruments, by which these forms come afterwards:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has .ij. [a number] of rays, by which this form is made:
and other iron instruments that are before in the shape of teeth, and of this instrument which seems like a great plier, whose form is:
And be this instrument not broken, for many of the instruments within are; and also other instruments, which are not numbered; and the masters of subtlety try out their own instruments themselves according to that which their works and the disease demonstrate, because there are many diseases in which the old do not teach an instrument for the diversity of them; and if it does not break the carriage or the other bones on which it rides, if he seeks the instruments that are needed, that I have told you, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form: And be this instrument heavy and firm to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can hold it and remove it; and then restore its place with suitable medicines for him, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, then all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural shape of the jaw, and the form is ugly, especially in young women, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is under the gum, and is not in its right place, and cannot be sewn or filed: then take this instrument; and if it is long with a little bend, then make this instrument like a small pick, and make of iron, as it was made:
And the cap is put on and on the hands for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then take a fine file like this instrument:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se déplace pas tant qu’il grince; puis la plaine à la fin à tout aucun rasoir, et le fond est trop tranchant et il brule la langue, alors il faut limer l’aspretéité jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit lisse, de manière qu'il ne brûle pas la langue ni n'altère pas la parole.
When the teeth loosen...
When the teeth loosen... When the teeth loosen, whether by percussion or by chewing, and the patient cannot press on what he chews so as not to choke, and you have treated them with restrictive medicines, this will not help; but if you restrain them with a gold wire, because silver wire becomes green and腐rot, but gold wire never moves; and choose a thin or thick wire according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice any looseness in one tooth, take the wire and double it around the healthy tooth next to it, then place the chewed food between the two teeth, if there are more than two loosed, until you have tightened them enough so that they no longer move; and if the wire comes loose, tie it again with another wire; if it takes a long time to tighten, leave it in place, and if it becomes loose again, tie it with another wire. Then cut the wire at the roots of the teeth so that it cannot escape; then wrap the wire around the healthy tooth next to it so that it does not hurt the tongue; and then let it tighten as long as possible, and if it comes loose again, or the wire becomes loose, tie it with another wire. If it takes a long time to tighten, leave it in place, and this will serve for all its length; and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the healthy and chewed teeth.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se déplace pas tant qu’il grince; puis la plaine à la fin à tout aucun rasoir, et le fond est trop tranchant et il brule la langue, alors il faut limer l’aspretéité jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit lisse, de manière qu'il ne brûle pas la langue ni n'altère pas la parole.
of copper the links of the tongue
de copper the links of the tongue
and if you notice a dark or hard spot that the patient cannot feel or touch, for it is cancer; and if it has blueness and moisture, then pour on the oncine, and make a fine paste of it, and deliver it with a spatula from one part to another; and if he does not improve to your treatment, put on vitriolic brooth as long as it is stained, and then return to your treatment as long as you continue; then lift up the aisel and sea water, and cure him with other remedies until he is well.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
None. The text starts with a discussion of treating dislocations and the different types of joint dislocations. Here is the translated line-by-line:
None. The text continues with a discussion of treating abscesses and the tools used to do so. Here is the translated line-by-line:
None. The text then provides an alternative method for creating the instrument if the previous one is not available:
And cut from one side and not the other; and when you have chopped one of the mandarins, chop the other according to the same method, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot water, and sharp and soft, and they remove blood if it comes, so gargarize the patient with water, or juice of cooked pomegranates, or leaves of myrrh, and similar things until the blood is stopped; then treat him until he is well; and never emerge in the throat other abscesses than the 2. mandarins, if they are chopped just as the 2. mandarins.
I treated a woman for an abscess that was stuck in her throat, which is to say 1. an abscess of small size; and I had it shut up so well that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was stopped up, nor eat nor drink, and she would have died if she had stayed like that for 1. day or 2. days. The abscess was so high that it had been rained on 2. times from the 2. openings where it was stuck. So I waited a while, and then inserted one of my 1. needles into the one opening, and drew some blood out, and after drawing out the blood, I squeezed the needle into the abscess, and pushed some of it in, and there came out only a little drop of blood; and thus unblocked the passage in the woman's throat, and she began to drink water and wine, and she did not stop cutting off that abscess for quite a long time; and the abscess started growing again, and filled up the space I had cleared out, until it was very large; then I put it back into place and cauterized it in her throat: so it stopped growing; and I left those parts, and there were only 2. things that God did for them after me.
of wine
When the sun burns his head and it is gone away and far away, so it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, so it is called "uve". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the chaps of the abscess are calmed down, and they are subtle, then you should chop them; and those who are roundly assembled and not far away; and if they are blood or black color or dark-colored, so it is necessary to avoid the incision. For there is great danger on the sick person. Therefore, when you see it, according to the way that I have said, of its blenchor and its longness, that you make him sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument of which we have spoken before; then put the scalpel in the "uve", and turn them roundly, and cover them with .i. .ij. instruments that I said in the incision of .ij. mandorles. And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, it hurts the voice and the word; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of .ij. mandorles, and cure until it is well. And if the sick person has fear of covering, then you should use an instrument for cauterization according to his fear. The way of cauterizing is sharp water. And it is that the sick put his head on your side, and then press his tongue to the instrument that we have said or "chapitre" of cauterizing, and confound with sharp water so that it is not too thick or too clear; and by using this handle of this instrument, from which there is this form:
Here is the translation of the provided text:
"And this cure is more safe of the incision or cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation according to this way, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and gather them all or any of them in 1/4 pot, and put it there like this, and let it boil; and the pot is well covered with strong soil, and pour the water into 1/4 instrument chaped according to this way:" And of silver or gold, and one of the bottles squirted in the mouth of the patient as long as the vapour rises through the vein, until the blood is chilled; after he begins to speak often, until the blood is dried, and guard that you do not do this at the beginning of the coming of the abscess hot, because many things come from it; and do not make this but at the decline of the hotness of the abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in his head a hook of blood, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; for the hook of blood does not let the vapour heavy the mouth, and this is good together and saves health.
Many times it rises in the throat bone or spine of fish, or nothing; so that it is convenient that you take what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun on all the instrument, so that you see the thing move; and what does not open for you and is put back in the throat, it is convenient that you make the patient vomit so that his meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if this thing is ejected by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or .i. piece of dry bread; and to the sponge there is a thread, and then he swallows it; and when it comes to the point, if it moves, and then you pull hard; and if it does not come hard from what we have said, then take one instrument of plunger according to this form:
And take the instrument curved at the tip so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and have the head raised up high; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that none of them comes down, or do not push the bone in; and move the instrument so that the patient swallows it, for this thing or that thing is moved; if it swallows the bottle, or he spits it out with all the instrument evenly, until it is thrown.
of the blood from the throat
No time is medicine of the blood, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not benefit, then look into the throat of the patient under the sun, because you press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the blood, so take a fine hook or tweezers that are worth to him. And if he does not work, so take a razor, and bottle it in the throat of the patient, then bottle or cut it with the blade of the razor often. And if the patient is dark all day. then take a full cup of cold water, and open the mouth, and drink it in, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, so spit.
And if she does not spit as we have said, then sublimate the patient with ash, at the instrument that I have said in the smoke treatment of the uvula; do this many times, because it will not spit without it. And the way of the smoke treatment is that you press a pot or one who has charbons visible, and put a cover over it so that it covers the center, and on the hole where the instrument is; then pour your smoke treatment, and the patient puts the tip of the razor in his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not go out, but comes to the blood; and the blood will come now, and if it does not spit, then begin the smoke treatment again by many times; and make the patient thirsty, and eat salty things and bitter, and do not drink water; and then the proper time will come when she spits through this government.
And the shape of the instrument to consider how you treat the blood, is if you can see it, like a pair of tweezers that are bent at the end, so that they can enter into the throat; and has the appearance of an instrument to take care of the uvula, and has the hardness of lime, so that whatever he takes, he cannot let go; and consider this shape:
the Kapitel of abscesses
The Kapitel of abscesses are, according to this reminder that comes from one and the other in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and incision; and it is in 2 ways. The first is in their appearance, and from what he has held moisture. And the second way is for the joints where they are in place. For the abscess at the head is different from that of the fundament, and the abscess of the limb is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if an abscess does not need to be pierced, as long as the bow is dead according to its fulfillment; and if it is of such that it must be pierced when it is ripe, and do not die according to its fulfillment, as is the abscess which comes from delicate joints. For when an abscess comes from delicate joints, and we leave it entor until it is rotten, by chance if the ligature and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, so this is the cause of contraction in that member. Or the abscess is from the principle member, and if you delay the perforation as long as it is dead, it will harm the principle member; or it is from the fundament, if you pierce it thus as if it were dead; and it does not convenie that you pierce a ripe abscess without digestion accomplished, lest that which is from the fundament should not rot completely, and be alonged inside, and come to a fistula; and cannot heal in great term.
And it convenies that you know the hour of the piercing of the abscess which is dead according to its fulfillment, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the debatement and the sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it convenies that you cause the piercing to take place where there is most blood, and the abscess is in the hand or foot, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all the limbs equally where there is no pus.
In those that are plied, according to the member. And when abscesses are in their natural position, so as not to leave the perforation until it is confirmed that digestion is complete, as we have said. For if you pierce them before this, if you allow the blood to flow from him, and it is plain with much filth; and by chance they harden the lips and his depth. And if there is any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the members require. And it is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if such abscesses are there that need to be chewed and covered; when they have become as hard as drapes, and are deadened, it is necessary to do so as you do with blisters: and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are such that you cover as you would a mirth seed, like abscesses of the arms; and if there are such that you make a round size, and other sizes and a supposed covering.
In those that are plied, according to the member. And when abscesses are in their natural position, so as not to leave the perforation until it is confirmed that digestion is complete, as we have said. For if you pierce them before this, if you allow the blood to flow from him, and it is plain with much filth; and by chance they harden the lips and his depth. And if there is any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the members require. And it is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if such abscesses are there that need to be chewed and covered; when they have become as hard as drapes, and are deadened, it is necessary to do so as you do with blisters: and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are such that you cover as you would a mirth seed, like abscesses of the arms; and if there are such that you make a round size, and other sizes and a supposed covering.
And if the pain of an abscess is coming to your work, so amenister cold water and soon, and moile .i. drapel, and place over the running one by maintes times. And if the pain of an abscess persevere, so amenister government and cure, and the powders that I said in your hands in this book, and if it is or has tens ofiver, and li leus where li apostemes is mout nervous, so it is necessary that you put sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mettes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nous avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.
And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: or I have told you how one should go before in the treatment of abscesses, and see this ointment.
of sores
And the cure for sore legs and feet, and they are managed in such a way that they are in webs, just as the cutting of a rope, and so much in common with the cutting of a beard, and there is also of them which are fat and of such as have moisture also, and such as are hard and rocky to cut, and there is no doubt if the arteries go against it. And the work of the waist so that you experience all .i. instrument which is called "entromissoire" (intruder), of which the form follows in the following text, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, it comes out by itself; and when it is empty, it does not leave the hair which contains that moisture, because it returns to itself when you let it be; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, in water and oil, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day; and heal the wound with ointment, according to what is convenient, until it is healthy. And if the abscess is thick, so the cupping follows this form, of the leg; and you cut off your nails, and scorch all sides, and put all your cure by dipping into the shirt or where it lies; and if the artery goes against it, do what I have said after. And also treat the abscess if it is rocky, and cutting the hair and curing as I have told you.
And the cut on the thick and moist abscess, so it is lighter, because it has a little blood. And if there are any of these abscesses or chief that do not have moisture, and such as these are those that I described or chief of an old woman; and I found the abscess just like a hard, rough and white stone, which could not be broken; and if one had cut it, it would also have made a wound like a stone. In other abscesses coming or chief, so that they come to the most dependent part, in order that the bow may be released; and cure them as is fitting.
of scrofula
Mouths have come to the collar, and broken the joints, and had sores, and none of them has moved to another place or died, but they are wet, and have gone into each other. And each scrofula is properly inside its rib, as the notch and the apotheosis of the neck, as we said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not want to obey health. In this case, when you see a good appearance in the chest, and it is similar in color to the flesh, and does not move from any side, and is not deep; so it is right that you cover it from above, and scorch each part, and are the 21 teeth of the teeth on both sides, if you need them, as we said about the apotheosis of the neck; and cut it little by little, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, and do not go too far forward, so that you do not cover what you should not.
If you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put vinegar in the wound, or some powders that stop the flow of blood, and strip the wound; and leave it until the apotheosis is calm, and the wound is softened, and you begin to rot. And when the root of the scrofula is well, if there is no small scrofula there, then cut it and wash it away. And if there is a large scrofula at the root, then it is not right that you cut the scrofula in its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without any harm; then employ the wound with old cotton dipped in olive oil, and then cure it.
And if you have the whole scrofula, then it is necessary that you join together the 21 lips of the wound and sew them up immediately, so that there is no delay from excessive enlargement of the scrofula; then it is necessary that you listen to how to patch the root of it and squeeze it hard, and sew it up as we have said. Those scrofulas that have excess, pierce where it opens; and pierce in this way too, depending on, so that it mixes with blood and similar things, so that it corrupts those who are delayed by corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then heal it with ointment, as long as it is healthy.
of squint in the eye
The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the size of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who performed it, and it is the script of their words.
For those who have squint, it is necessary that the fender of the throat (epiglotte) be removed; and no one should help him because all the veins and the mouth are hot because of the disease. When the illness is in the throat due to a pommon, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to flee from the death which comes from strangulation.
It is therefore necessary, when we want to split the epiglottis, that we split it of two circles or three little splits across, between two circles or by the quantity of the split from the syph, not in the cartilage;
and if they are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no bridge, and the vessel is long from it.
And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to all its length, and then splits the meat as far as it comes to the chin; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cover the syph, as we have said;
and is demonstrated by the section of the vein that has been broken out of place, and by the lack of voice;
and leaves the wound open a piece.
And when the hour has passed by of which one doubts the strangulation, close the two lips of the wound on either side, and the cut all down to the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote health, as long as they are healthy.
Albucasis says: "Do not do this until the throat is completely closed, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect leaves it." Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
And then the old man should order that the wound be left open as long as the sickness is passing, and it will pass in three or four days. And then they should sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed;
For I have seen this before; I saw a damsel take .i. a knife, and put it in her throat, and cut part of the chins from her face.
and I was called by the healer, and I found her as if dead.
I discovered the wound, and I found the blood that had flowed from it, and I saw well that she had not cut a vein but only her throat, and the blood had flowed out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and I healed it until it was well;
and there came to the maiden such a hoarse voice, and she returned after her condition;
for I fear that in the surgery of the epiglottis there will be no pain.
of the large throat
is called "hernia of the throat", and is a large hernia in the color of a yellow egg, and is very common in women;
and is according to .ij. manners: nature, and accident; or natural has no device.
And the accident is according to  .ij. manners, one is similar to fat us, and another manner is similar to an abscess that comes from us of arteriovenous; and it has fear, and does not come to work of fire in that which is little, and tests and seeks in all the intramuscular; If you find it as well as .ij. fat, and cannot for any reason, if the cap is on, as we put the caps on us, and try to all its coat, if there is any point; and search well soon, and treat him as it is necessary, until he is completely healed.
of us
There are many ways to do this, all of which I will describe;
and it is necessary that I give all the difference which exists between us and what happens.
I say that fever and chills are issued, as long as the boiling is passed, and the poulticing is accomplished; then rest the fever and the heat.
With it the not there is no fever or heat or pain, and contains. i. siac, which is his own sack and is according to the color of the heart, and begins also as a seed, and becomes fat; and
and are according to iij sembrances, or grease, or moist, and most of the colors are as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the not, that you try and question first all the instrument which is called "intramisoire", according to what its form will or the paste which is after.
And the way to examine an abscess is that you squeeze or more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your thumb little by little until you know that the instrument has hit the core, then that be according to the size of the abscess.
then remove the instrument, and take care that it does not hurt.
If the moisture runs fast, that it be colored, then do as I said about other abscesses;
and if after the instrument there is no moisture, know that it is oily, then take it in two pins, and burn it lightly on each side, and keep the core where it lies, or you will have it healthy with the oil;
and if you cannot pull it out whole, then pull it out piece by piece so that nothing is left behind.
For if anything remains, it will come back to us many times;
and if it takes a little time, and it does not bother you, then use some corrosive water to extract the wound, and put something soothing on it, and apply other treatments until it is healed;
and if it is very large, then cut the 3/4 of the wound, and treat it with this mixture:
and if you have batans or another wound and you are in a hurry and apply the place of vitriolic broach, and leave it 21 days or 23, until the wound is putrid, and let the blood be warmed; then return to copper the one that has been delayed by the cold.
Here is the translation of the text line by line in English:
"And also consider the needles used for piercing sorceles, and they are of yellow brass, iron, or silver, and those that are made of yellow metal are more proven by weight to encircle the fistulous cavities."
"And they are three ways: big, small, and tiny, according to the quantity of the width of the apertures."
The shapes of scabs are like those of hair, so that you see: long, short and small ones; and there are also patches which have .ij. corbeures (corbings) in .iij. ways.
and if they have .iij. corbeures and are also in .iij. ways; and if they have .ij. corbeures, and scabs of a single corbings, and are in .iij. ways; and all these are necessary in their places.
The chief of these things to be done are sharp, and of such I have who do not cut but on one side, that we peel the skin so that the vein or nerve is not cut.
and of these things are the alems made in many, so that the patient does not lose them with the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three ways: great, small, and medium, as you see;
and do not use but in one place of the bone, as legs, arms, breast, and shoulders, and similar things;
and there is no other instrument small, resembling to scalds of fists, according to this form, in order that one does not burn himself:
and one puts it not at all at the place which heals with ease of veins and arteries, and never in this great form:
No one should ever fill the breasts of certain men when they want to corrupt themselves, until they look like breasts of women.
and they remain and swell up, and those who want to cure them should do so according to this form of the chapter from line b above: until: then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound with char, then join the 19 lips of the wound together with a stitch, and cure it until it is well;
and let the breast fall down, and is softened by its grandeur so that it looks like a woman's, if made in 19 ribs above, by 19 similar cuts; for where the one is held by the other at the end of the one and the other, so that the greater line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. as far as line .g.; then peel the skin that is between the lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powders, and anything necessary for the treatment, until he is well;
and if he is not well, or the incision is not completely made, so that the patient does not rest, or for the occurrence of blood, then you must fill the wound with moistened cotton soaked in corrosive oil; and leave it until the residue and fat are wet, then apply the treatment until he is well.
of the asses
Of the asses are dealt with scrofulous nodules that come out of the skin, and if they contain moisture.
Therefore, those containing moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b up to the line g: And when all the bowels that are in the aposteme are empty, if you employ the wound with cotton wool, and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the appearance of leprosy, if you cut it as we have said in the treatment of leprosy, and if the wound runs down, apply cauterization as we have said above.
of the artery burst
When the artery bursts and the skin is tighten up above it, many times an abscess forms, and also it comes to the escaped vein and abscess;
and if you see it on time before it is for the artery, if it is a long abscess completely perfect; and when you feel it on your two sides, if it is extraction; and when it is for a vein, if it is for reasons of appearance;
and this is madness to cut this abscess, and most of all when it is dislocated at the armpit and at the throat and in other places, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the use of iron in this case, and that which is at the top should also be avoided, and in that which is inflamed by an artery, cut through the skin from above;
It is therefore necessary to avoid the use of iron in this case, and that which is at the top should also be avoided, and in that which is inflamed by an artery, cut through the skin from above; Then work on the stomach like a snake, and carefully separate the artery from the mesentery, until it is completely exposed;
and then draw out the needle, and pierce it all the way to the other side of the flesh, and remove the artery with a double thread of thread in .ij. lews according to what I have taught you in the extraction of .ij. arteries that are in temples;
and then cut off the leu that is between the .ij. lings of an intromissioire as long as there is a hole in it, and make the aposteme;
and then place the cure that was in the bow, as long as the lien cries; and then apply the ointment that comes to this one, as long as he is healthy;
and if the abscess is near the spine, then you should have your arm tied up so that you can't move it and you can't feel the skin around the abscess. then fill the needle with the thread on the other side; then wrap a strip of cloth around it, as I told you before, with one end of the thread tied to one edge of the cloth and the other end to the other edge;
and if you doubt that the thread is secure, then put another needle on one end of the thread at the incision made by the first needle, and stretch the threads in three directions;
and then cut the abscess as much as the excess fluid drains, then cut off the excess skin and leave those tied up;
and then cover it with a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, and then administer treatments of herbs and onions until it is healed.
of the abscesses from the nails
Also, the abscesses come from the nail and the vein, they come from the nails when they are broken, or by too much work, and similar things.
And that is often in the joints of shoulders and arms, and this is what is called an abscess, and its color seems to be the color of the flesh, and it is in many conditions without pain.
And when they are put back into place, if the patient feels pain, and it is not completely healed by the flesh, but stops the cure.
And it must be well sealed on all sides, and not go forward or backward, nor above nor below, and the one who is in the joints should not cover with iron: perhaps there will be a contraction.
And those who are at the head or at the front, make the skin with chisels. If the abscess is small, if he has a nail, and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, if the suspender has a nail, and cut it, then scorch it, then the bone and join the wound with sutures, and heal it until it is healed.
hanging large balls No times comes in bellies and no other part thelull, and is a disease that is called "fungus" by appearance of wet, and is the subtle root, and the big tree; and there are small and large ones;
and I saw .i. home who had .ij. or stomachs which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had small roots, and they were split open, and ran together with moisture.
I took them and found in one 1600 grams in weight, and in the other 520 grams, and the extractions from the incision were such that if you look at the patient's color, it is moist and white, and the root is thin;
if it is large, and they are in your presence, the fire cautery comes again and again too much blood loss, and it leaves him without you, so hurry up then cauterize;
and if you see the patient anticipating and afraid of the incision with fire, then take 1 well-made piece of twine, and bind the articol as we have said, and leave it for 1 day;
and then the restraint, and do not cease to pull out the hair thread as long as it grasps the arteil, and try by him the work; and if the roots are thick, so fear for the copp at once for the belly, but you make it well copp half.
then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and keep you do not copp the thistle which is of foxy color and poor taste and of milky milk.
For this is an abscess encrusted, and I will come to the cure of the ulcer hereafter.
when the milk is strong
If the appearance of the boil comes by a cautery from a wound or a cut of the syrup, and it is on the belly and in some of the boils, as it happens in other wounds, or of blood which comes out of veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness;
If it is by the cut of the syrup and by the issue of the boil, if its color is similar to that of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and opening of different issues. And if it is by the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press it at its two extremities so that it repents, and then comes back, and perhaps if it is tight, and grows larger at the entrance to the bath and because of great work.
And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without restraint; and if it is by blood, then open it according to a quantity.
and if it's because of windiness, if it's at the base of the neck, and the opening if it is that you observe that its appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or windiness. If it is appropriate that you leave the cure. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you before, or a paste of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if its appearance is due to the intestine or the bile, if it is appropriate that you command to the patient that he dyes his hair, and be all right, then sign of both sides the belly; then command him to turn himself between your hands, and then go to the place you have tied up all the sputum. then raise half of the abscess at the top to the whole great hook;
then extend half of the abscess on the thread, and dip your index finger in it, and feel the intestine; If you have been struck by an arrow, if it has lodged, draw out the arrow towards the back of the abdomen.
and if you find the boil, if it takes hold, cut off the excess.
and if the artery hurts or bleeds, then go inside and take 12 feathers, and tie them together, and cut off the ends so that you have 12 threads, and tie them around what you have pierced, so that you can pull it out.
then stretch the appendix out over the feathers, and if you see it, cut off the feathers, and leave it there until it has bled dry, and then remove it. and here is the first line translated into English:
and here is the first line translated into English: and remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the joint with what is right, and bind the joint.
and here is the translated text:
and here is the translated text:
And the treatment, when it is in place where it can be removed, as we have said, is to purge the disease of black bile; then make him healthy if he has manifest fulness, and then afflux the disease .i. good place for making the treatment; then pour your leechings or chancre, and hair all over, and the bone all over without leaving anything; and let the blood run freely everywhere, and squeeze the place in your hand or anything, and if the blood runs contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, if it is cauterized until the sinews are stiffened; then cure it with other remedies until he is healthy.
from dropsy We have said in the division the appearances of dropsy, and how the accumulation of water is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment that is performed with medicines, and that which is cured with iron: it is only to be touched by iron in these  .ij. appearances: namely, tympanites and hypoglycaemia, for it is a deadly thing; so when you treat this appearance of dropsy which is called "ecetes" from medicines, and the cure does not profit, if you see the patient is weak, or he has another disease besides dropsy, as we have said, and solution of the stomach and similar things; if there is no doubt, and the patient seems of strong virtue, and he is not too old nor too young, then you should do so: Lie the disease right on your hands, and the minister press the belly at the bottom of the pis by pouring water there, then take the spatumile with thorns according to this form: And they are sharpened from both sides, so that it is not so deep as to come up to the intestine when you put them in, and do not hurt them.
Then observe if there is a drop of water running toward the intestines: if it is, then cut from the back of the boudel of 13 pieces right at the knuckle; and if the droplet runs because of liver disease, then your cut should be on the left side of the boudel of 13 pieces; and if it is from the mucus, then cut to the right, and it is not necessary that the patient lie down on the cut so that the excess does not run into the weak place.
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pour it out, and hold your hand to all the spatumile between the skin and the syfac as well as by scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or more; then pierce the syfac until the spatumile comes out to the surface, and then draw it back, and pour out this instrument which has the form: And it is similar to an silver hook, and it is made of brass or light copper, and has 1 part at one end, 3 parts on one side, and 2 on the other, and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision where the scribes cut the feather:
at the top of it is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes out to the water, then draw it back now on the instrument; empty then half or one-third of it, for if you empty more than it is necessary in this hour, perhaps the disease dies because of the loss of its spirit by the weapon, or it shakes, or approaches death.
but in proportion to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the malady mean, and his hairs; then try the instrument and retain the sharp, and it is retained now for the key which closes the aperture which is on the face, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then start again the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering this, and try with the sharp a small quantity;
do not do it any day, and keep yourself from going into too much detail as long as it does not take more than a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave out a little water, so that the cure of the grave or sand is hot, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and tans him with drink; and the cure of drying medicines as long as he is healthy, and cauterizes on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
of the stopping of the virgo None of the times born child who do not have a pertus in the verge, or if the pertus is small, or it is not in its place. If it comes soon that it does not pierce at all. Take very thin spatumil according to this form: then put there a very thin clump of lint, and tie it and keep it for 15 days or 20; and when he wants to urinate, if he is osted the clump, make him urinate, and then release him; and maybe he will not notice at all, because the urine that comes furiously does not leave his close. Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.
And the way of this operation is that the patient lies down on his back, then the base of the scrotum and the penis are as long as a feather; so if the hernia bursts in the middle, as it should, and take care not to cause an evacuation of blood which comes often, and if it does, let the one who stops the blood stop it, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the penis Many times come cysts in the penis, and it is an appearance of a ugly character; and there are malicious and non-malicious ones; so that you should take them with one hand gently, and wash them and scrape them all, then put cotton wet with Egyptian ointment on them; then cure with oil of vitriol until they are healthy. And if the albath is evil, of a putrid color and depraved, it is necessary that you bring it fire cautery. When you have burned it, and the albath is in the root, and part within the hair and part away, then it is necessary that you take out the albath which is within first; and when it is sewed up, then cure it. For when you cure it together, if it is not assured the roots of the hair that they do not perforate, then blackness and corruption come into its roots and where coition is; so it is necessary to cut off all that is black and corrupted, then lie on the plaster of honey and flour which is made of the bark of pomegranates and dates, and then cure it with other cures until it is healthy.
And if the fever breaks out, it is necessary that you bring the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizations help the 2. dispositions together: that is to say, at the outbreak of the fever and corruption; and if the roots of the scrotum are corrupt and retracted, then it is necessary that you cut or conduct from the root of the scrotum a cord of rush, and make the patient urinate; and since the hair has grown on the head of the root which has been to those who have not yet been circumcised, or where there is an injury or an abscess, then it is necessary that you skin it with 1. instrument chisel, until the bonds are loosened, and the roots of the scrotum are free;
and if it is a difficult thing to devise this, then it is necessary that you skin it with 1. instrument chisel from the top of the root and the hair; then loosen them well between 2., and put 1. thin cloth of linen soaked in cold water, so that it does not burn again.
of circumcision
is not a problem of continuous healing if it is like the other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will and especially on children, we must do it with the most delicate and light-hearted manner possible for the sake of salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their laws, and we have only come across it through experience.
For I have heard the most skilled and renowned masters who practiced circumcision around the world, and in many places; so it is that I ask, for there are .ij. folds, and perhaps if one does not perform it correctly, the wound may heal properly.
Or the recovery is delayed, and the pain is doubled, and with the purification which comes from the blood there is no assurance of the point of the member; and the purification of the nail by accident escapes the iron, and corrects the work, and often happens so that there is no need for purification and I want it.
Of the purification which is made as quickly as all the limb I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the quickness cuts just as well as below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut it evenly throughout; but may the thread be well-stretched around the skin; and may the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you only tie the thread around the shaft so tightly, and then let it rest in all the ways that you can; and and then hold your hand straight between your hands, and pull the forces together between your hands or your toes that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the shaft and blow or kiss, and turn it upside down as much as the shoulder of the shaft is; then purify it well of the dirt which is gathered there, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it to 2.i. other threads by the second lieure at the knuckle and the little finger, and cope between the 2.i. threads, then lift the thread carefully from hospital; and turn the head of the shaft.
and then hold your hand straight between your hands, and pull the forces together between your hands or your toes that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the shaft and blow or kiss, and turn it upside down as much as the shoulder of the shaft is; then purify it well of the dirt which is gathered there, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it to 2.i. other threads by the second lieure at the knuckle and the little finger, and cope between the 2.i. threads, then lift the thread carefully from hospital; and turn the head of the shaft. And then let the blood run little by little, for it is the lifeblood; and put powder on top of the powder. i. a cloth is dried with one degree of wheat flour cooked with water rose distilled from rosewater, seasoned with good oil and fresh herbs, and left until the next day, and other treatments are made as long as it is healthy.
The shape of the body changes due to this treatment: the shoulders are soft and flexible, and they are also equal in width.
The error of the purification is when the blood flows out through the incision; therefore, you must extend it to your nail, so that the head makes an absece; and then he equalizes it, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, you will hold it with pliers, and then you will equalize it.
And if it is three days, and that which is in the verge is inflamed, if he leaves until the absece head is calm, and the burn lightly; if you can move it, and keep away from the part of the verge, it will not harm him.
Cure therefore the powder of things that are soudant wound, which we have said to be a treatment for powders, and if it is applied more than necessary, it goes up, so it does no harm; cure it therefore, as we have said, until it is well.
Dou retention of urine
For the retention of urine is due to a stone in the kidney, or frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or similar things, which we have said in the division;
and if the urine is not passed, and you see the retention for the stone at the base or neck of the bladder, so that the patient is bent on his knees; and if the stone is placed on the back, extend the patient's stomach from above the back, and restrain the patient to lie down as much as he can; and then forces the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, so that the urine is passed.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, so you need to bring extraction with all the instrument that is called 'syringe', which is the form: and let it be of fine light silver, as the feathers of an owl; and let the cane be a palm long and a half, and make it fine at the end.
And the way of the issue of urine is that you take .i. double thread, and tie to the end .i. little of wool or cotton, and bottle the end of the thread into the syringe; and cut off the surplus of the wool and bottle it up to the end of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and massage the bladder and penis with wet oil and olive oil and water.
then lightly insert the syringe into the penis, as far as it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the bulb; then bottle the syringe before up to the bladder, and let it come out with the urine, and this is not done except according to this order unless the patient turns it; then draw the thread all around the little pouch, and the urine follows the pouch, then remove it by force, and make the urine flow.
and restart the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and keep the patient calm.
of the diseases of the bladder
When blisters or sores come in the bladder, or if it is inflamed, then you should distil water and medicine, if done to all the instrument which is called “clepsydra”, and this is the form:
It is closed, and if it is 1.3 perches: 1. part on one side, and 1. part on the other, as you see; and let the cheveux of the medicine be such that it stops well the stem without addition, so that we can draw the moisture, and pour when necessary;
and when you see how to move your medicines in the bladder, put the chief of the medicine in the moisture, and pour it while moving, which will move the moisture to the chief, and then pour it firmly again; if it enters the moisture inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it.
and this is the form of the delicate cyst which we use to cyst the bladder: if so:
And it is of silver or archant, and the shoulder blade higher; and desoz at the .i. breast or the liiens chiet; then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture which you see to cyst the bladder, then lie between the .ij. breasts formed of a good double thread, and heat .i. poc that moisture on fire; then bottle the head of the cyst in the penis, then draw your hand over the bladder all the way up to the moisture coming out little by little, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
and if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment paper, and make 1 a circle, and pierce it roundly; then bottle 1 strong thread in these holes, then assemble the circle as one puts together 1 a dal, and put in it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do so as you have done with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of stone
Nos avons ja dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l'extraction ensemble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as reins, et toz les signes, et en que piere on doit ovir de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai ouvertement et briement.
I said that the stone that is embedded in the bladder occurs more often in children, and this is a sign that the fluid jumps from the bladder, resembling water in its subtlety; and I open it, and massage the patient's penis, and stroke it many times, and then tighten it; and its foundations are destroyed; and the healing of the children is light until they are .iiij. years old, and it is heavy in the elders, and it is weak in those who are between juvenile and elderly; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, if one first purifies the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the matter that is in the bowels. For it never causes trouble to seek the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and stand him up and move him to the left, so that the stone comes out at the top of the bladder completely; then make him sit with his hands on his knees, and his legs open wide, so that the bladder is all turned towards the ground; then seek it and touch it;
Here is the translation of the text:
And command the minister to press the bladder in his right hand, and he orders that he extends in his right hand the testicles up, and with his left hand he lifts the skin which is outside the testicles in the part where one makes the cut; then I pour the sputum copiously, from where it is this form:
And open between what is between the testicles and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left leg; and let it be right on top of the stone, and your two fingers are close to the foundation, and let the cut be wide from behind, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big;
Then open between what is between the testicles and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left leg; and let it be right on top of the stone, and your two fingers are close to the foundation, and let the cut be wide from behind, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big; by chance if you press so that the two fingers are where the foundation is, that they should not go without work; and know that there is a part of the stone or angles, and margins: it is gray going up; and if it is part that is underneath, resembling a bead, and round, of which the issue is light.
A certain cell where there are angles and margins, make the size larger; and if it does not come out, so that you extract it with pliers which are like a chisel at the top, to prevent it from escaping; or you take a very sharp instrument curved at the tip; and if you cannot engage it in this way, then open it a little more with a blunt instrument, and if it is peeled off, then extract it with vitriol.
and if there is more than one stone, first bring out the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then press hard, and the smaller ones afterward if there are any. And if it is very large, so that it is convenient to make a larger wound; for two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out through the hole where the flesh does not close; but you must try to extract it piece by piece with pliers or a chisel, as long as you extract it.
and when you have finished your work, if you employ the wound with ointment and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put thereon a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the abscess; then remove the bandage from the patient's neck after three days.
And when you remove the bandage, if it is well oiled with oil and water, then clean the wound with daphnicon ointment and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.
And if abscesses come into the wound and corrosions, and blood-clots in the bladder, and is kept back by this so that it does not jump with urine: then you should put them into the wound, and extract this blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and it will putrefy.
then lift the wound with water and mud and rope, and help it in all ways that you can until it is healed; and it is necessary that all the time that you cure it, you tie the two legs together, and apply the medicines to the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is placed in the urinary canal, and it is stuck, and urine cannot come out; then you should cut it many times with this cure that I have just said, so that it is excised from the size of the cut. I have already tried this.
Take 1/3 of iron according to this form and be 1/3 of the angles fixed in 1/2 a twig:
and take .i. a piece of wood and lay it between the testicles and the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then insert the wood lightly into the scrotum until it comes to the stone; and bring the wood back to your hand little by little in the stone until you can pierce the stone from the other side; and soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what is delayed from the stone that is inside the scrotum. If it is so soon broken, and jumps out with the urine, and is relieved of the patient's pain;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that harms it, then take 2 pieces of wood and stick one on top of the other, then lay the scrotum between them; then remove it forcefully, and untie the thread and wash the frozen blood that is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of the stone of women
if the stone is present in women, and if it has never been there before, then one thing is that perhaps the woman is virgin; and another is that we cannot find a wise woman who knows how to treat it by hand, even if she is married.
And the third mode is that by chance one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of hands; and the fourth mode is that the stone of the woman is more perfect than the stone of the man, because it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear.
And if necessity dictates, if you press a woman who is very well-versed, and in which you do not find, then cast an eye on this one: a woman who knows a little of the art; and present to him a good lady well versed in life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to make that you command from the examination of the stone.
and see well if that woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to put out his little finger or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, then she binds her little finger, and he recommends that she put out her little finger with the disease, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder formed.
If she finds it, then she binds her little finger, and he recommends that she put out her little finger with the disease, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder formed. If she has found the stone, if she moves it strongly at the entrance of the bladder until she reaches the root of the thigh; then cut over the stone in the root of the thigh where the hair grows, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her little finger over the stone or off, and let him have a small size.
Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
and if it does not go out, then put white vitriol on it, and keep it for an hour until the wound is clean; then return to your work, until the stone is out, and have the tools that I told you in the extraction of the stone at hand to help you with your work.
and if the stone comes out, and it is of the artery that has broken off, then put the powder on the top and strain the blood and lactic fluid, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not extract it except by chance, and then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided, and the loins have relaxed, then return to your work, until the stone is out.
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
of hernia
And the generation of this ramie is so weak that it comes from the testicles and is spread out that matter.
And it never comes from the percussion on the testicles, and this moisture is often of different colors: or it is a declining yellow, or without red, or black, or white water, and such happens more often;
and these are the signs of this assembly, for if it is as white as we have said, then the abscess is shallow, that is, short and as the shape of an arrow; and does not open the blisters, because it is wet all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper towel, then the abscess is shallow with part of the arrow, and because of this one thinks that it is another arrow;
And if the moisture is between the leather of the joints and the white clearly, then it smells good; so, when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all around it because its shape is as described above. And according to what comes after the joint, judge what is inside.
And according to what comes after the joint, judge what is inside. And when we cure with fire, it is fitting that the patient should be made well according to his power and the fulfillment of his body; then let him lie on his back, on a low thing, and cover him with many sheets.
then let him sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and stretch the stick at one of the two ribs at the cure of the lungs;
then take the stick lit, and peel the skin of the lungs among them all along until the end of the knuckle, and cut it with a straight slash while peeling the skin of the lungs carefully according to his power;
then pierce the plain of water at 1.5 large holes, and extract all the water, and then put your fingers in, and close the hole up; and do not touch the skin of the lungs, but only peel it yourself; cut off piece by piece carefully the skin from him, so that if you do not peel it well, the water will return;
and if the feather falls to your work, if you set it in its place when you have completed the work of medicine; then join the .ij. limbs from the knees to a seam, and heal it as you would other wounds until it is well.
And if you find the feather corrupted by another disease, if it is necessary that you hold the suspenders, in doubt of the decay of blood; then cut the joint to all the suspender, and extract the feather, and heal it as we have said.
And if the aiguille is assembled into two parts together, knowing that there are two branches; then cut the other part as you did the first, making it even, and wash the blood, and put in another wound wet with oil rosin.
and put there another wool wet with wine and oil, and put on the 2 joints, and put over double sheets, and lay it down on all the thread which is according to this form:
Then take .ii. drapelets, and employ the woollen cloth according to this appearance, and let them be sewed together by means of a seam in the girdle of the breeches, and one of the shoulders should press upon the fundament down to the back, and the other at the part of the hand; and that other two chins upon the .ii. angles, and may all be assembled into the loop of the breeches.
and never use the knife of cautery in place of a iron one, and it is that you press 1. cautery scalfice subtil, and cut the leather of the shoes, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white medicine which contains the water may come to light;
so take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white medicine with it like a bird, and dry it out by means of that scalfice cautery;
And cut it in all the ways that you can, until you have dried out everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the fat; and know that this work is more safe; and keep from corruption of blood, and make sure that the works of cutting are done well;
And if anything makes you contrary, or an abscess of blood or other thing, if the cure is opposite to it, according to what is before said.
And if the patient is fearful and will not wait for this operation because of its horror, so make a puncture, as I have said, and it is that when you are sure by the signs which we have said that the water-remedy is alive,
Then sit the patient on a high bench; then pierce the abscess at the base all along the broad part of the jaw, and place the puncture at the long hole in the chest; and make the perforation wide so that all the water can run.
Then put cotton on the hole, and tie it, and let the rest of the water run out, then heal the wound until the sore is well.
and if the stain does not let the water go out of the wound's mouth, it is necessary that you put a feather or an instrument with which one treats the water from the hydropses there; for its form is as follows: and open .i. little the wound, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after 1 month or more, and when it is gathered so as before, and thus the sick person will pass his days.
of the abscess of the testicles
Know that in the section of this chapter on pain there are many considerations, for it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
and I will tell you the work and the appearances of an abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from the heart, and most commonly from the joints; and this is due to chance.
This is to be understood: by means of bitter and sharp moisture, which is expanded in the joints, or by impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the heart; and it does not cause pain, but is a grievous abscess.
And sometimes it is a grievous and painful abscess, of fierce color, and never comes from the artery or the swelling of a vein.
When it is an artery, if it is contracted by the arrangement of an abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it is not necessary that you touch it.
The wound made by the piercing of a needle is contracted by its arrangement with the touching of the fingers.
and it can do well to make the incision on this appearance and on the other characters; and so you chop the cur of the cow, then hang the liver high, and the truffle white as medicine, and free the suspender from all parts of the liver.
Now that the liver is already sodden with these new ingredients, it is therefore necessary that you take the liver and the cur.
and if it is fresh, or in that which is within the bags, it is necessary that you deliver all of it, and chop it well.
And if the birth of the cur is behind, it is necessary that you chop it all, and extract the liver, as we have said.
And when your wounds are done, wrap the wound in wet wool, oil and wine, and then cure it with other remedies until it is well.
of the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess surrounded by a wrapper-like appearance, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans with pain when he moves;
and the cure for this disease is well prepared with fear as before.
and we will tell you how to work on it, according to what the old one did.
It is necessary that you sit the sick person on .i. a soft seat, and then pour the poultice liquid down their throat from both sides, to all the vessel that are near to the penis, and wet them with the master liquid, and extend them out.
Then chop with a sharp spatula from the top down over the vessels, until they are all uncovered.
and then peel each part off, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples;
then take an awl or it has .i. double thread, and tie it to the first loop where it came into view, and then quickly to the other end; Then chop them in the middle correctly, according to the length of the body, and cut out the corrumptous moisture;
then treat the wound as with others where a bow is shot, so that no vessel hits either of the balls;
For if it comes from nowhere, and all the vessels come out, then you must pull the balls from all the vessels; so that the wound does not lose its moisture because of the incisions of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
of the rupture of the syrup Here is the translation of the text line by line:
"And this tear is either due to sectioning or to external application on the abdomen, and these two ways of causing pain are: by beating, jumping, braying, or lifting heavy things, and similar actions;"
"And the signs when it is due to external application on the ribs, are that it happens little by little over a long period of time and does not suddenly occur;" "And the rib bones are even up to the very end, so that the tear does not cause the intestine to separate."
And the signs are when it is of the section of the physician, that she brings about sudden painful trouble, and are the abscesses different appearances, separating the skin, and this for the issue of the intestine and the body away from the physician.
And never does it separate with the intestine, and is held in, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
In these cures of iron, for fear of it coming out.
And the method of this work is that you command to the patient that he keep the intestine in his hand within the wound, if it can be re-entered; Then have him sit with his head between your hands, and loosen the hair.
Then cut off all of the skin from the top, then bottle up the essence of the oil of the skin according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that it can easily come out.
then peel off the skin, scraping all the way down until the blisters appear;
and place your two fingers in the opening of the crotch, between the white skin which is behind the scrotum and between the second skin.
and depart what is behind the scrotum and between the second skin; and then move to the palm of your right hand into the crotch opening, and hold the white skin on top of your left hand, and bring the scrotum up against all the skin around the groin. and instruct the minister to stretch out the scrotum upwards, and pull back what is above the anus.
and look with your two fingers if there is any hard or white skin wrapped around the intestine, and if you find nothing, pour it into the gut.
And take a needle where it has .i. thick thread made of .x. threads, and the bottle in the back part dou sic, which is after the skin of the coins; after the size, then cut the heads that appear from the thread, as long as there are .iiij. threads; and then assemble one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind sic where we have said that is removed from the skin of the coins, with a strong thread of 2 parts; and then wrap the heads of the thread and bind them together with 2 parts, so that no one of the vassals who suckles them can enter the ears, so that an abscess does not come up; and then put the thread on according to the first long thread of 2 parts, and after these 2 threads leave sic where the skin is removed from the coins, which is large for one part;
and then all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; and chop in the part which is outside the skin of the eggs, until it stops running, and the bow, as we have said before;
and then introduce the moist wool in oil, and put on the wound, and put the thread that we have said. And no time is cauterized with the white salt that we have said, after the incision, by doubt of decay of blood.
For this often happens, and leaves the thread as long as it sews itself; and if it delays to sew, so let it be raised with hot water, and put on that we have said, as long as it sews itself; and then:
and then treat the wound with another treatment until it is completely healed.
of hernia carnous
In this recipe I have never seen anyone attempt to make a cure for hernia with fire.
And the ancient ones said that it is made in this way, as if you tie the vassels together, after cutting on a light and lightly; and tu mettras le li sur un bois, ou il est par temps sec et sans vent.
and then cut off the appendage, and cure the abscess for those who have it, as long as they are still alive; and cure it as we have said, until they are well.
No time comes when there is a rupture in the bowels, as we have said, and open them; and do not remove any of the bowels to the outside, and if any are removed, it is little, and repair every hour;
and wherever he stays too much in this place, if the wound or syphilis believes him, as long as the intestines are removed;
and where there is a stretching of the syphilis that is in the bowels, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then it softens and dilates the intestines and opens them;
and he is healed by cautery, as we have said above; and he is never healed by iron in this way:
and the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then place the fire cautery over the edge of the wound according to the quantity of .ii. two;
and then remove the skin that is separated from the flesh, and then take the hair and place it on the edge of the skin;
and then press it perfectly to the belly, and cut the .ii. inches of skin that is on the edge of the hair, and cut the two;
Then remove the head from the root, and do not cover with any medicine or extend the blade in any other way, as I have told you in the treatment of the ramose intestines.
And then he heals by healing wounds. And when you cover the fibers, if the wound and the healing are good, as long as it is healthy.
The medicine must be kept in place, and does not have a visible appearance in the incision; and the cauterization is wet in this spot, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the leather of the joints
Maitre de la cauterisation par le feu, enseigne au patient à laisser pousser les poils jusqu'à ce qu'ils soient longs et égaux; et s'il les gratte à leur base, maintenez-les immobiles jusqu'à ce qu'ils poussent.
Voici la traduction du texte en anglais :
I will translate the provided text into English:
of hermaphrodites
Here is the translation of the text:
of the tenticle
Here is the translation of the text:
of irregularity
de erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n'est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c'est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l'enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connaissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S'il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu'il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l'oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines stainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d'uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d'autres cures tant qu'il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n'est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l'aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
Emorroids are openings in the veins which, without surgery, and when the emorroids are old, they become thulles; and we have said in the division the appearances of the anus, and the signs, and I will say here those who receive cure. I say that the emorroids and the thulle, when they are completely inside the buttocks, and it is not felt unless it is cured by iron. Those who are at the mouth of the buttocks can be felt, and they can be cured. Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold room, then tie the thulle to the clasps, and powder in restraining medications, if possible, and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then pour his feet on the wall for an hour, then put it in cold water; and if it comes out, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranates and scabs and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confit with honey and easily, and make .i. plasters on his back. And if it dries up, it is good. If not, have the ventouses put on her back and the mamelles without hurting; then take another, and squeeze it into juice of plantain or blackcurrant juice with old wine, and make it come to the place. And when the abscess stops, let the place be oiled until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a .i. rough head, if it should be covered as I have said about the thulle; and then cure it until it is healed.
of the buttocks
Here is the next sentence translated into English:
of childbirth
of childbirth
If the baby comes out by its own natural power, and the woman gives birth with a groan, and the virtue of her is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or have women support her; and pour a little oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then put the midwifery between her two knees, this being the form: If the baby comes out by its own natural power, and the woman gives birth with a groan, and the virtue of her is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or have women support her; and pour a little oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then put the midwifery between her two knees, this being the form:
of the issue of the child from its feet When the baby comes out from between its legs, then you should lift it up. and then turn it over and over until it is even;
and then rub. And when you have done this, then stretch it out and rub it over and over again.
And as soon as they jump, if they are instructed to vibrate, and this is done by making it shake with cold. If they jump, let them see God.
And if it does not work as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is in accordance with natural form. For then it is light.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, take musk of the earth, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind them all together in a mortar: and put on the woman's natural secretions, and spread this ointment: then let her sit in an lukewarm bath until she is completely wet;
and when she is thoroughly wet, she is given a necklace of myrrh, and it is put on her, and she is left for an hour; Then set it on a seat, then make it shake and hold its mouth and nose, and pinch its belly lightly, for the child does not weigh much now. from the birth of the child on its knees When the child is in this condition, if I put my hands on its belly gently and repeatedly:
of the birth of the child who comes out wide a hand during It is necessary to devise how to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, if one makes the woman stand up and go.
if she cannot walk, if you make her lie down on her side, and raise her legs slightly.
then introduce the muscle tension that I have described.
and if it does not give birth, then take care not to place your hand on it; and the child according to its natural form, and make it sway, and command that it stretch itself as much as the child is born.
of the birth of the child on its neck, and has spread its hands, and its face turns towards its mother's back So that the dance holds its hand, then turns it slowly, and lightens it gradually;
and when it is even, put it on the muscular nature of ale and oil, as we have said, then order that it move little by little;
and when you have done this, if the fire sit on .i. place, and order that it shrivel; and the fire will shake. of this same manner for all the second part
of this same manner for all the second part When it comes in this way to all the second part, if you rub the second hand on your nail, as long as the moisture is empty;
and if he falls on his face and on his neck, so that the cup of wine is spilled, so that it is not held, and the man dies;
then pour the child in, until you have put him in as it should be, and command the woman that she does not weep once:
of the twins' birth. It is known that twins are born many times, but not once or twice; and this is not a strange thing, and does not often happen. Two are a strange thing, and do not live much, if at all.
I know that they may be multiplied, and are devised by the doctor who devises them, who is tied to the boudelle.
and not once or twice do they naturally come like all others, as we have said.
And if there is a grating sound, if the treatment is as we have said, and let the ball be subtle, and quickly and lightly do what it does. and make it as it should for salvation. of many children
of many children No one is formed except in the marriage of .i. or .ii. or .iii. or .iv. or .v. or .vi. or .vii., and all are formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious,
and he knows all things, for in similar things there is doubt. if you make it as what he says.
of the dead child.
When you treat a woman whose child has died or her womb is empty, as I said in the division, and she does not conceive again, and you are compelled to work with your hands; If it is necessary for you to know that her woman is of sound virtue, and has not experienced any accidents or fears of death.
If it is necessary for you to know that the woman is lying on her back, with her feet lowered and her legs raised.
and the midwife should hold her at the chest, or she will lie in bed so that she is treated with the birth of the child.
Then massage her mouth with moist oil made from almond and fenugreek seeds and flax seed, then oil her hands with these oils and these ointments. Then bottle up in the light, then want. i. him or her bottle the onions that are suitable for this,
and take care so that he is properly dressed, so that it hangs down over his head; so file the onions into his eyes or his neck or his throat or his palate or his tonsils or near his cheekbones, or at the back of his throat;
and then they hang down over his feet, they file or pinch and touch his toes;
and let the patient dye the cloth on his right hand, and place the sponge between the two of his left hand, and lightly dip the cloth into all these places until it comes to the empty thing;
then put another oncine there, where you need it, so that the extractions are even;
and then make it even by moving it from one side to the other, so that the claws come out, and the claws hold it in place, as this is the form:
And if a part of it remains, if he applies oil to some of its two sides and fills that part with it, and draws the other part.
And if none of it remains, let him set this ointment or more high up and do so often as it comes out all over.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the tightness, then cover it with a cloth until it stops coming out.
And then wrap it up in the joint of the foot or at the ankle, and so you must do with the other hand, and for .ij. feet.
If the child is large and obstructed in the passage, or has an acute angle gathered together, then you must put the spatemile with thorns between your two hands, and push it forward and pull out the acute one; or you must wrap it in the instrument which is called "almidah", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapistry which comes after this one;
and thus make him fall by nature's own power; and then try to pull out the bones with tweezers,
and then cut off the head and pull it out by force, if it still moves, until all the moisture is gone;
and if it cannot be pulled out, then cut it into small pieces with a knife so that you can remove it;
and if it is inflamed in the belly or seizes the ribs, then you must pierce them while the moisture runs.
and if it seizes him on his feet, if is a light traction, and the rehabilitation to the mouth of the foot is simple.
and if it is dislocated in the belly or in the leg, then you must extract it with the cloth wrapped around your hand; and if it is dislocated in the belly or in the leg, while the moisture that is running;
and if the other member is broken, and the shoulder remains immobile, if he cuts off his hand completely from the arm, and draws it out at the elbow; then he should draw a line on the skin with his finger, and cut there;
and if the mouth of the arm is constricted by an abscess that has come out, then it should not be worked; a means of dealing with moist and greasy things; and it is prepared with vinegar, and chopped up in water that is both salt and sour.
And it is put on the skin, and you may then make it even, and apply to it what we have said about the living child;
and if one does not have power, so let him cut it into pieces, and leave nothing of the second;
And when you have done this, bring him who has said to us in the aphes that they come in the mareis;
and if the blood flow comes, so he is restrained in water, and others are brought him.
And I saw a woman whose womb had a child killed, then she consults another, and refuses to kill the other. After a long time, the twenty aphes in the bouilloire, and it began to boil, and caused great pain.
I was called to treat, and I thought long, and I could not close the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and in it I placed a bone, and after a few days another one. I marveled much, for where there is no bone, the belly does not ache.
I thought it was bones from a dead child.
I would like to place the wound, and with two hands, until the woman was much improved; and wait for the woman a long time, and he was set back a little bow in place;
and I have not remembered this chapter before but that, when the master tries a strange thing, he knows how to help.
to bring back the bride to her bed
Here comes the first sentence to translate: However, the corners should be thinner than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood; and
and the mouth of the horn should be 1 2/3 inches wide, and the margin of the tree 1 inch wide, and a palm long; and the two limbs of this horn should be joined by a joint that is 1 palm long or a little more;
and these two supports are pressed to the mouth of the mare by opening when they turn .ij. horns.
Another shape, its appearance more subtle and lighter, should be made of oak or boxwood, according to the appearance of the nails; and has .ij. supports and .ij. brackets, as you see, of a palm long and .ij. wide;
and when you see the mare opened to all the instrument, if sitting well the woman on 1 bed, with the legs hanging and the feet out; Then bottle up the .ij. ajostemens ajostez them together in the marris, and hold the chief of the instrument desoz between his cuisses; Then operate your hand on all the instrument, as you have made them evenly, according to the quantity that you perceive opening the mouth of the marris, until the ball makes what it should.
This instrument is all mounted, and has many uses; and when you see them prepared, the more quickly you work, and the higher you raise them for their quantity.
If you do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for their necessity is not excusable.
When the second child is coming, it is necessary that you command to the disease that she keep her tongue, and then make it sneeze, and keep your hands away from her mouth and nose; And if she does not do so, she will die.
If she does not do so, she will sneeze, or spit, and put herbs in her mouth that can open the mouth of the sick person, as thyme, Rue, Anise, Chamomile, Cassialine and Centaire.
all of these herbs, or any of them, are cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put a hook or a stick in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the sick person,
and scabies as long as the fumes come into the marrow; then make it shake, as we have said. If it is a second attack. And if it remains after this treatment and is not healed, command that she soak her left hand in olive oil or musk oil of althaea, and then pour [it] into the air.
and wants it again; and when she has found it, if she holds it and extends it little by little correctly, so that the marrow does not break at the extraction; but it is necessary to move lightly from right to left, and then pull; so he will come and dislocate himself.
And if the mouth of the wound is dry, we have said the cure of sweating, and of smoking with herbs;
and if it is not all of what we have said, keep in mind that you do not make a mistake when pulling;
but it is necessary that the one who is at the mouth of the wound, you tie him to the crotch of the woman, and then rub with oil four-fold tar;
If it is not cured and left alone, it will get worse; but if it is treated, when it is cured there will be a foul smell from the stomach and head, and harm the patient.
If one should apply suitable fumigation: no one has yet tried fuming with nettle leaves and dried figs.
The form of the instrument by which one fumes the woman at the retention of flowers and the second one is this:
And it is like the appearance of a dog, and put the thin head in the nature, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
and are fumigations on the charcoal, and the scabies until they are exhausted, and start a new one.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who have not had their foundations pierced, but a skilled surgeon can make an incision and cure them. If, therefore, one pierces the foundation of this child with the knife of surgery and does not pierce it too deep, and sews up the place where he has made the incision so that it is not touched,
and put it on a different bed soaked with wine and oil, then the treatment of wound care as long as it is healthy.
If you doubt that it will not return, then put a wooden pole across and leave his hands free, and let him rest while he walks in the rooms.
And never comes the sudden stop of pain from a wound or an abscess; if it is necessary to cover suddenly: if it is cured, as we have said about the wooden pole.
of the fistula from the foundation Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodation, and those that grow larger than those that come from the fundament or in the space of the .ij. parts,
If there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodation is old, if it is opened and then moistened with a white or subtle powder, or
And these fistulas never persist; and they are known by that which comes out of it or moves from it when the patient has defecation, and sometimes in the movement of wind.
And if there are fistulas that pierce only to the bladder, and only to half of the penis; and they reach only to the junction of the scrotum, and only to the nose tip.
And so, know how to recognize a fistula that penetrates to the fundament, but not that penetrates from without. and so, stick your little finger or fundament, and stick a very fine needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twist.
and if there is a twist, and you stick a piece of thread or a hair from a horse, as long as you feel the thread or hair in your finger;
and if you don't feel it, and there is no pain, gas, or sight coming out, as we have said: Here is the translation of the provided text:
"And if the fistula reaches until the bladder or until the conduit of urine, and if urine leaks out, and cannot be stopped by medication."
"If it is pierced only to the hip joint of the groin, then let it be set at ease up to the height;" "If there is no twist and the pain at the entrance of the abdomen, then let it be set in place by gentle pressure, and do not use medication or massage;"
and in these fistulas that persist there is no cure except work, and the vanity of foolish looks that interfere with them.
In those that are neither persistent nor old, there is hope of health by fire, as I have experienced,
and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and bring his legs up to his hips, and bend his hips towards his stomach; then pour a bucket of water, or a spoon if there is a twisting, until you know where the bucket comes from.
If the patient feels pain in the fundament, then you must put your index finger there.
Now feel where the nerve ends; and, uncovered, feel between your thumb and the finger, so you know it's persistent; If it does not work, it cannot be cured.
One should always use fire to cure some, but it is difficult to do so well;
and the aid which is made, if it is heated the fine caustic according to the width of the fistula, as said before; and pour the bottle all hot in the fistula, until it comes out smoothly from the base; and do this .ij. times or .iiij., as long as you know that these hairs are burned, which are like an owl's feather;
and then the doctor of tents moistened cures, until that hair comes out, and then the doctor of ointments wrapping hair and binding it.
If it is thus healthy, it is good. If not, otherwise cannot be healthy;
and if it is tried between, and does not pierce up to the thumb which is at the base, and on the two sides of the tent a thick covering of cloth or silk, and you see the fistula in this who sews the covering to the edge; if the cloth of the encumbrance of the fistula is sewn together and glued before the tent, and then heat after, until it comes to the top of the tent;
and the tent will be delivered, and it will shine; then make those cloth trees that look like an owl's feather, and there remain no more.
And if the sun goes out, and light comes between you and the work, if the fire cautery or medicinal broth.
For the fire cautery brings together 19 useful things: namely, the burning of these joints, and the drying up of blood and the removal of moisture.
then heal wet tents by drying them out or burning them, until the joints are dry, and burn the burned joints in the fire.
then heal the sore spots that have grown hard due to the harsh heat of the fire, and dry out the medicine.
For once it is healed, then it is well and does not return.
And if a fistula comes just to the foundation, and is distant from the heart, you should turn it back on its two foundations, and ask that one.
If you feel the pulse, and between iij is the towre or the syfac or chares, where it is ready to pierce, there should be only a way of betrothal and hope by the administration of one of the iii ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it just to the foundation, or if you can, put tendons and cure it as first:
and do not go too far with the cauterization so that you cover the foundation, and come to the outlet by the voluntary way; and then the doctor, as we have said;
and then the doctor, as we have said; in case he is well, or remove that covering and turn it upside down then he will find the source of his disease, or with a needle or another instrument; and then examine that hair which is in the wound, as well as you can;
and then study how to restore the wound, and delay the fistula in the opposite part of the foundation: this will be lighter for the patient.
And there are no fistulas according to this way: and it is when you pierce the tent in the fistula, and it is or costit doulx lez lo cuire delez laou desous, take a tent pierced at the top according to this form: And I pour one inch thread through it, and pierce the tent at all ends through the thread up to the top of the tent.
If it persists within the margin from the foundation, then remove the thread from that pierced, so that you pierce your two or foundation margins;
and tie up the head of hair, and bring together the two shoulders together, and hold them apart from each other, and leave it a day or two.
and do not restrain once, until the thread has cut between the two, and the shoulders have moved apart;
and then heal the wound as long as it is sealed and healthy.
if the fistula does not pierce, if you can pierce it in all ways that you can, if it is not too completely enclosed.
For it is not right to do this with a complete closure, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healthy again.
The form of the spikelet from which one makes a tube, if it is wet with water, is cut and trimmed; And on the other hand, it should not be done in this way, because it is not right to do so; you see this clearly here:
Here is the translation of the text line by line into English: and there is one or more, and they are away from the fundament and at the top of the fundament; but those that are away have a little moisture, and
and then cut again where there is a little yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment for those who have them within the fundament, so that you command the patient to sweat by sitting in a bath, until the fundament comes out, and then they discover the fibers; If you hurry, and hold it as claws, or if you hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots.
and if the uncut hair is wet, take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather; and pull them with your fingers, then cut them and powder them with hot powders that are in the fire's place; or you can cauterize them as described above or with a paste of cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;
and if the foundation cannot come out, then cauterize the patient with a burning cautery and sharp, to wash what is at the foundation, so that it can come out freely;
Then let the patient lie down, and if his blood is hot, and his pulse is rapid, let him rest for a while; and then let you press them with your nail or tweezers and cut them off, and then cure them as we have said, until they are well, and do not fear the incision with iron.
If it is necessary that you bring the stitch in this way: take .i. thread, and wind it onto a needle, and then pull the thread over and under the needle, and make the needle pierce from the other side, and return the .ij. pieces of thread from the other end of the needle. and if it is wide; and pull the thread up, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do so with all of them, and leave. i.e. in order to remove the excess blood;
then put on the foundation. i.e. dip it in oil or wax, and put on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave it for a while, and when he has finished his business, if the wound has healed, he may take care of other things, until he is well.
but only after the foundation has been laid Many times there is drying up of the fins in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is no good.
If you must go to the point of a sputum or your nail the shell above, which does not let it get wet. then heal it as much as it is sodden so that it can be healed;
and if it cannot be sodden, then restart the rasuring more strongly than before, as much as it heals, and is scorched; and then heal until he is well.
he will sweat. is a small green thing in front of the body, and goes very well;
and there is no time when the wound does not hurt, and one can feel it all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
And the treatment is that you take a feather from an goose, or from a strong eagle, and place that feather on the wound, until the purple ring surrounds the entire wound. Then turn your hand to all the feather, until you have covered the entire wound, and place it perfectly in place, and scrape the wound from its roots.
And if you wish, make one of these with metal or iron according to this shape, and be subtle and run over it:
do not pierce it, so that you keep the two together, and press: And if you wish, cauterize the wound, as it is before or with fire of cautery.
of the form of the clister No one should make a clister of silver or brass, or of molten bronze or brass; and no one should use these small or large instruments according to the places where they are applied.
These, on the other hand, are used for the cure of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the clister is small and large according to its width, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
and I say a difficulty where the belly is bound, so that you see it, and the ribs are within pierced; and on one side has .ij. openings, and on the other .i..
and let the belly be put to medicine with a bladder of wine or parchment, and be pierced all around the small openings,
and place between each opening 1/2 space of space cloth, then bottle in these openings strong thread of twisted yarn in 10 or so around, and assemble the belly as if it were a sheep; and when the medicine is inside, if the tool has a strong thread in front of it, then distilate; and it is the shape of a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil of olive, or of egg yolk, or a similar thing, then pour it lightly.
Then the ministers spread it with their two hands together as long as it is hot, then remove the oil and place the patient's legs against the wall,
And let the medicine run out if it needs to, and if it sleeps all night, then that is greater help.
And if you cauterize for a disease of the abdomen, and the medicine runs out quickly, then continue to apply it until you are healed.
And if hemorrhoids are at the fundament or at the abscess, then is the catheter also as small as for .i. a child;
and this is the form of the catheter that is thin on which the skin is held back:
for wounds
We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will speak about the cures for hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
I say that wounds are various according to what they are made, and according to the places where they are made, and because of it they are made.
The things that cause wounds are by hitting with a stone, or cutting with an sword or a dagger, or a lance or a staff or a spear, or similar things; or
or that are made by the blows of the heart, such as a wound on the neck, or on the head, or on the breast, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar limbs; or
and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the reminder will come in my chapter.
I say that when a simple wound appears at the top, and the bone is not broken, if you are careful it is from a stone or similar thing, and the skin is all torn and the wound is great, and you doubt the possibility of an abscess: if you do this quickly from the pain in the head, and it goes to the opposite part of the injured member;
and remove the patient's repletion of wine and meat that is heavy.
And if it does not heal, if its meat is reduced, and does not drink wine or eat cheese;
and at the wound, if an abscess forms, wet cotton in oil and wrap it, or use wine as a styptic.
and if there is no abscess, if it is fresh to the whole of its blood, and does not move by air, powder, which I will say a little later;
and if it has been moved, if it is on some herbs, as long as it is healthy.
And if the wound is large, as much as a sword's edge and similar things, and the lips cannot be joined by tenderness, if they are joined by stitching, as I will say to wounds from the navel.
If the wound is exposed to bone, and it only holds for a little while when sutured, then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. And instruct the patient to eat large meats, as tested and baked bread, also as poultry, and similar foods.
And if you find any putrefaction of the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then chop off all of it, and burn it, and then heal it.
and if it has an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a string. and if he does not benefit from it, then cauterize him.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the light cure is: and that you put this powder which hardens so that fire moves it.
And the way of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood 2 parts; live coal 3 parts, and the powder subtly, and apply the wound, and the stain form, as long as it is well dried up and joins all its blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it unbound if it does not swell, for one should not bandage the medicine until it is healed.
And never use calamine powder at all, when you have not burnt the incense or the dragon's blood, but let the wound move by itself.
And if the wound has moved on its own, even if it is still open, do not apply this powder.
but put on some oil of saffron or wheat flour made with water and honey, as long as it covers the wound. and then let the physician prescribe other remedies until he is well.
And if the fracture of a bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with gentle tweezers;
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
of the wound in the throat
Here is the translation of the first line of text:
If it is at the throat, if there is no other device to leave the wound open, and do not place anything restricting, because it harms those who have it and make them withdraw; and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the neck is cold, and the flow of blood is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but either the medicine is cold, as hot water in mild water and mixed with oil of roses, and boiled also in mild water; ou si n’y a autre remède que de li mettre un chauz au col, et le laisser a ses sours, et li faire bonne cure. and other stones of mine according to this way, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is great, so that the bandage does not hold it, then treat it until he is well.
And if the wounds are deep and she is hairy and full of hair, so that the cut or deeper;
and if the artery is cut, and the flow of blood comes, so that the darkness, and the fever, and the cauterization this craft is;
and if the wind is stuck in the throat, or the coughs, and the diet is kept, so that meat goes well. if the cough is on top of the neck of the throat, and does not touch the throat but sets it back according to its natural shape; and then the extraction is gradually brought forward, and is left for some days, and then the cure of onions is discarded as long as it is healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, so seek it; and if there are pieces of bone, if the tough muscle is strong for you, and those that you cannot have, leave it until the wound festers. and let the discharge be clear and regular;
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder that I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter on the chapître.
of the wound of a spear or knife
If the wound is caused by a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, then observe whether the patient faints: for so the wound is fatal.
and if it is not deep and the wound is fresh throughout the body, then in the first hour put on the powder, and do not bind it tightly for fear of slowing down its progress. and keep the patient warm, and attend to the patient. but I do not know if attractive healing, and lie .ij. times a day;
and if you have no healing, put in the wound dry cotton to suck out the moisture,
and let the patient lie on the wound .iii times a day, or .iiii., or more often; if there is no spasm, nor a tremor of the body from heat or cold; and when you see such good conditions, know that the wound is saved. Treat the cancer of the breast and other cures, as long as it is healthy;
and if it cannot be healed, and there is a fistula, then know that it has been treated as one should.
And if the wound is from a knife or a scalpel, and it is simple, or on the front or back, then know how to treat what is before you.
Here is the translation of the text line by line: and if they are exposed, then let the wound rot, and will bring about extractions;
and for other wounds and other members is the judgment as we have said.
and the rupture of the womb
The breakdown of the abdomen is great and wide and small.
From the great wound there escapes none of the intestines, or of the mesentery that holds them, so that the ingress of water
and the suture is more difficult, and never heals better than the small wound than the large one,
so that we reset the intestines further apart, since we don't reset them from one part to another. for so that the intestines swell up often enough to feel the cold, so they enter more into the toes,
and for so that the meat of the leg swells up often enough to feel the cold, so it stays in place more than other 19.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to 34 ways:
the 19 common sutures are found in the suture of the belly,
and the stitching of the other wounds of the chest and .ij. other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
and likewise they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will say each one and I will declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine in sight, and good thing is to treat it, this is done by one of the two ways: because of its smallness because their intestines are swollen from cold.
And when it is cold, heat it in this way: moisten a sponge or .i. moist cloth in lukewarm water only slightly, Here is the translation of the provided text: and let the intestine swell until it breaks open;
and do not tighten it, and let it swell until it bursts;
And when you see the swelling go away, if you moisten the intestine with water or ale and cook them well, For by this the entrance is closed to few things;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small hole in the wound with the instrument with which one copes with hemorrhoids;
and the first cure is to moisten so that he can chop it; so we don't have to chop it unless there is a great need;
and this is the instrument for splitting:
if you cut it inside the shell and do not bend it, and see the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, if you put it back in its natural position in its proper place: If you can, for this is worth doing.
When the wound is large, and it is in the lower abdomen, if you should cause the patient to lie down on his back, and place his legs higher than his head, and if it is in the region of the loins the belly,
and also if it ruptures the belly in one of the two regions, if the hip region where it is dislocated is higher than the other,
and so it is necessary to treat what I have said about great wounds and painful injuries.
For small wounds but with this you are dressed,
and then place your hands minister pitous who covers all the wound with his hand, and gather the lips; and this is the common method of suturing.
and this is the common method of suturing. and you must twist a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave two spaces at the head of the wound, and thread a needle with good strong thread; and pierce the leather with the needles from the side,
then extract it from a double thread entor the needle of 20 parts, and gather the 20 together of the wound ahead,
and then leave them for two spaces, and I put another needle; then lay down the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need with the needles, as long as all the wound is closed.
and let the needles fall, between fine and coarse, because the fine needles fill all the space, and the very thick ones cannot enter well: so that they are of moderate size;
and do not push the needles too far from the edge of the hair and leather;
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie avant la soudure;
and then cut off the heads of the needles, so that they do not hurt the patient while he is sleeping, and I put blankets or sheets over the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is sealed;
and this method of sewing with needles is most useful for small wounds, because it requires a needle or .ij.
The second stitch is common, and it is that you join the leather and the fabric together with a strong thread; and when you have perceived these things together,
and when you have perceived these things together, if I return the needle to the part where you have begun, in the manner that one threads the thread;
and put space between each stitch of the same size as a small nail;
this stitch is for the seven days of the week;
and I sewed up a wound this honourable man had on his belly,
who was stabbed with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in length, and it was from his intestines, measuring about three feet in length,
and this wound is inside the belly. I brought him back his intestine after xxiiij hours.
and the wound healed after xv days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
And the miracle was that he did not die, and this was a wonder.
and do not cure it with ointment, for I am in .ii. leu where one cannot find it or any medicines; and rub cotton wool 19 times a day on the wound, and wash it with honey water until it was well.
or I will tell you the three proper ways to sew:
take the needle, and thread it from the outside in;
When she perceives the cure of disease by right, if the head of the phallus or coast or you have swallowed the needle,
and pierce it from another part from within until it reaches the exterior;
and he should know about this stitch so that you also sew like the furrier sews the pelts, and leave the phallus on one side and the other on it until the stitch is completely done.
The second method of suturing, which is properly done by Galens
if it is if there is no thread, which joins the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the chiefs to the other chief in this manner:
file an awl or needle near the Miramich chief, and pierce it only once, and leave the .ij. shoulders of the sick then turn the needle, and pierce it from the outer part to the inside, as shoulders of the sick.
then pierce the other two from the outer part to the inside, in 2 other shoulders that are opposite sides of the body;
and this is the manner of sewing, and the most common way.
Here are the first two lines translated into English:
"It is necessary to sew the abdomen with .ij. needles, or each one have thread."
"and must one needle be pushed from one side, and the other from the other, in the way of those who sew with thread."
and know that when the rupture is within the navel, that is the suturing more painful than those of other places in the abdomen.
the assessment of the wound is such as that of the other wounds:
and when you find the fresh wound, so that the fire has moved it, if you reset the bowel, and rub it; then put the powder on gently massaging,
if you reset the bowel, and rub it; then put the powder on gently massaging, and if the meat is moved, place any ointment that is present on it, as much as the wound; and chop the flesh, and let the sinew be tied, and the mirror; then treat the wound as you would with others, until it is healthy;
and if you do not have medicines, put on, as soon as it begins to go out, cotton wisp, and move it. 15 times a day until it is well.
For you do not need any other medicine in many cases, when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will not connect to the main members; If it is necessary for you to soak another light object in oil of time/temperature heat, or in oil of roses, and put it between the arms, and clean out the armpits;
and if it hurts or feels warm, and often happens, If the wine blackens and causes burning, and sometimes comes to the intestine;
and the perforation inside, and know that when it is the large intestines, so it is lighter to heal than the small.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot be healed when it is torn, and this is due to the shape of the veins and the subtlety of the whole body, and the nearness of its nature to that of children.
And if the wound jumps from the pain, so it is set back as well as the intestine, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and turning towards black, that you lie the place which is black, that does not come from blood, for there are veins and arteries;
then hold what is between the links, and put the two chains hanging from the side of the wound away from it until the extraction is complete when the hair pulls, and the wound opens.
about the piercing of a boil
When the intestines are ruptured and the wound is small, if one can restore it in some places,
for I have seen some honourable men wounded or slain by a lance,
and this wound was on the right side of the abdomen, and became infected and developed a discharge, and had wind and gas.
I treated it according to what I could find, and did not stop until he was well, and sewed up the wound.
And when I saw him sewn up, I doubted that the disease was in his abdomen; and there is no harm, but delay in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
and said no experiments that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in some way: take nails from great testicles, then join the lips of the wound, and when the nails have opened the mouth, so that it is placed on the iij. lips,
then he puts on another bandage after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely covered;
and then he bandages the wound; If this is burning within the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient,
and it can be tied with a fine thread cut from the intestines of an animal,
in this way: take the head of this thread of intestine that is completely removed, and then place at the head of this thread .i. a thin twine of flax twisted then put the string in the needle, and cut the intestine, and retie it in the suture;
and this method of sewing with thread is only good according to the path of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, mostly when it is in one of the internal grooves, then there is no need for surgery, but only for subtlety.
of the fistula or where it is I know that any wound or abscess, once it has healed, is called a "fistula" universally. and most often when it is cut and sewn up.
And the fistula is according to the green seed of the plant that grows hard and white, or one does not feel pain there. and is also called the horse's tail.
and never clear in a jump, and sometimes thick. and never pokes, and sometimes enough.
and I have spoken in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no cure, It is because of only one of these 29 causes:
This is to say, namely, by the small wound or piercing. or due to its malignity; or because it has a hard core within, and on the lips, which does not allow them to grow; Where there is too much bowels. where the bowels are putrefied, and the matter is of bad quality; where the medicine is not good for the cure; where because corruption is a way of plague; For by its own property, in the late region there is late digestion, and late health, and it flees by nature. where there are veins or bones:
and I have also described all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicine in the division.
Or it is necessary that I make known to you the cure for fistula, which is made by work of hands.
I see that fistula can occur in all limbs of the body; for there are fistulas which come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the syrup, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this way are great damage, and there is only work, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the light until I have said it, and you are engaged in its cure, and if you see it clearly, so take a piece of leather or iron, if the fistula is straight, if you seek it.
and if his fistula is twisted, so that the search for a fine hook to pull, For the plunges are bent due to the twistiness;
and if his fistula is deeply injured and you cannot well search for it with hooks, so that the cautery by fire goes into one of the injuries,
For the moisture is short from one hole to another, and cleanses it.
then ask if there is bone or nerve, and chop it off completely,
and ask the patient if he feels pain when you squeeze his hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you know for sure where it is, whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein; Here is the translation of the text:
Here is the translation of the text: and bones were broken and corroded pieces of flesh that were inside them; and then the treatment until she is healed,
and the opening of the scar should be very deep from the right place, so that you cut it perfectly, as much as you can, and I put wet medicine on it, and I bottled it up to the top of the fistula.
and I put wet medicine on it, and I bottled it up to the top of the fistula. as long as the medicine corrodes the excess that is retained at the bottom;
and I put honey in it, mixed with holy oil, as long as it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy with this, then the fire cautery as we have said,
and if his eye is corrupted by the fistula, then the patch. For in the vein or neck where the main members are, as we have said;
and if his eye is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, if the king is as long as the corruption is all bone, then treat with cauterization things that are dangerous to the health as long as he is healthy;
and if he is not healed, and goes back to the same way as before, knowing that you have not come all the way here
if you discover and wait until you are at the bottom, and bone all the corruption, then restore the joint;
and if he is healthy then that is good. if not, know that the corruption is too perfect, so you can't come there; if there is no other way to cure except by nature's means;
and if there is a little rotten bone, and you can pull it at the claws, If the extraction is made with .i. a suitable instrument for this,
and if there is only one bone, and the tract is short, do not leave any behind;
and if moisture makes it difficult, and there is no doubt or fear; If the extraction is done with ease and without pain,
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place upon the wound something that encourages putrefaction. and leave it until the flesh around the bone is rotten.
and then the bones will come out more easily.
and if it's a large bone, like a leg or thigh. If you wait so long for corruption until the blackness is all bone, Then restore the wound;
And if there is a great deal of corruption and it comes to little more than the bone; If it is suitable and can be covered all the way up to the corruption, and then treat it until it is closed;
and I will tell you about a fistula which happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take an example and aid in your work.
There was a young man aged 18 to 20 years who had a pain in his leg due to an internal cause,
For the matter came to the leg, and was escaped by a large abscess, and had no apparent cause for opening;
but if it is overdone by their madness on that they open on the abscess, and in corroding matter, and becoming a fistula, and it came to such a degree that all went out of the bowels and moisture from the body;
and many I have cured in iij. years, and there was no cure for me in the art of hands,
for as long as I was called, and I saw a leg and the medicines with which it was cured, and those who run through the cracks with great noise; and their bodies became red when they were young, and had an orange hue.
I put up a tent in one of these cracks, and then searched all the cracks.
and I found that one came between the other from all parts of the leg.
I quickly went to one of the openings and began to dig until I uncovered part of the bone. and I found it rotten and destroyed, and the rot extended all the way down to the bone inside;
I knew what kind of bone it was, and I made sure that there wasn't any other rot present, except for the one that I had already uncovered;
and I began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and it didn't heal;
and then I began, and discovered the bone as before,
and I found the continuous decay in the bone, and the socket, and then I took the bone, and bent over to weld the joint;
but I could not weld the joint with my hand on the bone, and I took it all apart; then I put it back together with medicine; and he was healed and fully welded,
and do not intend to recommend the use of this remedy except for the weakness of the disease, which cannot stand it. and from the fear of death that I have for him. For with the evacuation of blood it was often, but he was completely healed, and
For with the evacuation of blood it was often, but he was completely healed, and and bore in place of the bone a hard core, and was of good disposition and had no harm or opposite in all, nor to air nor to come.
and set the head, so that you carry the rotten cart to the end, and uncover the cart on top of the frame where you see the rope, so that the rope does not damage the cart; and put .I. a piece of wood or a table made of wood to support the frame so as not to damage the rotten cart; and it is necessary as much as possible to see and feel the corruption, and be also another time.
And if his nose is corrupted, and does not open, and corruption is in the middle or in a part, then discover the chest entirely; then put
and then tie one part of the corruption to the other with silk, and let the silk be long from the corruption; as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, so cop the joint with corrupted silk, and tie the bone or it contains from the other part;
and if corruption is in the continuation of the 19 joints, so there is another pain than that of copper;
and if corruption is where he is pricked by the hand or by the foot, then it is very strong that thing, but nevertheless you must question that corruption, how it hurts you; and clean it in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve does not hurt you;
and know that the chisel and threads to cover these bones are many, according to the seating of the bones and the appearance of the teeth. and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. and for each kind of work they need to be fitted with the right tool.
and know that the work will teach you which tools you will need, according to the knowledge of this craft. and the testamentary disposition of the manner of diseases; if he takes the instrument with which you are skilled according to what it is suitable.
do fire The head may be dislocated due to moisture or due to falling.
and when you have medicine to remedy that corruption by the cure of medicines, and it does not benefit at all, it is necessary to cover that member until the place where the corruption comes. so that the patient escapes death or bad luck, which is greater, from the loss of the member.
so that the patient escapes death or bad luck, which is greater, from the loss of the member. and the signs are that the members become black, or seem to be burned by fire. and after the blackness, then go those corrosions of member to member, and take it all over the body; if you hurry too much with the copper,
and if it is through the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and witchety shark and similar things,
then the corrosion is at the top of the head if it is struck, and do not give it space to come except with the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, if the cup is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm.
and if it comes up to the arm, if the cup is at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no need for a more precise measurement of its virtue;
and the corrosion comes in the first joint, if the cup comes after the other joint;
and if she comes where pie, so cover all pie; and if he goes up in the leg, so cover at the joint of the knee;
and if it comes above the knee, so there is no other evil but to make the patient die by the fire;
and the way of covering or sewing the member so that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister of the two strings downstream, and another ministers the other string upstream, and you remove the bag that is between the .iij. strings at .i. broad spatulum, as long as the bone is uncovered;
then the hood or silk, and place of each part 1. drappel linen, so that the silk does not touch the ground; and bring to the patient other wound and abscess cure;
And if the pain comes when you operate, then cauterize the place well. Or you put on some powders that restrain it; then return to your medicine until it is complete,
Then wrap the member in a convenient bandage, and treat it until it is healthy;
and I will tell you that there was once a man at home who had:
he had a darkness which seemed to be burned by fire,
and that corrosion came first in his foot, so that it stained all the foot;
and when the honourable man saw the corruption, he washed his foot with copper, and was cured;
and a long time after, the corruption returned to him on his two hands, and came to me,
and I put it upon things that reflect after the purification of the body, and cannot stop the corrosion.
and he said that I should cut off his hand, and I say that I had no hope of reflecting the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die; For the virtue of the man was weak; and he was desperate and returned to his land, and wrap his copper hand, and was healed;
and I have no other use but to do so for the sake of others, if necessary.
Now comes a time when the flesh is removed from the bone, and it takes so long that it makes a great assembly of bowels. and then it ruptures and perforates, and the bone jumps out, and the viscera remain shut up, as our serfs do. and the leather that is above it is as soft as .i.. linings of sails. nor do they hurt the bone, nor the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy".
but if it extends all the way to the bone completely, then it is called a "fistula".
and the burn so is that you grab the burn all around, and most when it is thin, also like us drapes; and do not heat it for its corruption.
And if you have promised that the leather will be heated, and the corruption is not complete, and the leather is tough like a horse's hide, if you heat it with hot water:
regardez si ses seins sont grands, et le cou qui en est est d'un odeur puante, So that you see if her breasts are large, and the neck which is in them is of a foul odor: then let the Egyptian medical poultice be made thus: take easily, and oil, and lead white, evenly, and put to cook on .i. vase at the fire, until the medicine is red, and thick as honey;
and then take this according to your need, and make it with water and honey, and in the cauterizing of the breast, and extract the puss. and leave the medicine on for .ij. hours, then remove it by squeezing.
do this three times, until the skin is red, and the bone is exposed.
and never are they clistered with water of ash. when this medicine is not present, and it is that you squeeze ashes from a vine twig, and pour water on top,
then pour it out, and clisterize it, until the breasts are well covered;
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither can Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes. If the paste is made of water and honey, and a little bit of chalk ground up. or you make it with honey and wine, so that the honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and the wine does so with a bit of strength.
and when you have done so, and you have pledged that the breasts are well cleansed, If the cauterization causes pain in those who have it done,
and if you press an ointment of plantago, and make it with oil of roses and wine; or you cauterize it with some medicines and herbs, whose properties I have spoken of or treat with oils;
and if the patient has a small hole in his skin, and the cauterization cannot enter; if the expansion of a bit of iron, and put it in a tent of Egyptian oil, or Egyptian basilicon oil, until it is expanded;
and if the wound is too wide, so that the oil or the rinse can enter,
and if the cut is higher than the eye, so that the kop or lower than it is, For when the bow is in perfect shape, so it does not slip. and if you can't cover the neck properly as you see fit, then arrange it in such a way that the bow runs low along the string, so that it does not slip.
and if you cannot cover the loin with a cloth as you see it, so that the bow string comes down lightly and does not let go of the bow; and take medicines that consolidate in order to put on the back;
and be placed on a .i. drape of linen that covers all the back; and place as many as possible of the opening on the left side i.e. a larger one at the front than at the back, so that it is sutured above and below i.e. another piece of cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and place it on the left side in order to align the bow i.e. do not remove the large cloth before several days;
and that which is above the opening, often remove to expose the bow, and knows what runs from the bowels, whether it is poison or pus or enough or not enough; or indigestive or indigeatable;
and take care if the patient feels pain or no pain, and if there is an abscess or not;
and when the medicine has spread in any way on the chest of the sick person, and you see the nature that rises from within the breast; if you know that the breast is inflamed, and approach the saint;
and then remove it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you remove the wound, if it changes .i. another cloth, and renew the dressing.
And if the breasts become swollen after many days, know that the breasts are not inflamed. And if subtle poisons come slowly over a long time, know that you will not perish from their poison,
For the health improves. For there are men whose late healing of their wounds and those that do the opposite;
and they vomit after many days, because their breasts are not yet dried up;
and their breasts are late in drying and are swollen, let them take medicines of dried substance mixed with moisture and made useful by being dried; for with great caution, for there is much lead in it, and that is the last medicine;
Take care with precision, and make it with oil of rose, and anoint with even old wine.
Then let it cook well, and add to it, and this same thing made better with honey cooked and thickened, for when the care is not present,
where you take mirr and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on honey as soon as it comes out of the fire; and then in a cloth, and lay it on the chest, and never administer oil or alcohol long. and roots of the sky, which is also like flour of times and one hundred;
and roots of the sky, which is also like flour of times and one hundred; and in simple or compound use: grind them, and make a powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it; and the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure,
and the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, And thus you shall know that corruption begins to spread from the bones, or hard members, or limbs. if the doctor of the cure of the fistula, if as we have said above.
of the nail of the toe
is a wart that grows on the nail of the thumb of the hand, Here is the translation of the first sentence:
and when it is wrapped up, and no attention is taken, then it comes .i. abscess between the toes, and cut and grind as much as they cut at the root of the nail, and perhaps they cut all of it;
and comes the corruption up to the bone, so much that it comes with stinking pain, and the two sides of the joint are large, and the color is red.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, If it is necessary that you cut off all the excess that has been delayed from the nail, Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterization is a great aid if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
and if he presses the foot hard, and begins to prick, and bleeds it, if you put the iron on the nail that pricks the foot, and pour the wine up, and hold this subtle and light foot, and put on top of the remaining foot of the wine fiery and corrosive remedies to destroy all;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and burn it, for as long as the bone is corroded, it cannot heal;
and if you see the pus coming out, then cut it off with a knife as described above, then treat it until it is well.
and if it is wild, and bruised, and it hurts a lot, then you must first treat it. then cut the nail of the little finger with a chisel from one side to the other.
and be careful that the cut does not go all the way down to the nail bed, because the patient will feel a lot of pain if it does.
and if there is something, put something on it that soothes.
they will have a strong grip on the hands of some men by chance and are all flesh, and by chance they may have part bone and part flesh, and never have knuckles,
and some people are born with the root of the joint, or their birth is at both ends. Those who are born without a navel do not move. and those who are born with a navel may move.
the size of the one who is chubby so is light, in some way: the size of the one who is chubby so is light, in some way: taille le en sa racine d'un large spatumile.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief à curer: si te tien dou coper.
In that which is born at the root of the joint, it is painful to cure: if you should chop first the round bone up to the bone, Then chop the bone with an appropriate chisel; then heal it until it is healthy.
The two main ways in which bones come together: either by natural birth, or by the join of a wound, or by the heat of fire, or by similar things.
If you believe that you have this saltpeter, so that it is repaired according to its natural forms; Then place between two tents or drapes soaked in oil, so that it does not harden; or you put between two thin pieces of linen, until the threads are softened, as is necessary.
Soaking in oil is necessary for this; take that saltpeter and, as it should be, soak it in oil so that it softens.
Of the vile things
The evil ones are vast, wrapped in thick layers of melancholy excess, which come from many members of the body.
and more come in legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, that at others.
It therefore comes that you do not administer any cleansing of the colon, and then heal from the basilica.
The cure of iron if it is according to .ij. manners: one is that it on the copes, and traie on fur the black blood; and another manner is that you see the vein, and trai all fur.
The cut should be according to this manner: arise the first leg of the water hot very strong, until the thick blood is thin. then strain the leg of the sick person from above the knee to the hip; and cut the vein in .i. place, or in .ij. or in .iij., of a wide size,
Then cut and draw the black blood from your arm, from one hand to the other, as much as the patient can bear without fainting;
and then make a poultice, and instruct him to cover himself with black meat;
and repeat the process of evacuation and cleansing when the veins are clear, and rest on the patient.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English: "For the treatment of the leg of the patient, first remove any hair: then dip it in water, and heat it; make the veins swell up red."
"And if you do not have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then place it against the hip at the ankle, or in the part between the knee and the ankle."
"Then soak the skin with oil, and peel the vein from each part, until it feels smooth when touched."
and it looks red and black, and when it enters or leather also seems like a white cord;
then pour on the resin so that it is raised from the skin, and then put on the oil lightly,
then the cope in .i. other place after it iij. do; then dry the skin on the vein until it appears, then let it rest at the raise, as you have done, and put on the oil to another uncinate, as you did first;
and chop another piece, or more than you need, then cut it into two pieces, and chop one of the pieces in half.
and cut it in half, then remove it in half-inch pieces, and chop each piece in half, until it is completely removed, then chop it.
and if you cannot pull and lift it, then tie a strong double thread of .i.i. wire around it. and cut and lift it, and tie a string of 100 threads, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it has completely been removed. and let it not break, for if it breaks, neither can one pull nor lift it, and there is harm to the patient.
and when you have finished treating it, place moist wool in wine and oil over the wound and wrap it up; and heal it until it is well.
And if it is twisted and bent and wrapped together, and it is not straightened, then as we have said, if you split it diagonally, but do not cover it; and handle it as we have said before.
if you split it diagonally, but do not cover it; and handle it as we have said before. The form of iron which one takes care to curve so that it is not broken, and does not cut, but curves the vein.
and is of large curve, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but being thick as we have said, and this is the form:
of the civil vein
This vein is found in the legs, in warm areas where there are no herbs or trees, and in the ground where there is no moisture;
and by chance does not happen in other parts than the legs, and that which is of the pus that comes off the skin,
so that it comes from within the body, serpent-like and twisting, between skin and meat.
And if the signs of the beginning of this disease are that it comes in the leg a great inflammation, then the legs change, and the disease begins to grow from within, like the root of a plant.
When the head is opened, if you wrap a piece of cloth around it from one Z and a half to I Z., and tie it up,
and leave the cloth hanging at the leg, and every time that there is a point to move away, if the wrap around the cloth, and the new and if it is too far, then cut a part of it, and wrap the rest, and do not cover its root entirely, until it is all wrapped up; For if you cut it, then it enters into the hole, and causes apoplexy and corruption where it goes, and brings bad illness;
For this thing, it is necessary that she be treated little by little up to the throat, and there remains nothing or a core.
and this vein never when it is treated with palm of long, or with X., and I have ten good hands for it, which she is of X. palm long, and when you cut her, if bottle or hole, and pierce up to the font,
so that everything comes out; and let the matter which is inside be empty, and introduce at the place healing remedies against putrefaction for a day, then treat as with abscesses.
And never use this hand to cut with, and least of all when it is opened in the joint of the foot or the foot itself, and then he will have a break-up, and from which he will never recover; therefore, heal it as we have said before.
of worms that are born between leather and cart
this disease is called in our land "buff disease", because it often affects buffaloes,
and it is a small worm that is born between leather and harness, and goes all over the body up and down. and he smells good from one member to another, as much as he removes the leather where he goes, and jumps far.
and it is infected with some humor, so that they come towards him and wind and crawl and worms or eggs.
and doubt about his malice, because when he goes through the body, and he climbs to the head, and he comes to the eyes. for adventure enters, and destroys the oil; and it happens many times.
When you see it being cured and drained, then one can only do so often as he goes:
So that it is convenient that you lay it on a hard place with a very tight strap,
then drag it up and down and across, and it will be perfectly even in the cart, and you do not find it, If the fire cautery is used, until he dies.
and the greatest harm it causes, if it corrupts the oil, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the oil, then hold back its head with one hand and cut off its tail with another;
and use the patient of mondification of קורסי של תרופות פירוטיות על מנת להסיר את הרוחות הרעות,
and to wash away the meat with a poultice.
Of pain which comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that affects certain members, and it spreads from member to member; and I saw the one I told you about.
I was called to attend a sick woman, and I uncovered her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm.
and after that, he saw rise up like a worm at the shoulder, so soon as if alive silver when it cuts from one place to another;
the pain left that place and settled in the shoulder, and it became hard, like a bone;
and then a little later it corrupts all the body, until it comes to the other side of the breast.
then she told me that she twisted again and again around her body, as I saw her.
I marveled at how she moved her member from one part of the body to another, for I had never seen such a thing before. Nonetheless, I have heard that many people have suffered great pain as their illness progressed in this way. but I do not want it, if I saw it in a woman.
and I thought that this is why the woman had a small chest, and the veins were exposed, and for this reason does the woman's belly look tight;
and does not appear to these women who are delicious, and who have moist chests and relaxed veins.
And when you have cured this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, if the wound heals and does not remain open, and then bandage it up tightly where it has opened; and cauterize the wound; and if you do not see the hairs at their base,
if the cure for this disease, such as pills of foul-smelling herbs, and pills of seraphim, and similar things.
Of arrows
Arrows are various, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they lodge.
There are different types of them, there being some with large tips, and others with small ones, and some with hair-like points, and some that are welded. and some with .ij. corners, and some with tongues, and some with pieces. and which chies in any member so chies according to .ij. ways: or in a principle member chies,
as the brain, heart, liver, pancreas, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs. When she chies in any of these members, and the sign of death, which I shall tell you hereafter, appears is that you should wash yourself of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after a number of preparations; and when there is no sign of disease yet, and the arrow has not been fully removed, lead it along and cure the wound.
and the sign of the skull when the arrow pierces the bone, and a medical implement is placed on top of the skull, is when there is a scar, and a swelling, and an irregular shape, and redness, and inflammation of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of thought, and vomiting of food; and may be there is a lack of breath through the nose or ears; and may be there is a loss of speech or voice; and jumps out of the moist wound white as a pullet, and in jumping too like a burned horse;
and this sign will reveal itself to you, if you hold it back from the cure, and follow the arrow if it is not entangled.
The sign of the arrow when it points down or up is that it is near the left breast and also seems to be stuck in something hard, not hollow. and if by chance the arrow seems like a pullet, and in short black blood, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: So then you see doubt that death may come.
And the sign of an arrow is that the patient does not sweat from the wound, and the throat swells, and the skin changes color, and he gasps for breath and shivers with cold.
And if the arrow enters the back and causes pain and grief, and he gasps for breath, and all his limbs shake with pain.
And if the arrow enters the stomach, perhaps it may cause an upset stomach and a foul odor to emit from the wound.
And if an arrow enters the belly, and it does not go through the intestine wall, then there is no hope for healing or extracting the arrow.
And if an arrow enters the bladder, and urine flows out, causing the patient to urinate frequently, and he feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
The other member, if it is the face and neck and throat and shoulder and ajutoire and spine and forehead and jaw and legs, and the limb resembling it, are safe according to many dispositions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it does not cause vomiting, as I will tell you that happened to me, then do otherwise.
A man had an arrow in his leg or armpit at the root of the nerve. I tried it, and severed the fat of the ear from the other side, and was healed without pain.
And I saw an arrow that had entered his flesh at the root of the ear fat, severed from the paper. and the arrow was removed, and I only felt a poking sensation on the skin towards the ear. and this arrow was great of an aquamarine bow, to all .i. lighter than ears; the game was healthy, and no bad accidents came.
And through one arrow from the throat of a Christian, and this arrow was Arab to ears:
I knew the hawks, and I hid them as much as I could, and the Christians were healthy.
And through one arrow to a man, who was on his back or stomach, and I thought he died;
and then let him rest for .xxx. days, if his condition does not improve; I cut off the arrow, and fixed it, and removed it, and did not suffer any bad accident to happen.
And if you have an arrow in your chest or back, and the wound is sewn up;
and do not change its natural position, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres natural
And I saw another man, to whom he had shot an arrow into his face, and the wound was healing.
and he remained there without suffering great pain; and many others.
And he shot an arrow at a prince's king, which went through his neck, and was slightly tilted to the right side, and the arrow was completely lodged.
I was called to treat it after it had been wounded. I found the wound very tight.
I treated it with great care for a long time, and I did not feel any pain. and he felt pain and numbness in his right ear. I thought this was from the tip of the arrow
I put on Lou's plastron that atractive digestive, so that the leaks don't burst; and I saw the arrows.
and I saw the arrows. I put on the plastron right away, and quickly heal the wound, and delay the patient's suffering for a long time,
as long as he felt the arrow. i.e. a day or two after its entry; and he told me. I applied to the wound an aggressive caustic medicine by hand for as long as it was open.
and I tested it, and felt the tip of the arrow which took root; then I applied to the wound by that caustic medicine, until the tip of the arrow became visible;
and well completed the terms within three months,
and then I cut out the wound so that I took hold of the nails, and the meat from one side and the other, and I could not take it out;
Then I ceased to be subtle and to devise ways of instruments, until I took it with very good nails, according to this person who has a certain form in the end of this chapter, as I keep it coming back and healing the wound.
And I see that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I repaired it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or have you said the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you put your cure on what I have not said, for the book cannot include everything;
but the wise masters compare a few small things, and on those that are present and failing, try to work with nine or ten instruments, and in the dissection of strange things which come into this craft.
I say that arrows are from the limbs or they are fixed except for according to the following nine ways: or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and those who have pricked themselves there, it is an arrow entering into their flesh, and they have not pricked themselves there at any time now.
And if it does not prick now, let it be left until the flesh is rotten and the issue is healed;
and if it has entered into the bone and cannot come out, let it be left for such a long time that it causes no harm;
and then it pricks, and if it does not prick, let there be a small opening at all times, so that the flesh inside is stretched, and then cut;
And if the arrow is lodged in the chest if it cannot be seen, and seek it out with all your might; and if you feel it, and treat it with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot by the stretching of the wound, and by the deepness of the arrow, and if there is no bone, nerve or vein, let the wound be as large as it needs to be; and train the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place,
and train the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place, if you can find the spot where the shaft is inserted into the bone, which is half the length of an arrow that you can, and then break or rain the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it out;
and then break or rain the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it out; and carefully so that you do not break the arrow, but rather pull it out with great care.
And if you cannot pull it out at first, then rain it in, for the extraction is painful. And if the pain of the extraction contradicts you, then apply what we have said about the cure with our章
and guard against incision of the nerve and vein, and do not comment on how you may pull out the arrow without danger,
or bake or roast, or firmly or loudly; and set the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow went in, For this is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot do so, then let him do it according to what the sign shows you.
The arrow that comes from another place, where it does not open anything, or the leather is swollen in a certain place so that it can be seen or felt:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.
If it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly so that it enters into the bone and broadens it out, then remove it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it there still, and then begin the extraction again as long as it comes out.
and if the arrow is in the bone, break it off at both ends.
and if he has a fever, and you see how to administer it, then he will administer .i. the instrument will be used so that the point of the arrow enters into the cheveur of the instrument; and then pour out,
and if the arrow is pierced, he will pour .i. the instrument with the point entering in, for the extraction to be easier.
And if the arrow touches the bone, so that you can cup all the marrow where the venom is, if you can, Then treat the wound as needed.
If an arrow or spear strikes him in the chest, belly, bladder, or side, and it is close, then you may cover it with a patch.
And be careful not to cover the vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound, for this is work. and treat it until it is healthy.
The form of the claw-like tools used to treat arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and it should be as follows:
And there are many ways of doing this: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
veins of the neck common The veins from which one heals are .xxxii., from which there is a head xvi.,
This is the translation of the provided text into English: and the two arteries which are in the two temples appear. and the two veins that are in the two arms of the hair, which are called "suckers". and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the head; and the two arteries which are in the neck; and the .ij. veins which are on the lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augerich"; and the .ij. veins which are on the tongue.
The veins which are commonly referred to are .v. in each arm:
the one is the cephalic, and is on the left side of the chest, and it is called by lay people "voinne du chef"; and the motion is called "fasting", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic. and they call it "vein-curing"; and if the basilic is on the right side, and they call it  "vein-curing", and it is on the top, and it is that which we call  "vein-curing", which opens clearly above the navel.
And the little finger is the vein between the thumb and the index finger, and if it has .i. rain;
and in the leg and where the foot are .iii veins: one is located at the outer corner of the ankle joint, and the second which is in the heel of the right leg; and the vein called 'nesse', which is located in the heel of the left leg;
and in the other leg are  .iii veins located from those.
The ear canal, which is behind the ears, should be cleaned with old catarrh, and with headache. and the quality of the medicine, as I told you, is that you remove the head of the disease.
and the quality of the medicine, as I told you, is that you remove the head of the disease. and rub the area where the veins are with an asperged cloth; then tie the patient's neck with a band. as long as the three veins appear behind the ears, depending on the head: Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
Then take the lance and pierce through the vein up to the bone, and then lift your hand up towards the top of the vein. and wrap it with care, and cut through the vein very carefully, and let blood flow as much as you can see;
Then strain and hold it, until it is healthy;
and I have already said the incision and the cautery of the first book.
The blood vessels that are in the two temples, if they cause headaches in old age, and if there is pain and redness, and a habit of tears;
and the quality of the blood vessel is such that I say: and it is necessary to extract his neck until the two veins appear openly; and he must put his hand on both sides of his face, and then sign with his eyes;
and then he will place the cupping glass above his second finger, and suck out the blood; and he will leave the vein open, and cover it with a cloth, just as you did with the previous two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
Then untie the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it.
and then let it rest, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of its beginning from the book.
The healing of the vein at the forehead is as effective as the healing of the headache from ancient diseases, and it causes headaches, and bright lights.
and the quality is that if the patient twists his neck, so that the vein appears; and take the instrument which is called a 'spoon', whose shape is thus:
And place the point on the vein, and hold firmly with your hand, or another thing, and allow the blood to flow according to the quantity that you see; Then cut off the neck of the patient, and tie the vein as long as it is healthy, and never use a wide flame.
However, the fire must not be too hot; and the vein is cut across, because the bone is close by, and the flame might break if it is too small.
The health problems that can be helped with this are the three veins in the arms and legs that cause pain when they become inflamed or infected, and also conditions of the eye, skin rashes, and facial diseases.
and the qualities of their health are that the patient should extrude his neck by twisting it, as before.
then heal, and let the health flow through, a little of long flame, a little of wide flame, for there is no fire.
And if the flames are subtle, in case of a breeze; then make the blood run, as much as you need, and then hold it on cloth, and hold it well.
The patient of the birth pangs of the child so that he is well watered, and sudoriferous diseases, and diseases of the face. such as headaches and redness that come to the face, and especially when it is old;
and the quality of the patient so that the sick person twists his neck, then pulls his baby by the hand with his left hand; and take a long, flexible flame, and put it on the lip in the space between the iij. nostrils; For the vein does not open well now, and the blood will begin to run.
and do not over-exert yourself too much yet, and make the blood flow according to your need, then rest for a night, because it is soon restored;
This is the text on the five wounds: si aide à l'estrangement de l'ailaine, et à l'encomancement de mélancolie, et à beaucoup de maladies, et à l'empétige, et à la corruption, et aux hernies, et estiomenes;
and the quality of the wound is such that the patient pulls out his hair from both sides, as we have said; and if the master stands over the head of the sick person, and the sick person cuts off with .i. cut,
then heal the vein long a little, then treat the blood quickly, or as much as is necessary;
then mend another in the other vein, then hold the ligature, and pull out the hair gently; that the patient does not choke; and leaves it until morning, that the wound is healed.
of the health of the animals of the health of the mouth and teeth, and their correction, and the repair of gums, and the repairs of lips, and the growth of nails, and swelling of the tongue.
And the quality of health is to make the patient sit before you, and to hold his throat as I have said; and turn the lip, and watch as .ij. veins, one is at the right lip and the other is at the left, and know them by what they are black, and because between them there are small black veins: then turn one and the other, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt about it,
then turn one and the other, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt about it, then turn the larger of the two, and do likewise with the .ij. veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
In regard to the health of the tongue In relation to the health of the tongue
and the quality of the healer is that the disease seizes between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts up the tongue, and looks at each side with a black vein:
So heal both, and do not become too perfect, for soon the veins will be black.
The veins that are commonly used are done according to .ij. ways:
where it pierces with all kinds of flames, or olive oil, so as to call it "anesil". and are wide and thin according to the width and the stretching of the veins. The shape of the flame is called "mirtin", and it is wide as you see it:
And it is a skill to open the veins of thick blood which appear on the flat surface of the head and contain thick blood and trouble; and this is the form of the flame of olive oil:
and it is more subtle to point out, and it is for saving the subtle veins, or there is subtle yellow blood.
The salve of the basilica, which is one of these veins, so helps with diseases that are in the throat, and where the collar, and where the chest, and where the belly;
and it is necessary for the surgeon that he cauterize, and that he bandage it with wool, and that he not pierce the artery which is exposed. And if he stops the artery, and the flow of blood comes, if it is necessary to cauterize, as I have said; and it must not be struck by the flame, but cut as Anesile.
And if the bascule does not open obviously, if it is necessary that you extract it, and change another one; If you want to prevent it from happening again, or if you are injured at the base of the arm, it opens clearly. and hold the wound in fire as we have said.
And if you can recognize the injury's location, so that you extract the arm, and touch the spot until you feel the pulse. Then sign the spot with a pen, then extract the arm, and hold the wound in fire as we have said.
and beware that you do not wound in the artery when you see it moved from its place, for that is the artery: therefore avoid it.
and if you see spitting up high as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery: Therefore hasten, and put your finger on your throat for a long time, then lift your finger off it, so that the blood may come out once again;
lay your arm down, and leave it, and do not move the sick person; and be afraid, and do not move it until he is well.
And if there is no blood coming out, and he goes away, and the medicine does not reach him, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of the shoulder retains it; stop the bleeding.
And take a piece of fir tree and split it, and take one half and tie it well together until the next day;
If the bleeding has stopped, that is good; if not, apply the powder that stops blood, as we have said;
and the application of the powder is not made in many ways because of the small size of the wound and the position of the vein on the arm.
The doctor will instruct the patient to let the veins empty of blood between the shoulder blade and the neck, and between the heart and the collarbone. For it is composed of the bazillical and cephalic parts, as we have said;
And it is necessary for the doctor to cut through the nerve that is at the base of the neck, and if he cuts too much in perfection, he will tear the nerve, and it swells up and the patient's health is ruined, and perhaps it cannot be healed;
and the nerve is opened many times, and if it does not open in any of them because of its thinness, you should cut off the nerve with a sharp tool; and avoid cutting the nerve to your power.
And if there is a space between the two nerves, then make it long.
The treatment for the headache is to attract blood from the head, and to draw the eyes;
and it is necessary to heat the olive oil or the wine, for that is the most effective for all kinds of wounds, because it does not burn the nerve or the artery.
All the same, it is necessary to try out the easier method first, and not to worry if the first time it fails, and then start over again; and by chance the limbs of some men swell up when it is tried out for the first time, but nothing is lost if this happens. The quality of the treatment depends on your opinion.
The first thing you need to know about a doctor is that medicine should only be used for the sake of maintaining health.
and to prevent future illnesses; and let the surgery be performed in one of the three veins that run through the head: which are, cerebral, facial and basal; and one should perform surgery when the signs of fullness appear after eating, in autumn and winter after dinner, when the sign of satiety appears;
and one should perform surgery on the first day or third day after two hours or three days.
The saint who is free from diseases has no specific time for fasting or eating, but it should be done at all times and in all seasons.
And women should not fast or eat until they are 13 years old, and girls for three months after their seventh month. Nor should the old be made to fast when they have passed sixty years of age.
And when someone is made to fast, in whatever way it may be, let him not eat any leathery food. If there is blood coming out, so that the veins do not draw out the harmful waste matter into the main members.
do not heal those who are too sunburned by meat, nor those who are oily, as much as there is fire, nor those who drool.
and if he heals after a feverish passion, and vomiting, and abdominal discomfort, and frequent sexual intercourse, and fasting, and sleep, and hunger, and all these things, or by a weapon or the heart;
then subtly the humors, so that he becomes fat, through meat, drink, and medicine, if you have any power over it;
then enter the bathwater, if anything is dangerous to him, to make subtle the blood.
and heal his back from the neck down, as we have said;
and protect him from work, or hunger, or lustful desires, and similar things;
and be tied and joined together, and be higher in healing than the one who heals him, and rub his arms. 12 times or 13 times,
Then remove the ligature gently, for if it is too tight or loose, it cannot run without being restrained.
and then rub the joint by hand until the veins swell and can be felt.
then dip the finger of his left hand into a little vat of old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein for a moment or two. so that the vein stops bleeding. For there are veins that run as strings of music, and some like these are prone to windiness. so that when one puts it on the flame, if one takes it away from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and so are those.
and if one opens the vein, if the wound is too narrow, lest it cause pain to the patient in these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, let it be done again after a while or when one is in hospital, if the legs are swollen.
And if his arm is swollen, and the patient hopes, let it be for a day or two, and do not bind the arm. For in case there are abscesses; do not go into water, but begin to wash if it pleases him;
and if his fracture is small, or the bone does not protrude much from the skin so that you do not doubt that it will not come out as much as you see, then in this very fracture I recommend burning with fire all along the bone;
and make a small incision so that the swelling is reduced; for this often happens, when the wound is small:
If you see the wound open, do not recommend the medicine, and put a little oil of oil on it, for it smoothes the course of blood in this place, and it becomes soft in this place that the oil that is in it.
and so administer the oil of oil in each wound that you heal the veins to stop the flow of blood;
and so it makes three times and bows of oil when you put it on the wound; if it is too thick, it subsides slowly when applied.
And if there is a large abscess that often comes; most importantly when it is not healed except for this time or the opening of the vein is small, If you hurry, and place on the joint a wet sponge of water and of rope a little warm, and hold it in for an hour;
and you must do this after the blood has left the vein, and if it stays in place for a few days without any black or green color, then it is not harmful to him; and if you see it, put on something of aloe or mirrhor poultice made from juice of calament, monstere, or similar;
And often the swelling and appearance is to the side of the temple: so place your hand on it, and if you feel the joint soft to the pressure of the hand, then this is the appearance of illness. Eschui donc que tu ne mettes sur aucune chose de ce que nous avons dit, car par aventure en cour sans de l'artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le lieu, puis le guérit d'autre cure, tant qu'il soit sain.
And treat everyone with the same amount of medicine according to the quality and color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it is red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for those who are thin and have a need to extract blood, one should make the wound wider and keep the flames wide.
and to those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary that they be cured little by little, and they must be cured by cutting across, not by piercing.
and this way of curing is saved from the decay of blood and the chopping of nerves, and it is better than the long cure or the wide cure.
And to those whose course requires curing, it is necessary to give them moist juice in grape juice; if they are heated, if the blood is troubled, three times or four times.
And if he is of a cold complexion, before the curing, give him moist juice in musk syrup, or honey syrup aromatized with spices, as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and fragrant syrup.
And if he swallows it at meals, after the exit of blood, if it is necessary that he smells wine and aromatic syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the division or ointment of syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
And if he vomits up from one arm and sometimes swallows again, if it is necessary that, when he becomes weak from much vomiting, he should be given a little at a time, according to the quantity of his continuous virtue.
And if he vomits up from one arm after the first swallowing, and he has a strong heart, then he should be given
And who gets well on another part, if he must get well the second day or the third.
For he has blood that is deep within the body and brings fever; if so, a great quantity must be drawn off, and the opening made wide enough to allow a large amount of pus to flow out. and then you treat all the symptoms and put your hand on his pulse when he is getting well, so that death does not come from pus. and this often happens when the sick person is neglected.
and it is not necessary when you see that the arm has dislocated, and make it come out with blood for the second time, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly on top of it; if he is bent, that he extends the arm gently, because this would be wrong;
but leave it until the second time he heals; or you point to the tip of the flame, until the blood that has been frozen by the opening of the vein comes out; and put on top. I put a little water of salt, and press lightly.
And if a vein has burst, leave it alone and do not constrict it, as long as the abscess is calm.
And if need be, drain the blood a second time, whether it is in the same vein or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein that runs through the arm is more important than the vein at the base of the hand, for whatever reason it may be composed.
And the method of draining the blood is such that the patient holds his hand in warm water until it turns red.
then let there be a small movement, so that the vein appears clearly, then take care now to cut it across, not wide nor long.
and let the hole be wide, and cut well close to the joint of the hand, and so it cannot come out, then put the hand in warm water, and leave the blood running in the water until you have enough.
and if it is stiff, do not put the hand in warm water again, for we put it there more for ease than for stiffening.
and the vein cut from this is safer than any other vein, as it is neither an artery nor a nerve.
The salvation of the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is how it should be done:
withdraw the hand, and pour into hot water, until the vein has gone back in, if we can see it. and hold it across, and cut all of it off, if it doesn't hurt anything;
and don't cut it too perfectly, for the nerve is all exposed from the bone;
and then put the hand in warm water, it is frozen there in the wound, and cannot be removed.
And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, if you put oil and thread to bind it firmly together, and do this for each wound.
The surgeon should take the hand with the disease from the patient and make all the cuts as I have told you before the right side.
The surgeon should treat all diseases that are separated from the body, Here is the translation of the provided text into English, line by line:
And the quality of his health is that the patient should drink some warm water, and rub the vein until it stops." and the joint at the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go most of the rain;
Here is the translation of the provided text into English, line by line:
And if you treat it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are exposed, and treat it as well as you would a wound, and let the flame be extinguished.
And if the nerve cannot be extracted, put the foot in water, and leave the vein to drain well.
And if you treat it for the first time, start again for the second time above a small hole, because the leech is salty; do not doubt about nerves, as we have said, and do the same with the other foot evenly.
The leg of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle joint, and its pain extends to the knee, when it's due to cold.
And the quality of this pain is that the patient goes in or out of the water, and pulls it off the ankle. iiij. two must twist,
For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, so that you can feel it with all your fingers, and running across; and worth more than you can pay, for the leg is out, and it is very heavy to many men.
and worth more than you can pay, for the leg is out, and it is very heavy to many men. And if you do not treat it, neither does any rain of him who opens or closes the foot, and towards the small bow, and keep away from the water;
and make the blood flow so that you see it, and then draw the arrow, and put cotton on it and hold it in; now it is cured.
Suction wounds
are made of horns, or of ark-glass, or of pottery; and the suction is made in one of two ways: either by injuring and pulling out blood, or without injuring.
And this ventilation, which is not to hurt according to .ij. ways: or it is on all fire, or without fire;
and 2 in 2 places on the throat; and the windpipe under the chin; and the vacuum of the shoulder joint; and the vacuum on the shoulders; and the vacuums of the arms; and the vacuums of the legs; and the vacuums of the ankles; and the vacuum treatment does not treat blood flow, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the carriage,
and so you don't weaken yourself at all, as is done with vein bleeding; and it is not necessary that it be amined, or any fire or heat in any disease that comes from excess, until all the body is empty.
And if by necessity of disease it is necessary to ventilate, or because of habits, if we administer it every hour in the beginning of the month, or at the end, and burn it and put it in each ten;
for there are those who, when they need to ventilate, become very heavy;
and if there are those who have repletion and pain in their face, and in their head, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who drink a drop of blood in their mouth, and have flown away with the tongue, and are satisfied with blood; and if there are any such people who think, and see by no blood or vomit or death or similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order them to be breathed after .iij. hours of the day.
The saint of music helps the greyness of the head ... if it comes to the eyes, and does not come until the whole body has been evacuated.
and this ventilation if it is in the place of the head of the skull,
and it does not suit anyone who has a cold complexions to use it, or who has had a fever, because this does them great harm;
and for that reason neither the old nor those who have had cold illnesses should use it.
And those who are cured of it often become confused, and for that reason the ventilating should be placed a little further back due to the confusion caused by the cure.
The venting of the wind comes from the neck, which is in place under the chin and the bazoo, and for this reason it causes irritation to the pit. and a cutting of the channel of the stomach, and all, and filling up;
and so it is necessary to push back, for if it holds too firmly, then either hunger or the stomach or both.
The venting of the wind comes from the neck, which is in pain under the chin, and causes blindness and dizziness, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
And it is in the place of the shrine of the basilica; and you must command the physician that he express his hand to apply, that he not cut the artery, and do not cause the blood to flow.
The ventilations of the mouth cause disease of the mouth and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the shrines of the two lips.
The ventilations of the shoulders cause disease that comes from heat and filling up.
The ventilations of the collar cause as much as the three veins of the arms, for she brings blood from those large veins;
and command the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for the blood vessels and nerves are easily damaged, and the veins and arteries are exposed.
The suction cup that is on the back should not be placed too deeply, and should not hurt the foundations or the nerves, and it must be large and of iron, for its job is to suck well; and perhaps, if it were too delicate, it would break; and would make great wounds.
The suction cups on the legs should open widely, for they bring blood from all over the body, and cause pain to the old nerves, and the uterus, and the bladder, and draw forth flowers; and are in front of the 12th rib and the 12th shin bone, and after a long use, they weaken the body and bring about many diseases.
Here is the translation of the text from Old French to English:
And if it is thick, so it is necessary to hurt .ij. times: the first time to soften the path of the great pain.
And if it is very thick, so it is necessary to hurt the third time; and when we want to squeeze the little pain a little at a time, we must suffer a great deal once only.
And if we want to squeeze the pain, so we should start again; and if it is thick, so we must firmly hold it, and the end should be that the scream be heard all at once.
and cover those who have thick and tough skin, and who are prone to scrofula, with the oil of vitriol that softens and dissolves. if it is seared, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or gourd seed oil;
and if it is burned, with watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
And if the excess is thick and cold, then use almond oil, or balsamite oil, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
And if there is someone who has an injured shoulder and chest, and it must be tended with oil and wide fabric, then do not put oil on.
but it is necessary to wash after the windification with pink water, or cold water, or water of blackberry, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or other kind.
And if there is moisture, if it raises thus, or with water of mistletoe, and sumac, and similar things.
And if there are great excesses, they rise with old wine, or water of sedge, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or other things like them.
and do not get wet before the bath or bathe, but after the bath an hour or .ij.; and do not sleep after the wind-up,
and it is good that he warm himself, when he must be winded, and when he has been winded. And guard against those who are coleric, and whose blood is too hot and inflamed; if he prunes cold things, like grapes and endives and lettuce by the sea, and similar things;
and a little pork, and cheese, and wet meat.
And those who have a cold complexion, if they drink honey syrup, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and little pork, and little piglets and small birds and pigeons;
and let him urinate when he feels the urge, if he must drink more than eat;
and it is good to give some people a strong or musk-scented unguent before or after urination, to strengthen the main members; and be careful of the sun, but it is useful only for those who are hot.
The leeches that are used to hurt are those that are placed on the liver, and the mouse, and the podagra, and the belly, and the bouds, and the reins, and the hinch, for that member does not suffer to be hurt on the outs.
and one does not do it but to attract blood from one member to another. as we put on the teats when the milk comes; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put leeches on the belly and on the bouds to weaken the member.
and the bone the pain, when it has surgery or stone, if by its own virtue the surgery is attracted or deserts the stone from its place;
and thus do so because when you put it on the liver and on the mouse when there is repressed wind,
and these suction cups are emptied only to suck; and never are they emptied together fire, and never are they filled with fresh water,
as such diseases of the pleurisy, and in this way the suction cup is filled with hot water, or water in which he has cooked herbs suitable for this purpose.
The shape of the suction cup administered to fire is thus:
And it should be 1 1/4 inches wide and half a palm long, and it should have a small hole at the center, about as big as an awl.
and be of iron, smooth before so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the member;
and have in the middle a crossbar of iron or of steel, to hold a candle in place;
and are great and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them.
for the leeches of children are other than those of old people, and thin ones than fat.
And it is necessary to put this leech on the limb:
take the wax candle or .i. linen thread, and place it between the leech and the limb where the leech is to be placed, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the bellows so that it does not burn the patient;
and then put it on the limb, and your two hands are on the hole that we have said, so that when you blow, if there is steam, and then take off the bellows;
and take the poultice as before, and start it over again, if you need to;
In the bellows which is amined for pleurisy, with all water, has no verge or hole, and is amined only when it is plain of water, and is put on the limb as little as possible;
and this is the form:
And these are not suited for use except in limbs where it is difficult to place suction cups because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar parts. and on naked legs, such as two or three toes, and other similar parts.
and the quality of their use is that when you find suction cups that are in clear, non-runny water, take them.
and put them in a broth of sweet water until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies. and then poultice it with vinegar and poultice, then rub the limb until it is red, and put poultices on it;
and when they are well, and have cheer, if it is their leg or where one can put a poultice, one puts it on, for this is worth much afterwards.
If not, raise the leg thus, and then of water, very well, and then squeeze it;
and if he lies too long after the heart of the sun, so that .i. a cloth of linen in cold water, and put it on, until the sun is dried up;
and if the sun is multiplied, then put on crushed vitriol, or gangrenous matter, and similar things until it is dried up;
or put on half a handful of peeled beans, and leave them burning at the heat, so now they will be dried up;
and if you have more business, then take other veins.
And if the blood will not take up, then rub the base of the wound with fresh blood, or insert an needle so that the blood flows. and then put them on, and soon as they feel the blood, so they start;
and when you see that they are crying, then powder on a little of alum and of sloe juice, or of ash, so they will stop crying now.
This begins the book of broken bones
The chapisters are necessary many times in the art of medicine, and are restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know it well, son of a bitch, that the very wise men pour this chapister on, which they never saw in any ancient books, nor did they ever read about it in letters;
and for this reason the science is strange to us in our land, because I never found any good one before;
and know nothing, except from the science of ancient books, or I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experience, and by custom, in my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have summarized it at the end, and have explained clearly the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the above 2 chapters.
It is therefore fitting that we say in this book the sums of speech and the chapters where wisdom is placed, and remain on truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or damage comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to save the sick person from one side and the other, if anything does not prevent him from walking, as weakness of the spine, or disability, or age;
or if the tenon is too short, or too frequently; and avoid cold drinks, and the car of eyes and hair, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about the tendon's heat, or the material's expansion in the member; if the sick person returns to their usual governance which they used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meats that are great nutrition, or have viscosity, like cooked bread made with water and rice, and eggs, and milk, and cheese, and fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with great nutrition the healing slows down and happens more quickly.
And know that the broken bones of the old and weak will not heal or harden properly according to their nature because of the weakness of the limbs, nor those that are too soft, like the bones of small children;
but there is no cure, restore the broken bone. i. large, tough tendons that join the member together, until it hardens as it was before; and do not cut off any part of its work, and because it is necessary to nourish it with large meat, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are various and in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is other than the fracture of the leg, or of the foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes to the shoulder, and another in the knee, or in the foot, as when one cuts with a knife for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes to the shoulder, and another in the knee, or in the foot, as when one cuts with a knife for writing. And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a small fracture that creates a tiny crack.
And each has its own way of working, and its own special instrument for healing, according to what comes to mind in its turn.
and is caused by the twisting of the bone, and is opened well from the outside, and is pressed by the hand;
and when there is no twisting or torments in it, and the patient feels no great pain, there is no fracture;
but it can also have twists, or fractures, or small breaks. If it is not necessary for you to move it by hand, but put medicines on it that come later, and then now hold it gently.
And know that the break that it has in the shoulder, and there are three separate parts, now put them together evenly, so that the bone does not move.
and if the abscesses are dry, so that you leave it for a day or two until the abscesses have healed. and then put it in a position that is even and steady, so that you do not move the shoulder, and know that the rehabilitation of this is easier than that of the other, then hold it, as it is necessary here.
And if there are pieces of bone broken off, if the break is in two parts, whether hand or foot, or at your hand if it's a small member, or in two strings, or a string and at your hand;
and set the member back in its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the member are put back together, you must reset all the additions to their places as well as you can, and guard against injury or pain for the patient by your work.
and align the two head pieces of bone according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to be all right: if the movement is smooth and good, and does not strain too much, do not press it as they do with the aposteme cautery and contraction of the member, as we have often wanted to.
And when the limbs are set in place, instruct the patient that he not move them, neither in waking nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way. and guard well that the limbs be so secure that they feel no pain. For when one feels no pain, then it is not yet set in place, and it is necessary to put it into a state of rest so that one feels no pain.
For when one feels no pain, then it is not yet set in place, and it is necessary to put it into a state of rest so that one feels no pain. and guard well that it be placed correctly, so that no twistedness comes when it is restored.
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
I know that the broken members are diverse in smallness and in greatness and in form.
For there are small members, such as hands and feet and similar things: it is convenient to wrap linen cloths of soft and fine material around them;
and those that are thick, such as chest and leg: it is convenient to wrap a broad and sturdy linen cloth around them, for the broad linen cloth embraces all of the large member, and holds it even, so that there is no gap;
Then he takes it slowly in two places or three according to the limb, and holds back his hand a little at all of it, then goes up over the break and holds less back, so that the break is moved just a little bit.
and softens the limb little by little, until you press a lot of it on the sound side, then take another limb and turn around again very much on the broken place;
then go back to the sound part of the break, and hold it slightly, not too hard or too lightly, as we have said in the first line above;
then place between the linen threads or drapes, until they are all the same length, then lay it all over with .i. bandage, and then put your well-made splints on, if there is an abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or an infection, put something soothing on the abscess and let it sit for some days.
Then extract from your bones, and make half a yard of wide thread for bleeding, or a piece of wood used to make cleats, or palm leaves, and be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the bone that one puts on the fracture is a little bigger and wider than the other bones;
and be also long or short according to the size of the member;
then tighten on the pegs also as you did at the first hour, then tie above it a thread advancing, as in the first hour over the breaker;
and then tighten more, less; and it is necessary that the thread be light, not too thick nor too thin, and of soft linen;
for if the thread is thick, such as I wanted for the works of the fools who make shoulder strings from linen rope, and this is a great mistake, because the shoulder string cannot be even if it is too thin, and it is necessary that there be between each peg at least two inches of space.
And if the patient is torn by the shoulders of the pegs after stringing them up in his clothes, or linen cloth, so that he does not bleed.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the cure is broken, I will tell the cure hereafter.
And know that it is not appropriate to extract all the members of a broken limb on the first day. For when the limbs are great, it is not appropriate to put braces on them before 2 or 3 days or more according to the severity of the injury in the apoplexy; but
and here is the manner of the ancient plaster to restore fracture, dislocation, and twist: and it is that you take flour which holds on the walls of the mill, and confound it with plenty of ash, and put this confection, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plasterer restoring the fracture to various dispositions, especially for women and small children, for it is not appropriate to be too hot or too cold.
Another method of plaster for repairing breaks, dislocations, and twists: take 3 parts of resin, 2 parts of sand, 1 part of myrrh; 5 parts of aloes, 60 parts of mirth; 70 parts of alchil; and reduce them to a powder, and mix them with honey. The composition of the plaster is warm; use it therefore, for it repairs broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Another way of making plaster for twists: take 3 parts of mugwort and 2 parts of vismac; 5 parts of myrrh, 60 parts of aloes; 7 parts of acacia; and grind them well, and mix with honey or bee pollen, and administer.
Another way of making plaster for joints and bones that have come loose from their places, which soothes pain immediately, and cuts bone properly: take a new bone, soak it in water, and oil it; place it on the affected area. This plaster does not repair, but it is good for immediately soothing hot pain and properly cutting bone.
Another way of making plaster that repairs broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earth leaves of the poplar tree; grind them together to make a plaster.
Other way of plastering to the restoration of the fracture of the bone and for lessening the remaining part of the abscess. Take root of viscose, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of times, from each one a part; and grind, and confit with wine, and so the members are heated, confit with water of coriander wet, or water, and use it.
Another way of plastering which is stronger than the first, when the abscess lasts until the restoration of the member. Take roots of viscose, and flax seed, hyssop, melilote, and sweet cicely, and flowers of violets and chamomile, from each one a part; and grind, and confit with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
In his book, Ypocras says that one should not put on the broken member for restoration any plaster made of wax and oil, and no other thing more; and he said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things which are a little warm, such as mirr, aloe, and incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plastering that is useful for both pain and injury: take mugath and the hair of a horse or cow, or feathers of an owl, and whale oil and string it evenly, and grind them together, and make the plaster and lay it on the wound.
And then take care that the patient feels no pain, and that his bone does not move out of place; if he feels no pain, do not take care.
And if pain or itching comes to the place, or there is no rest or swelling, do not take care, and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip it in water, and lift it up, until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved; then leave the member to rest for an hour, then put another dry one on, moistened with sea water or rose oil, and lay it on a nut, until you are sure of the warmth;
and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and ease the pain of the bone, then begin again the gentle application, and a little plaster, and do not pull it as hard as before; and gently until it is healed.
And if you see that abscess, redness, pain, and swelling have set in all over, and you need to apply plaster and bandage, then begin again, as you did with the first application of equal length.
And if it comes to the limb neither of what we have said, then do not dislodge it before 2, 3, or 5 days, and never let it rest for more than 10 days, according to what one sees, until the break-up of the abscess, and bring closer the joint to the bone;
then restrain it more than before, and thickens its meat, as I said above; and if you see that the limb is drying up more than it should, know that there will be no return for it; Let water arise from the hot bath every time you dislocate it, and do this for each quarter of the day, and pour a little liquid at noon.
By this operation, therefore, the member is to be brought back into place, and carefully examined as to what has caused the dislocation, so that it may be set right: this is bad, and if the pain persists and grows worse, I see no other remedy but to let it lie and operate properly.
of various ways of breaking There are many ways of breaking, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct:
For it has fractures which are made by the impact of a sword, and the collar bone breaks all the way down to the shoulder which is as if made like this or was; and for this reason this manner of breaking is called "hematoma".
Or the sword breaks the bone from above without piercing, and is called in this manner of breaking "absolute"; and the wound of these two great or small fractures.
And if there is an impact inside, or a break or collar of stone, or a fall on stone, or other things.
And if there is a perforating break, which approaches as far as the sinew which is outside the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if to a wound that is healed in the bone as fine as hair, and is a small split, and therefore this is called "capillary";
And if the wound is made by a stone, or by a blow, or by a similar thing, and a piece of bone enters it, and the head of the bone is as sharp as a blacksmith's hammer when he hammers on the kettles; if it goes into the stone.
And if this happens to an adult who has a moist head of bone, as is the case with an infant's skull.
and all these types of fractures that small pieces are forged if they are stars; and I will speak about it in its place.
And let us know all kinds of fractures by traction on them, and investigation to the tent, and by the corrupt horse which is above.
The hair-like appearance is caused by what happens when the bone is uncovered and rubbed on top of it, causing a black fracture.
In the cure for a fracture, be cautious of accidents due to disease, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of reason, extension, paleness, feverishness, and hot sweat, and other similar symptoms in many dispositions, it cannot be cured without doubt.
And if you do not see a promising accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
And when you first deliver the baby, and it is in the winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at most that you can.
And if it is in the summer, then you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh of the bone does not decay, and the accident that we have spoken of comes.
And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the part that covers the skull, then you must split it open in this way: and it is that you squeeze the chief of the sick person, and uncover the bone on all sides that you can, and on the figure of the wound more softly than you can.
and if the pain of the wound comes with the uncovering of the bone, or abscess, then he helps himself in this way, and it is that you fill the place with wet fabrics soaked in oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses are calmed, and be assured of the escape of blood; then begin to cut around the bone, and this is done according to .ij. ways of operation: one way is that you make the incision closely from the front, and this is the form:
And then I give another cut that is larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have several cuts of different sizes, some narrow and some wide, pointed, and made of iron; and with light touches, so as not to hurt the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, then you must pierce it with these; also, make each of them come out at the tip of the bone, so that one comes out at the top of the bone, and this is the form of the 3 ways of making the tarres:
Here is the translation of the text:
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, if it is convenient that you retain the appliance that is retained by the bone to any other instrument resembling an incision tool, but it is necessary that it be more soft and thinner than the other incision tool.
and if it does not retain any small bones or scales, if the bone is lightly held by  .I. instruments; then cure the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of work if it is that which Galen says, which is more effective; and press it very strongly, and this is his word. It is first necessary that you uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is open, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will set the head of this lens-shaped chisel on it, from which comes the shape:
And do not cut from one part, and this part is wet in 1 . 2 . edges, so that the cutting goes against the bone; then pound with a small mallet on it, so that you chop the bone lightly all around, and take good care of the tendon that is attached to it;
if it is attached to the bone, then chop the bone lightly, because if you damage the bone, there is no benefit, and there is fear.
And if the bone break does not pierce the membrane, and the bone is cut only slightly from above, and there are small pieces, then feel the roughness again, and shave off the scales with a sharp razor, of which you must have different quantities, to apply according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you are facing a great many razors, and after them more delicate ones, do not cease to do this as long as it is well done.
In each of the other haircuts and delicate shaves, you must bring your skill to bear according to its needs; this is something that has not yet been fully explained to those who have set their studies in this art.
And if the wound is deep, you must bring a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, dip it in oil, and put it on the wound. then take another cloth double-layered, or triple-layered, dip it in wine and oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do this more gently than you can, so that you do not damage the wound, then remove it only when it has soaked up the liquid;
and let it be so.i. day or 10 days, as long as the abscess is calm, then remove it, and administer drugs like roots of herbs, flour of times, incense powder, aristo logy, and similar things; and make these things into powder, put on the wound, and administer drugs again without torture but with medicine;
and guard that the wound is clean and not infected, nor let it gather pus or assemble bowels, for when the bowels corrode and flow onto the brain's membrane, they may cause great harm to the patient; because when one puts a mordant substance on top of a wound, if it seeps through above, it can be harmful.
Therefore, take caution, for if any bad accident should happen to the patient, as we have said, if there is doubt without doubt.
And if black comes out only because of the medicine that has been put on, which has its virtue, then you should squeeze a part of honey, and 1.2 parts of rose oil and bind 1 drapelet to it, and lay it on the wound's medicine; and then the treatment of ways as it seems appropriate, until he is healed.
Know that no time are broken the .ij. parts of a neck above, or one by the alone, for they are .ij. bones; and this neck is cartilaginous, and does not break if it bends or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the  .ij. parts is broken, it is necessary that you stop your little finger or pertuse above the neck, and put equal to the break in your index finger, and at the back by defect, until the neck revives according to its natural shape; and make it lightly, and guard that the patient does not feel pain by your work.
And if his break is in the upper part of the neck, and cannot come to its place, know that you must put the neck even with the head of a thin ray.
And if his break is in two parts, then do not delay restoring it on the first day if you can.
If not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the abscess has become calm, then bind it at the head of the neck with linen strips; if his break is in one part.
And you bind the other one to the other, if his break is in one part; and let the strips be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
And they said that one should soak the tents in lard and change them every day. I don't think that's right, but they should be soaked in ash of pigeon and powder of mill; then leave the tent, until the bone is hard and the joints hardened.
And never blow on or use goose feathers in place of tents, and if it's so cold that the drape is torn, and the wind blows through it, and it hurts the patient; or do as you see fit.
And if the abscesses open while you are operating, then put cotton wicks soaked in oil or a little vinegar; or a little of this substance.
And if the abscesses don't open, then put an ointment on it from afar, made of barley meal and incense powder, mixed with pigeon ash, then put it on light bandages, and don't tie the compress;
and if the break is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then extract with suitable instruments to that person, then cut off the end, and the cure of things causing pain in the chest, and also, as plasters and ointments suitable for that person.
and if there is no pain inside the neck, then cure of fever, and put strings of linen, as long as it is healthy.
of the rupture of the jaw
When the jaw is broken and there is no pain, and the break is not large, and it is not broken into two pieces, but rather bent inside, then you should know that it is a light break.
If the break is on the right side, put your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left mandible, put your index finger from the right hand inside, and push the break slightly, and make it equal with the other hand by pulling it away, and let it be.
And if the break of the mandible is in two places, so that it is convenient that you arrange the extensions of two parts, as long as they are equal.
And if the movement of the teeth is due to a break, so that they are strained by a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken mandible a waxed cloth, and on it 1 double drape; and on the drape put a large well-made plate, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and fasten it with the threads you have cut, and order the patient to rest, and eat light food.
And if you see that the shape has changed, so change it back on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and put plaster on top, with flour from the mill mixed with a lot of ash or wheat flour, after you have taken off the wax; and put on another light plaster, and if the plaster dries up, and the patient's condition does not change, leave him until he is well; many times he will be well in 1 week.
And if abscesses come up, so administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and a wound together, do not take out any piece of bone, but use the appropriate tools for this.
And if the wound is narrow, so broaden it with fire according to your need.
And when you have brought all the bones together, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, and put on it plaster appropriate to this, to keep clean, until it is healed.
of the shoulder of the shoulder The forcele breaks several times in front, before the shoulder, and the break is such that: it is broken and dislocated in 2 ways, and has parts, and is easy to restore; or there is a break with injury.
And the overtakes are such that: when the break is without injury, you have 2 ministers, so that one tints the shoulder joint that is broken; and the others extend the neck towards the part; then make the break even on both sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or hair of it.
And if you have more to extend, then put on the shoulder a round pole of fabric, or of linen, and make it large according to your need; and let the forcele be extended, and the pole be held by your hand, so that you make even the break, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder away from the opposite side, so that it comes off completely, then let the patient lie down on his other side, and put the shoulder to rest. i.e. a small ear is bent, and the minister lifts up the shoulder blade as far as possible.
And then place the break on both sides, and if you find it broken, then let it be broken; and pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join together for any reason, then put the tool away, in order to save the life of the patient:
and it should be like a spoon, and is not thin, and is also wide enough according to the size of the bone and the ability of the work; and there are 1.5 inches, as you can see, and one is wide, and the other is narrow, just as the break in the wound that you made when you pulled the bones together:
and when you are confident that the wound is closed, then put it to rest; and if the break is small, or if you doubt about closing the wound, then use a bandage or tent, according to its quantity.
And if abscesses arise, then moisten them with oil of roses, with mint, and with wine, and put on them.
The extraction of the bone, when there are wounds and no fracture, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the mill and the ash of the oven, and put light staples on it, and put a spike on the joint if you need it. Then take a very long band of a palm's width, then put two layers of oilcloth on it, and cover it with the plaster; then take a thin stake of two hands' width and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the top of the bandage is hanging; and put the stake on the break, and turn the bandage over the shoulder, and wrap the oilcloth around the back of the neck, and tie it on both sides of the shoulder; and take it off each day, and when you see that the break is holding in place, and when you can clearly see that the stake is not moving on top of the bone, then put it back on again, and when you feel that the bandage is tight, if it is painful, release a little;
and let the disease rest on its two sides, and put it when he sleeps . i. small wing open the shoulder, so that the dislocation comes up; if the fracture is eased by the alignment of the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and no bad accident comes, until xx days;
then begin the treatment again if you see that it is needed, and hold and leave it so until it has healed; and it is healed in about xx days, and less for some men.
of the fracture of the shoulder
then begin the treatment again if you see that it is needed, and hold and leave it so until it has healed; and it is healed in about xx days, and less for some men.
And if a piece of the bone pokes out front, and there is no opening to let it out, if done so, and the bone, and do as we have said in breaking the forceps to relieve an abscess quickly.
of the break from the piece
And the piece is never broken in the middle, but it often breaks on one side; and when it is broken in the middle, if it declines towards the back, and causes great pain to the patient, and lack of air, and sometimes vomits blood, and feels a sharp pain in the broken bone, and smells bad.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and you put him between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and carefully make them even in all ways as they should be; then wrap it in a light cloth, and cover it with salt or other lighter material, and tie it firmly to the bone, so that it does not move; and turn him over gently to his back, and hold him tight, and loosen it every hour, and if he relaxes, let him go, and remove the wrap, and treat the area in a way that suits you; then remove the wrap, and hold him firmly until he is well.
of the breaking of the ribs
I understand that the rib fracture can only be found in the large ribs behind the back, and at the top towards the middle, and they do not hurt much unless they are sore; and I feel it well when asked.
And if you make the fracture even, as it should be; and then put plaster on it, and tie it with a strap, unless you need to do otherwise.
And if the rib fracture is declining inward, then the patient feels great pain and hiccups, as though they are crying; for the bone rubs against the lining; and they become very pale, and it is a cause of great illness, and the old people have put up with great trouble.
And if to those who serve that it is necessary to administer meat that swells the belly, to drive the wind away from the back.
We do not make this, so that heated abscesses do not come, if it has not come yet. And if it has come, let the patient be quiet.
And none of us says that we put vials on the top, to suck out the excess, and this is reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the vials do not attract the excesses to the top by the disposition of weakness.
And said no one of them that it is necessary to cover the place of another wet in oil hot, and put tents between the ribs so as to make equal the space inside, then be cured by the cure of pus, flesh and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain so that he cannot bear by the bone that points to the sling, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to split on his place of the bruised rib, and it is necessary to put a tool 1 . i . to hold him; and then the bone must be cut, and drawn lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with poultices until he is well. And if abscesses come up, then put on drapings wet in oil rosin, and put on his place; and cure while the place of that who has to an abscess, and let rest sore on his rib where it must, until he is well.
of the rupture of the neck
No one comes who breaks the bones of the neck, and it happens that he cries; and also to the back pain. Et when it has come to any, and you know if he will be healed or not, if take ward that you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and they can't move or extend, and when you pinch them with an needle, so does not smell. Know that it is fatal in many dispositions, and if they mute and smell well when you extract them and not, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is healed, if he is put cure.
And when similar things come to the spine of the back, and you know if he will be healed or not, if take ward that his bones are softened, and that the accident that is in his hands, and on his back wind it and excretes without will; and when it has been put with water on its belly, so does not excrete without will. And when it is put down on its back and he tightens, he can't. Know that it is fatal: do not work at all in its cure.
And if this accident does not come to him, then it is the lighter thing.
And the cure if it is that you reward if he has chapped lips, put on the spine oil of rose or oil of moef as much as it is calmed; then put on one of the compresses comforting and drying, and tie it with a string, and command to the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels the pain, until it is healed. And if some tooth is dislocated, then cover it with lead; and tie the tooth, then join together the 20 lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat it with an ointment involving char, until it is healed; and if the tooth root is broken, which is called the "root of the tooth," then pour out your urine from your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand, then apply the plaster and bandage, if you need to; then tie it up, and if there are any teeth that have come loose, then sew them back on, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the breaking of the bone of the thigh
For if the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, let it not be too much of a break at the top; and make it long, and decline to the back, and comes to the patient pain in the place, and swelling, and aching where it is broken.
And the reset if you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the break; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the top, then make it equal, as much as it can be in natural form.
And if his break is long, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient lie on his stomach until you have healed that break. And when you have made it even, if you put the plaster on, then put a board of wood or of bark on top of it, and tighten the break so that it does not move, and fix the position of the bones until they are even.
And command the patient to sleep on his side or back.
And if the abscesses break out, if he doesn't scratch, until the abscesses are calm, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and tighten it as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and that is the way.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
the dislocation of the shoulder
and tie the two ends of the rope, and lift them up, and cut the patient on one side; then put the broken end of the arm onto the edge of the meat, then dip it in meat juice, then raise it again with a heavy object or help from ministers; then hold the broken end evenly with both hands, as it returns to the way it should be.
The other way is that if the patient lies on their back, and ties the rope to their neck, then commands two ministers: one to hold the end of the rope at his hands, and the other to hold it on both sides; and so they extend it to its place.
And if you see that the extraction is more severe, then hold him fast by the ligature on the breach, and on the breach, and extend each of the ministers to his part. And if the breach is near the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary for you to place a ligature across the shoulder, and another towards the back, holding the breach; and if the breach is towards the back, then it is necessary to place a ligature lightly, without effort, as long as the breach is even on its place, and on its back; then make the breach even, as it should be, and hold him fast, so that the pustule does not come.
And if the pustule comes out, then do not hold it back more than 20 days, and put on it with a gentle hand and rose oil, until the pustule is calm; then hold it fast, and the way to hold it fast is that you put the plaster on the breach, then bring the arm up by the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and wrap the cloth around, and hold fast on the arm, and on the shoulders, so that the arms are in a comfortable position, unless something hurts them or the bones are broken.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use stilts, and put on the breach a stilt wider and stronger than the others, and have between each stilt 2 inches of space, and let each stilt be so large that it passes the breach by 2 inches on each side; then hold fast on the stilts, in this way as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the plaster on the breach, more strongly and less by moving away.
And if you see the sitting of stars, and extraction, as we said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the apotheosis hot, let it be tied until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each .iij. days the ligature, that itching does not flower and come to place, or that the newness of pain does not come to the member because it is too tightly bound. If he re-injures himself, as we said.
And if such an accident does not come, if only you do not remove the ligature until after three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and place the shoulder joint with a plain of equal wool, and look at each hour during the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or is not softened by the ligature; if he responds to the power of medicine, and gives him the food that we have mentioned above, in such a way that the food is in the first layer; and when it begins to improve, let it be thick. And it is usual for the shoulder joint and the leg to be regained in ten months; and then it must be removed and bath and medicines of ointments applied to restore it. And if the tightening is ugly and blocked, wait to remove it for one day or more than one month.
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the "foscile," of which one is small, and that is what follows the hand; and the other is large, and that is what follows the little finger; perhaps the large foscile breaks alone, or the small one, and perhaps they break together.
When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, it is a bad healing, and more painful than when they are broken together. If it is only the small foscile that is broken alone, then the thing to do is to stretch it lightly, and make it even.
And if it is the large foscile that must be stretched more strongly; and extend it on .ij. cuisses, and bring the pouchet of the hand up higher than the other fingers, and the little fingers down lower than the other fingers, and let the patient cross over himself in the middle, and .ij. cuisses before him higher than the patient can suffer any work; then extend the ministers' arms to the dislocated part at their hand, or a ligature, and one other minister to the other above it. And then make the patient even, according to his better form.
And if in the breaking into pieces, each one is put in its place, and if there is none that can hold the cure, and you cannot restore it to its place, then stretch it on the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the broken piece there is a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; if take care.
And if in the beginning of the healing there come abscesses, I have spoken about it to the singular chapter; if take care. i. a bandage made of oil-roset and bleached wax, which is not too hard nor too soft; and place the bandage gently above the abscesses, so that the abscesses are calmed down. And then take off the wax, and put the plaster of the powder from the mill with much ash, and put the splints, and it must be that there are vj. splints or more in different positions: whether the break is in one bone or in 2.; and squeeze more above the break than anywhere else, and always less as it moves away, so as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the break be soft and moist, and they are not too hard nor too rough; and let the thread, from which it is squeezed, be made of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And after some days reward the member and the ligament. And if some bad accident comes to the member, as when a itching comes to the member, then it is necessary that you water the member with hot water until the itching is calmed down; and let the member rest without being squeezed. And then begin again to squeeze, and if the ligament is soft and the bone has healed, then treat them as described.
And if the member is too tight, then it is necessary that you make it soft a little, and leave it so for some days, until the swelling goes down, and then begin to squeeze again.
And if any of these things that we have said come to the patient, then let him not be separated until .xx. days have passed or until he has become entor, then let him tie his hands to his neck, and let his necks be even, and keep them from moving and changing, and let him sleep on his back; and know that this breaker is restored in .xxx. days or in .xxxv., and perhaps in .xx. days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
of the break in the hand
Know that at the back of the hand and on both sides there are few breaks, and it comes only once in a while.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or plied, let it be that the patient cries out, and sits upright before him evenly; then put his hand on a table extended, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and make them even the miriels, until they are well joined; and put the plaster and the stoies, if there are any, then wrap it up in 1. drapes of linen.
Et s'il le poignent à leur naissance, se leur enlève les yeux qu'ils ne bougent pas tant qu'ils naissent.
And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. And if the break is in the back, then it is necessary that you put a stake on top, and another at the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then hold it tight around the hand, and tie the string between the two hands tightly.
And if the break is in one of the two hands, then it is necessary that you make it flat, as it should be; and tie it with the plant, and if you see that it does not move, then put a small straight stake to lift the break, and do not move it; and if the break is in the other two hands, then you tie them both together tightly, so that they do not move, and you put a stake on top, as if you were tying a pouche; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the aposteme, and attend to the one who comes, as I have said.
Et s'il le poignent à leur naissance, se leur enlève les yeux qu'ils ne bougent pas tant qu'ils naissent.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English: And the patient lies down, then each minister extends his leg in an equal manner to his side; and it is when the break is made in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the cubit, then one of the legs extends toward the knuckle, and the other leg extends below the break; and if it is near the kneecap, then one leg extends upward and the other downward; then the minister makes the bone equal with his two hands according to its natural shape, and then he sets the splint, and ties it, so that the chaff does not come out.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it rest then return to your work and your treatment; the hour is done in such a way. It is necessary that you wrap the broken .i. binde hard double in .ij. or .iiij., and leave the excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the birth, and bind .i. long thread between the thigh and the leg, and loose the knee desoz, and bring the chief of the thread over; then turn on the leg and on the thigh the binde, then put on the briseure stiles, and put a stile on the bone of the leg; then employ the place wet with drapelsou to make equal the strapping, then begin to tie form .iij. twists or iiij. on the briseure; and as you go up more on the briseure, and less the strap; then join the .ij. threads that you have bound between the leg and the thigh, and bind .iij. stiles that are above, then return to desoz at the chief of the thread, until you come off the foot; and the strapping, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it so, and if it does not come ne aposteme or swell or any other appearance.
And if it comes to pass, if it looses, and addresses what comes, if as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that hold, if it is possible, and if not, if it is necessary to split the place, and draw hard; and cure it as we have said, until he is well.
And never is the thigh broken in this way, as in the help and where the arm; nevertheless, in the restoration made thus there is no alarm for the patient.
And know that the wound is healed in .1. days, or less or more, according to the differences of complexions.
from the groin
For in the groin there is sometimes a little injury, but it often heals many times. And if it breaks, it is either a small fracture or a hole, and when it breaks, it feels good.
And the restoration is such that whoever has a joint broken should be put back in place as much as possible; then apply plaster and tie it up with a round strap, if you need one, and tighten it as we have said for other types of fractures, whether it is a chaud or another type of injury. And for each accident, do whatever is necessary to make it well.
from the break of the leg
Saiches that in the leg there are .ij. bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz" and the others are called "foscile"; and all other breaks are as those of the arm, and therefore the restoration is as that of the arm equally, and the work is all i.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns on all sides.
And if the small bone is broken, then it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain and sees it clearly; and turn back to the right way. Then bring an extension, and make it equal, and tie the joints equally; but nevertheless, it is necessary that the fracture be ugly, and there are more pieces, so that the extension be smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your virtue.
And when you have finished your work, then take 24 hair from the head of the patient, so that they surround the leg on both sides, and are as long as the leg from the ankle up; then wrap them around 21 times above and below, and bind them together in the middle; and at this binding no leg should hang down to the right or left, and thus is it good; and each day move each hair of the leg, so that you can see whether there is an abscess or another accident; if the cure as long as it is healthy.
from the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bones of the foot there is sometimes a fracture and sometimes not, and it never happens except that it is broken in many ways.
And if it happens that the bones of your foot are broken, and you see these bones overlapping each other; so put this patient on the ground like a dead man, just as if he were about to go away, and then now place your foot on its side, where those bones are raised, then press them until they return to their places; then apply the plaster and press it down, and put a small table of 1.2 pounds behind your leg, then bind those bandages tightly around it, and other things that you need.
After three or four days, if the leg is still swollen, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two are broken, restore them, just as we have said for the hands; then put a piece of wood on the broken part, which is slightly longer than the bone, and make it a little wider, then place the small table behind the foot, as I said before, and press the leg forward; and if there are more than two or three broken bones, put a piece of wood on each one according to its quantity, wrapped in one or two cloths of linen, and press the table behind the foot; and let it be placed on the top of the table so that it covers the foot's navel well.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said for breaking things, when we have said it; and attend to each injury as it occurs.
of the fracture of the bone from the elbow joint
When the bone is broken by nature, if the woman is seated enlarged, then she is inclined to the part of the back, and held behind; then fill the vagina with cotton, and put in it also as much as .i. a stone; then turn the woman over, and touch the back little by little, and then remove the cotton, until it comes into the opening of nature, and returns the bone with the stone; and when she goes to urinate, if she hold the cotton, and when she has urinated, then put it back again, and so for .vij. days or more: so will be healed the break, and she will not see, take a bladder of cow's milk, and tie a string to the hernia, and pour all the milk into the vagina; then blow in the string forming, until the milk is inside: nature will then return the break; then fill with cotton, and leave it for some days, until he is well.
And when the bone of the elbow is broken in man or woman, if he restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these breaks are not hidden from those who apply themselves to their study and use, and hear my book. For the break therefore means many things on the right way to restoration: hear then.
In the vagina, when it is broken, take a bladder of owl and fill the vagina; then wrap bandages around, and leave them .iij. days or more, and it will be well in the hospital.
of fracture with wound
For those who have a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the arm or shoulder or similar, now let us consider how to treat these fractures so that they are healed, as the evidence we have mentioned testifies.
And if the wound heals, except for the vitriol stain, then you should start restoring the fracture in this very hour, or at least within a day, as the apothecmies will not come until then.
And if the apothecmies come within a day, then leave it for restoration until the next day, as long as the abscess has calmed down, and do not touch it again until three days have passed, for you could bring about a bad accident.
And if his nose is broken, it appears on the forehead uncovered, so that you should put it gently with your hand, with a small extension.
And if the extensions are not equal in length on your hands, so that you can use this tool made of iron, which has 15 or 20 inches in length and whose width is according to the quantity of the wound; and because it is necessary to apply pressure to the member with your hand at your opening, and be sharp in front and thick in the middle:
And it is called a "palainche," because the broken shoulder should be placed on the top of the visible bone; and it should be hit once, as long as it revives, and they are equal to each other. And if the break is subtle, and the instrument cannot take the bone well, you must chisel the top of the bone until the instrument can take it.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, if you take an appropriate tool for this, or a chisel or a file, in your power; then resece that which is delayed in the bone with roughness and small scrapes.
Et when the jaw is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. If it is in its place, then make sure it does not move; I.e., wrap it in black wine-styptic cloth, and carefully if it is in the flesh; and do not put anything on the wound except you cover it, so as to prevent the spread of pus or corruption, then administer tar when you have set the bone, leaving the wound uncovered, and wrap it all around with the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound does not contract with the fracture; and many times this has been done to the sick, either dead or corrosive, without fail; and the ligatures are softer and milder than those of other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a worse accident will not come, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, then it is not good to put anything on top of it except wrap it hard in place of tar; but wrap it all around with hard wrappings, instead of tar. And when you see after one or two days that a bow has formed at the wound, if you take off what you have put on top of it, and apply the ointment healing wounds, as well as the ointment tetrafarmaçon and others,
And it is necessary that you un wrap the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is hardened and healed.
And the limbs should be arranged in such a way that the bow is drawn down lightly.
And if the bone has broken, and cannot be joined again but comes together with a creak, such that there are small pieces of bone, it is necessary for you to clean the wound, and remove all these painful pieces that bring pain.
And if a fistula develops at the site or some other form of corruption, then it is necessary to treat it according to what this chapter says about it. And if the bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, as with the hipbone or shoulderbone, and other large bones, do not pull it out, for many die if you do; but leave it there until it has腐rot; then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
of bruses that come from the sudor
We come back again and again because of the health of the broken, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the figure of the limb; and by chance cannot make members do their natural work.
Take note that we are fresh: if he administers medicines that stick, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcacollege, etc., so that you do not apply any of these things, or all together, and confound them with wine that is sticky or with a lot of egg yolk or with honey; and put them on the knot in piles, and bind them firmly, and do not release them for many days; and then remove it, and start again another one until the knots are hard; or you hold it against a well-made piece of flannel; because the property of the flannel is that it makes all inflammation on the limbs go away; and if the knot has already turned into hardness like stone, it needs to be opened, then cut off the excess, or you give it to anyone who can do this, until it is hard, and cure it until it is healthy.
When the break in the bone is healed, and weak and thin members remain, this can be due to several causes: because they were too tightly tied, and were not tied as they should have been; or because he had too many ties, and could not get the circulation going to the member; or because of too much swelling; or because of too much movement at the wrong time; or because he did not have enough blood in his body, so became weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the cors soft, as long as the pains are multiplied in him; and administer baths to him, and give him pleasure and amusement; then put wax on the member, so that the wax attracts his great swelling, and pour hot water on it often, until the swelling goes away from the member, and returns to its natural shape.
the dislocated limb after healing
When the member is twisted after healing, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one should break the member all over again, and many such fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blameworthy, and bring great harm and perhaps death. However, if the nodules and torments are fresh, they should be heated with hot water, or soft herbs are cooked, such as leaves of vismalve, roots, and melilot, and similar things; and you make an ointment that softens, such as a well-made styptic, and you take the musk of vismalve, and confound it with butter of sheep's milk or oil of sesame seeds, and make an ointment out of it; or you take fat figs, and grind them with hay of colza, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And never let the bones be rubbed continuously and for a long time with damp hands; and always give the member some movement every hour.
And if the curvature is raised and hardened, as in the case of the stone, it needs to be cut with a sharp knife up to the bone; put on a splint and study for the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations:
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if it now brings back sense to tarry.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;
For if it is delayed, and the veins swell, and by chance we put them back to their place; for this does not come without pain that we move them when they are swollen: many times brings spam and other pains; however, when this comes, if you make the sick one well, then leave him, as long as the abscess hole is calmed down; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and heal each member as the cure comes.
And I have ordered the remedies for dislocations of the shoulder joint up to the point of pain.
of the jaw.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient désalignées et le dislocations d'ambedous est selon 2.ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostéos de lor lüs, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont entièrement désalignées, et pendent vers lo pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by them several configurations.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly in the hospital, and do not delay.
and in such a way that the ministers wet the chief of the disease, and pour water from one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, where the dislocation is of .ij. parts; and the other two hands should be away, to make it even; and instruct the patient that he softens his jaws, and moves them in all directions.
And let the wound be kept open until it has healed completely.
And when it has healed, if the jaws have joined together, treat with warm water and oil, gently massaging it; do not delay in treating it, as we have said.
And when they have healed evenly, and the mouth of the patient clings well, using a softener, place it on a drape made of oil and wax, then gently rub it in;
and let the patient sleep on his back, and his cheeks be between 1 and 2 pillows, so that he does not move or strain either to the right or left, but gently chews soft food, until the pains are relieved, and the jaws have healed.
and then cut lightly what needs to be cut, and do not work on opening the mouth to eat or drink until the mandible is well healed and sound.
And if the two mandibles cannot be reset to their place within an hour and are not reduced to their places, then there will come fevers and usual agonies, and by chance abdominal discharge, and by chance vomiting of clear fluid only.
And when you see this, then you know it is a sign of death; and many times he dies who has this, within seventeen days.
of the fork
The forceps cannot dislocate from the coast within the continuance of the chest and loins, and is dislocated never to the back, and feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down soon on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the joint with your palm, and it will come back; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it fast;
and the head that is on the coast cannot dislocate; if not, and if it is dislocated at all, return it to its place as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it fast, and order the patient to rest as long as he is well;
and so too is the shoulder dislocation returned when it has been taken from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
That the shoulder dislocates only in three ways: either because one of its parts comes out of place at the joint; or it is the bottom part that comes out; and perhaps it is the upper part that comes out, which happens rarely.
And don't dislocate behind the shoulder, and don't dislocate inside it for those who have a weak back, because in this case they will surely be hospitalized; and for those who have a strong back, let them dislocates, and return.
And perhaps some men have a pulsation or a break, and they heat the shoulder with a hot applique, and think that it is dislocated by this.
It is necessary for you to test this out, as long as you are sure about it; and then begin the treatment.
And is known when it is swallowed down towards the arm, and makes a difference between the sick and the healthy shoulder, and you will find between them great difference. and you will find at the head of the shoulder a depression, and take care to the arm to the table the head of the shoulder, as if it were a bird's nest; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck, nor move at all.
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it may be hidden, for you will see it clearly on the table;
and this method of dislocation is not to be used when it is new, or when the patient is ill.
And the manner is that the minister hold the hand of the patient upwards, then put the splint behind the shoulder, and raise the joint by force to its place; and the minister hold the hand, and extend it upwards, then put it behind; if comes quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said with the hands after two or three days, let the patient be bathed in warm water; and mild soothing and softening enemas be given, as of althaea and fenugrec and melilote in water, and be given;
then put on behind the shoulder a cloth of equal length, not too soft nor too hard, then put the feet of the patient on the cloth, and hold the hand of the patient;
and others ministers tan the head of the disease, so that it does not move up; this shoulder returns all at once, and you see him if you do as follows:
and let a man be present who is greater than the patient; and let him stand on the right side of his body, and push down his shoulder from behind the patient, and lift up the shoulder above, so that the patient hangs by it; and other ministers draw the hand of the disease down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then wrap something heavy around him, and the dislocation will return now.
And the branch is also bent in another way: and it is done as a.i. nail, and not too thick or too thin; and let the head of the shoulder be bent so that it stands on the point of the nail, and let it be held in place; Then let the evil one be laid down but that he have a blanket over him and the evil one be lying long in the furrow; then his hand be extended downstream from another side making a form, and the joint will return to its place firmly.
and if she does not return for all these things that we have said, then make this cure: take .i. beam of an arm long and .iiij. fingers wide, which has the head on end so that it can enter perfectly into dislocation the shoulder, according to this form:
Then lay it on the top of the head with a blanket so that the evil one does not hurt the evil one, then put it into dislocation the shoulder; and extend your arms on the top of the long furrow, and place the aid on the top of the furrow, and the hand at the head of the arm, then put the arm on 1.i. stone of a stone long, and let it be extended downstream, and let the body hang from another side: the joint will return now.
Then when it is in place, in whatever way, so that you put under the shoulder a sheep's wool even, then put the plaster ready with powder from the mill, with incense and myrrh of uff, on all the shoulder and around, then draw out under the shoulder forward, and tie it on the plaster, and embrace the hand at the neck, and let the hands remain in that way.
And it is necessary that he drink little, as long as the members are comfortable, for he will heal faster; and then drink more after a few days or so, and move him; and if he is firm and has not softened, then he is healed.
And if the joint has come out of its place due to moisture or some other cause, you must perform cauterizations on three sides, as with the paste used for cauterization.
And if you do all this, and after seven days the joint still does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm above his head, then you will know that the nerves at the shoulder have been injured or stretched or softened; and you will know that the joint has never returned to its place.
The dislocation that is toward the loin, and the breasts, or behind, is made by impact, and extension of the arms, and I administer another place; and treat as long as it is healed.
And if after healing comes greasiness to the limb, and late it moves, then use the patient often so that those greasinesses are gone away, and return to their first nature.
of the dislocation from the shoulder
Saves that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at the tips and returns; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not properly set, for we can see it well and feel it well; and dislocate according to each shape. And when you join the shoulder with fire, if you can see it open. For the joint is broken, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder from all sides.
And you must bring it back in the same way that you put in, for if you put in [the shoulder] with an upright arm, there would be much grief in bringing it back; and by chance cannot be brought back from all and all, more so when it is behind; this is worse than other dislocations and is great pain, and by chance comes death.
And the restoration is there, when it is such that you can bring it back, that you extend its hand to your .ij hands; and its arms spread out, and the hands of the shoulder along the side according to the couture around, forwards and backwards, and squeeze the joint in its palm together or at the root of its palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, return when it doubles its hand back to its hand, and strong from the root of the palm the side that is turned down.
And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong extension; and is that two minister extend the arm, and dip them two minister, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm of each part, then that you have wrapped a double long and wide drapeil;
and when he reaches the joint with his hand, if it does not come from any oil to soften the joint, then bottle up the joint firmly until it revives;
and when it is in place, if it is placed on dry plaster with ointment of wool fat, and is stretched firmly, and the arm is held up to the neck of the sick person, and is left for some days, then it is released.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not move well, then begin again with plaster and a bandage, and leave it like this for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it becomes quiet, then bathe and massage him well, and press until he is soothed; or put on the joint a paste of sheep's fat, then leave it for one day and one night, then wash and dry it, and let him enter or bathe. and when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then put on the new one over, and then enter or bathe; and so do .ij. times or .iij., as long as it is healthy; and if you see it, put it on the end of a wet veil heated with butter, and stretch it out; thus it will return to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
the dislocation of the hand is eased, and its return is lighter than that of other joints However, it must be brought back to its place as soon as it is dislocated, especially when it is swollen or there is a fever.
And let the dislocated hand rest on a table, and extend the fingers of the hand, and look at it so that he sets his palm against the joint, and presses it until it returns.
All the same, it is necessary that you look to see if he is in the right place; then put the patient's back of his hand on a tray for extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient's back of his hand on the tray, and let him look at the appearance of the joint. If it comes back now, it is good.
If not, if the extraction of the spurious ones that pierce the abscesses leaves him with a sore hand, then let him leave it alone for now.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in the right place after a few days, then let the dislocated joint recover itself.
and does not give the patient water until his hands are moist, and cannot extract anything at all: then you know that the nerves are cut or an artery; if there is no other device for extracting by fire but to cut a piece of the case, and perhaps nothing else.
And when the hands are in place, put on the plaster as we have said, then extract it and leave it for a while, then take it off and leave it like that.
If he cannot move it well, and there is no crack, then dip it in warm water and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the two hands.
No time are the joints of the hand displaced to each side, no time on the back of the palm or the belly;
Then are the joints, and push back the dislocation to your pockets until it comes back, then support the head of the two joints, and bend it towards the part where they are joined;
and then let it 1.5 hours, and then put it even that day; and of not the leg, so as we have said, and the dislocation of the day, and the movement, and the connection again; and do this often, until it is tight,
and also do, if it is dislocated on the back of the hand, and do so as you have done before, until it is well; and also do, when it is dislocated on the other side.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
When the neck or shoulder is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, for the patient will quickly die.
And the signs are that the emissions come out without will, they cannot be held, and often the limbs become soft, or the left or right arm or both.
And many times the eschinee mutates into four parts; that which mutates at the back is called "gilboite":
The following is the translation of the text line by line into English:
And that which comes from sitting down or percussion or similar things, the ancient manners of cure by great words, so it does not bring much good to all."
But I have condensed it according to my intention, and have fashioned instruments in various ways."
I say that in the gila bosity that comes before, there is no beginning or healing;"
and so I say that it comes straight in 1 . 2 . sides, and can only be cured properly if it comes from the back, as I said;
and so that the patient is lying flat on his back in an even position, and has had his eyes removed so that he cannot be blinded;
and then place 1  . 2  . sticks on the ground forming a platform, and 1  . 2  . others under the arms, and 1  . 2  . others at the hips, and 1  . 2  . others at the knees, and 1  . 2  . others at the ankles;
and the two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the 12 sticks;
and let the bones be well closed, as we have said, and the mirrour put its palms on the spine, until it recovers.
And if it does not recover with this treatment, take a table of three feet long, and chip off a panel from the side, and let the patient stand on one side, and pour the head of the table against the panel, then put the middle of the table on the spine. and put the mirror's edges on the other end of the table, and press well, until it recovers its position; and if you see that it does not work, then do it with a turn of the hand.
and place that same number of torches at the head of the sick person with one hand, and put them between each torch, face up and down, a palm's width apart;
and place each twig. i.e. a pestle, or it turns so that the twigs are firmly in the ground, so they do not move; and between each of them have 1. twig turning, so that the ties turn, and place 2. turning 2 small twigs of a palm long, to turn the pestle.
and then place the tie that is between the pegs on the top of the pestle, and the other tie towards the pips at the other end, and each of the assistants turns their tie all the way, and the master places the spike evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, put on desiccate with a lot of powder, and then the staples, and then the stone of a tablet of 1.5 inches long, that by purple the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then the string of a tie, as we have said, and use the subtlety of nourishment to him until he is healthy;
and if anything comes to the end of health, then administer medicine that softens and eases with the stone that we have said above; and never give a piece of lead,
and never has an appearance in the back of the spine between the two bones, and believe that this is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, so that one must not have any presumptions: perhaps death will come.
dislocations of the hip
It is known that the hip and shoulder joints only come in dislocations, not like other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to the four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside, and less in front and behind.
And the knowledge of their dislocations inside is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is more distant, and opens up the patient's knees more than the healthy ones, and cannot double the patient's knee on fire. and is the neck which is inflamed with abscess hot, for this reason the head of the shoulder comes from it.
And the sign of that to which he belongs, if this accident is opposite to these before.
And the signs of that to which he belongs, if it is well-proportioned according to its development; nevertheless, do not double it in length, and when you make it walk, if it cannot go before, and holds back its urine, and swells the ankle, and when it walks, if it passes over the heel.
And the signs of that to which he belongs behind, if it cannot spread its knee, nor double, and is that leg more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the shoulder is at the level of the ribs.
When the dislocation has existed for some time, and it does not remain in place according to its habit, there is no cure; and it only comes about through presumption.
And in those where the dislocation is recent, and there are three types of dislocation, if you hurry to put the joint back together again and move it within and without, and turn it from side to side; perhaps it will come back into place, and there is no need for any other cure.
And if it does not come back into place in this way, you must provide very strong assistance, and firmly support the leg with two hands, or a ligature tied around the knee joint; and others place their hand above it in such a way that they can press down on the joints below, then fasten the ligature around the hip; and others tie the end of the ligature to the belt;
and extend up and down all at once, so that the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains so.
This manner of extension is common to three things, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then you should put a cure on his back, then tie him to the root of his thigh, and the loop that is out of the crotch, then extend the loop above the crotch, and towards the hip; and
then extend the other ministers' arms, and embrace the large loop of the troublesome thigh, and extend it in a U-shape: so he will return to his place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot hold it in this way that we have said, then you must bind the .ij. feet of the sick person together with a strong rope under the .ij. heels, and on the .ij. knees, so that the leg of the sick person is stretched out more than the other two.
Then let it be hung from the top of a post, and be 2 arms long; then command 1 minister to embrace the top of the loins, and be others hanging with the sick person who embraces the loins tightly, for the joints will now come back together quickly.
And when the dislocation is on the side, let the sick person lie down as we have said in the case of gileositie, and bind a rope properly on the leg that is not ill, and also on the foot.
Then put .ij. torches on the head and another between the loins of the sick person, so that he is wrapped in fire tightly. and put wet flagella between, so it does not burn the patient, then each minister extends towards him, and the master puts the dislocation equal to his hand.
If it returns, it is good. If not, put it on a .ie. board, and press it as we have said in the gibosity, and lay the patient on the side.
And when the dislocation is before, if it is necessary to extend the leg of the patient carefully, and according to what I have said; and put the master's foot on the other side of the patient, then press towards him with the hand that is not injured, and pull upwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is behind, if it is not possible to extend the leg of the patient carefully, and it is necessary to lift it up; however, it is necessary that he is put on his side as we have said in the bed making; then press him towards you with one hand, and pull him upwards by his foot. and let it rest on its face, and the limb extended as we have said above, and you must now press down on the joint to the table;
and let the patient extend his legs, and they will be even; then put on the splint, and strain it with a bandage, so that the ankle does not move;
and rest for three days or three times, then remove the splint and put it on; and if you see that they are even, strain it as before, and let it rest. three times; then remove the splint, and make him walk loudly, until the members are comfortable.
from dislocation due to old age
The dislocations occur according to .iii.. ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and do not dislocate in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient that he bend his leg to his knees, and if it does not bend at his knee, know that it is dislocated.
and the treatment of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your knees.
then take his ankle in your hands, and pull it between your knees, then bend the .ii.. legs from the ankle; and other ministers extend his foot, until the genous returns to its place, and the signs are that he bends his leg properly at the knee;
and wrap the plaster on top of it, and make the leg rest in the lap, and join them together firmly. 1 or 2 days later, then remove it; and do not work the patient to walk, until the members are comfortable again.
And if the members are not in place, so administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
of the dislocation at the heel
the heel is never fully dislocated, and never fully displaced inward or outward.
And these are the signs that the ankle is dislocated, and test before the part where it has come out of joint.
They should be brought forward if they are light, and be gently extended to their hands when they are severely dislocated.
And when it has come out from the top, if it is convenient that you make the patient sit upright, and tie him to his bed with his legs stretched out straight above his ankles;
Then train the foot to you with your right hand, and then to the left with your left hand; then extend it up, and blow on the foot up above;
and do this 19 times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it comes back, it is good; if not, then begin the work again, because it will come back.
If it cannot come back like this, then lay the patient on their back on the ground, and place a long stake firmly in the ground between their legs, and tie the drape around it so that the patient does not bleed.
Then put the minister's hand on the hip, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with a bandage, so that he lies on the foot; Then extend each minister evenly, and place the stake firmly between the hips of the patient to hold him down while he is extended;
And then set the mirror equal to the dislocation with your hands, and another minister will dip the healthy leg in the vinegar, and the dislocation will return entirely.
And when it is fixed, then put the plaster on and make it tight, and shape it, and fix the foot to the leg, and guard against the tendons being too stretched;
Then leave it alone for .ij. days or .iij., and if the foot is still swollen, then let it go; then walk after three or four days; and if he walks before that term is up, it is not yet certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess breaks out, so that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy again.
of the two
When the two are dislocated, if it is done well and carefully without work, and this is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in the two joints of the foot, so that you place the patient lying down on his side or on a table all straight, and put your foot on what opens up these joints, then press your foot gradually, until it returns;
and when it is even, and does not open anything, so he sets the foot on a table of .ij. feet, then he draws it up, forms it, and leaves it for .iiij. days, then he takes it off; and let him rest until he is well.
of wound and dislocation together
When the wound and dislocation occur together, and many times the patient dies:
if you are not presumptuous in the remedy, and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful and slow to act, do not be arrogant:
and apply cold poultices at the beginning of things to calm an abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope for health. and when you see hope, if you put the limb back in place now, so that the abscesses may come;
and when the limb is back in place, if you apply cold poultices to the abscesses, and treat the wound, and if necessary, with dry ointments;
and if there is a fracture with broken bones, and the small bones are displaced, and do as we have said in simple illnesses;
and keep yourself from going down the path of fear, according to what I have said, because this will cost you your soul according to your creator, and for the sake of your arm and your heart. Amen
