O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the knowledge of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its expositions and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hand, that is to say, "surgery."
And because the work of the hand is very rare in our region and is unfamiliar throughout, the knowledge has been lost and forgotten, and nothing remains but brief descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have moved. And because of this, errors and vanities have come about, intentions have been hidden, and knowledge has been distant.
Now it seems to me that I should animate this treatise together with the order of this chapter according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because no good hand masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And one who undertakes this must surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of members, and forms and conjunctions and separations of bones, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the moving and resting blood vessels, and where their outlets are.
And therefore Hypocras says that the name with the non is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, beware that he does not err and harm people; just as I have many times seen several of those who meddle in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and lanced the arteries in her neck; so much blood issued out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; he carried away with it a part of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if he had been cut open he would have died.
And I saw another case where a knight from our land had his leg broken, and with the break he had a wound; and the ignorant doctor bound up the break over the wound with tight bandages, and did not leave any padding on the wound, but left it like that, with a bandage; and he ordered him not to take it off; and so he remained, until his leg, foot and all swelled up and came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to loosen his leg; and when I had loosened it he was at ease and felt no pain.
Nevertheless, the corruption had already settled in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the entire limb was destroyed.
And I saw another case where a doctor treated an abscess that was encrusted and then inflamed due to the wickedness of his lord.
For when a ulcer is purged of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron unless in such a place that one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, you need to know that the work of the hand is divided into two parts: namely, work where there is danger in various situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is danger and peril.
So it is necessary that you be careful, so that the foolish person cannot speak ill of you.
Then take your arms in confidence, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best path so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind the terrible diseases of grief, and cast aside what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen warns in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on a difficult case that you may not be called a foolish doctor."
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is on fire cauterization and medical cauterization, and it is arranged from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and of cauterization tools, and all that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter is on illnesses that come through the mastery of a bad angel or devils and through evil sorcery, and their treatments; and of the signs that are appropriate for these illnesses; and of baths and tools, and similar things; and it is arranged with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations, and twisting, and similar things; and it is arranged from the head to the feet, and describes the forms of instruments.
So that we may remember the work, I should say something about the nature of aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the most lengthy subject and subtle science, and the secret responses; and about this most of the sages have spoken, and agreed; and I am content with a little of their words, for I dread prolixity.
I say that cautery aids universally in all complexes where there is matter, for there are .ii. complexes: namely, hot complex without matter, and dry complex without matter.
In complexions of hot and dry matter together, some people said that cautery is of great help; and others said the opposite, that cautery is of no use for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated for hot illnesses by heat, nor by dryness; and those who said otherwise claimed that cautery helps greatly with hot and dry illnesses that affect humans. For when you compare the body of man to fire's nature, you find the body is cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
And yet, do not presume to apply this except for those who have experienced it and who know through long practice the use of cauteries, and the diversity of people's complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their recoveries and the timing; we fear not at all about other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the doctors agreed and concurred on the use of cauterization.
And know, my son, that a cautery combines fire with the secrets of healing, and has greater benefits than a burning cautery of medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not spread beyond the cooked member, nor harm any other member if it is not named.
Burning medicines spread from member to member by contact, and bring about the sickness of grief through slow healing; and sometimes they kill the patient.
Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not harm if there is no excess.
And I have found this through experiment and the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and stood upon the truth of things; and because of this, I excuse myself for the length of my speech, for it does not please me to take away the secret which is reserved for fire, and the quality of the work, how it heals the diseases of the body, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration. So receive it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed upon what time the cauteries should be performed, and chose a suitable day.
I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the underlying harm is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially if the cauteries are for painful conditions that are urgent and cannot wait until a later time when greater harm might come to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as the foolish do; for a disease that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say so, but it is not true as they believe, because cauteries are not medicines that change the complexion, but rather dry up the humors that cause pain, and are better than other medicines due to their swiftness, and because of the virtue of their action and their lordly nature.
And seek the time when the pain is urgent and severe; for in such a time cauteries are more effective than at any other; and it is fitting that it be performed in the morning or evening when the pain is acute. And it often happens that the disease comes according to the complexion of the patient, the location of the ailment, and its nature; and there are gathered within him excesses due to digestion and similar things, unless cauteries are administered to remove them, or if there is little excess moisture, as with toothache and similar ailments, and such pain does not return, but rather seldom.
And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine; but it is indeed so. However, they do not believe that cautery is better than medicine, their intentions are false. Cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cure for any illness and they are ineffective, then we administer cautery and it works. Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish people.
The ancients said that cautery with a gold instrument is milder than with iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold or because of its high value, but they said that the heat of the cautery does not cause swelling; however, this is not true, as I have experimented and found that it is true in some people. Cautery with gold is milder than with iron, as they said.
However, when you heat the gold instrument, you cannot tell by its color that it is hot, and it cools down immediately; if it is heated too much, it will melt in the fire; therefore, there is enough precaution to take.
And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Now I have ordered this chapter of the head up to the feet, so that the way is easier to find.
of the olive cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two ways of doing it because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that flow from the head to the eyes, and ears, and because of numerous pains in the teeth and throat, and especially for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged with a purifying, dissolving medicine for 3 or 4 nights, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can bear; and then have the head of the patient shaved.
And then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his thighs; then place the palm of your hand between the root of his nose and between his two eyes; and where your two middle fingers meet, there will be bleeding, then heat up the cautery, which is called "olive oil", and this is how it is done:
And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while pressing gently; then lift your hand gently, and check the bone again; if you cannot see it, repeat the cautery until you do as I have instructed. Then take a little salt, put it in a piece of cloth, and place it on the spot, leaving it there for 3 days; then apply moistened cotton in butter, leaving it until the blister is gone; then treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
And if they say that when a wound stays open for longer, it purges more, then use leeches.
And some say that one should leave the cautery for so long that part of the bone is burned, and then one should remove what is burned from the bone and it will heal.
And others say that one should leave the cautery on for so long, and press so hard that one lowers the bone as wide as a woman's fuse, so that the humors may issue forth; then one must let the wound remain open for a long time; after which one should cleanse and dress it.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem good to me in every respect, except in some people where there is fear; and I should rather leave it alone, for the shoulder is weakened by continuous dislocations, as we see in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first application of cautery seems more salutary and mild to me, then I employ this method together with healing.
of the old pain in the head
When there is chronic pain throughout the head that lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills called 'cochie', as well as poultices for the head, oils, and plasters. If they are then treated with the cautery we mentioned earlier but it does not help.
Take care that the head of the sick person is not too cold in nature; then cauterize it with that fire cautery which we described earlier.
After cauterizing each horn of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and make another cautery in the place called 'vessel'; there is a place for placing leeches; and lighten your hand so that you do not reach the bone: the patient will feel much more pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak of it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be more subtle than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and its shape is as follows:
of the cautery of the head When sudden pain arises in the head and the illness extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and one has done the other remedies that I have said in the division of illnesses, and all this does not help; then one should do cauteries according to two manners, that is to say, with medicine and with fire.
The cautery of medicine with garlic is that you press a clove of garlic, and remove the skin and cover it with a piece of cloth, and then make the poultice where the pain is in such a way that you can place the clove of garlic under the skin; and when it is placed, bind it tightly and leave it for 12 hours; then loosen it and remove it from the garlic, and leave the wound like this for two or three days; then place linen soaked in butter on top until suppuration occurs.
After the treatment of ointment until it is healed; and if you see fit, do this with some burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
The cautery of fire is done according to this method. Heat the cautery so that it is hot enough for its shape:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a clo [i.e., closed] with a slight curve, and in the middle has a small protuberance; and place it over the painful area, and hold your hand and twist it slightly so that half the thickness of the skin is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is deflected, and an abundance of blood flows.
Afterward put cotton in the wound, and place it there for three days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this emigrant with the cautery called  "cultellare", cauterize all the way to the tip, and be careful not to touch the artery in this emigrant which is not old.
of an emigrant
When you treat an emigrant as we have previously discussed in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned of medicine and fire do not help him, then you must heat the cautery which is called  "cultellare" until it is white; and draw a line half a finger long on the painful area, and lift your hand once, and hold it so that you do not touch the artery and so that spasms do not come to the patient, and be careful of the mandibular nerve that causes muteness when one chews, and let the blood flow until it is halfway done; but I will tell you how to stanch the blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the end of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more effective.
from pain in the ears due to cold
When pain in the ear persists despite treatment with solutive medicines and other remedies as described in the previous chapter, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery known as "poins", which has the following form:
After puncturing all around the affected ear, or both ears if the pain is present in both, and moving slightly upwards from the root of the ear after you have identified the location of the pain; and have 10 poins around each ear; then treat the area until it heals.
of the mouth torture
Torture which should be cured by cautery is only those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not cauterize appearances that come from dryness and nerve-swelling.
When you cure this appearance of torture that moves from fluid in the ears and purging from the head, and gargling, and it does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with 3 cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little further up on the temple, and the third in the junction between the two lips; and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and also cauterize the top of the ear just below the horn of the head, and another one on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery on until half of the brain is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery tool:
And the appearance of the scalpel that we mentioned earlier, but it should be a little more slender, and the blade should be a little thicker; then cure the area as I have described before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one where the 'vassels' are, as we have said before; and the last cautery on the stomach's mouth; and let it be treated as we have said before.
of quicklime
For this disease, give the patient large and cleansing pills for the brain; then wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and place upon the nape of his neck the plaster of mustard seed which is written about in the treatise on plasters; and here is how to do the cautery: do it as I have said.
If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries on the middle of the head, descending just to the neck, and have one inch of space between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see fit to adjust it, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if need be, two more on the two corners, and cure him as before. And let the cauteries be those which are called 'olive-tree', as I have said before.
of coldness from the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and dirt as we have already said; then wash the head of the patient, next apply cauterization all over the head and on each temple, one behind and three on the spine; and if more is required, and the body is moist and the patient can endure it, and the illness is severe, he should be cauterized four times on the spine; allow it to burn until the heart is scorched, then lift your hand; treat the wound until it heals, and use the cautery we call 'olive' as mentioned before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cauterization except for those who are phlegmatic; first, the brain must be cleansed of hair and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section on great and suffering illnesses that require medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, make them gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meats; after the king, put the head in the middle, and do to him one cautery according to what we have said before, and one cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is strong and painful, do cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said.
If the disease is in an infant, do to him one subtle cautery according to this manner:
When by the cause of melancholy there are corrupt humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy the humours are inclined towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink to purify the brain according to what is said before in the division.
After you have applied the cautery to the wound; then make a little tourniquet of linen well-made, like a circle, and place it within the wound; and cross the bandages of the patient, and hold them tightly from all sides; then apply the liniment, and add some mutton suet of an old ram; heat it gently over fire so that he can bear its heat; then remove the circle inside the wound, and let it cool down; do this to the patient once a week with good management, until he is healed.
Or, if you see that he needs to be cauterized again in the same place many times with all the cautery, this kind of cautery softens the brain excessively; then place wet cotton in suet and chicken fat on top.
of the eyes When eye problems first appear in the eyes due to the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient a drink that cleanses the head, and protect him from all moisture, and make him sweat or take baths several times while fasting.
After he commands him to turn his head and cauterize inside the mouth, and make .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the swelling of the jaw extends to both eyes, or on one temple if it is only on one; and close all the veins and arteries under the skin, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with as much power as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of the arteries and in making the incision, how to stop it; and sometimes a cautery or hatchet is made under the .ij. bones at the back.
where the body weeps
When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed, and are on the veins or arteries that are visible on the outside of the head; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I said at the beginning of the jaw:  .i. cautery inside the mouth, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or hatchet under the .ij. bones; and if there is a need for more, then he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery all over.
where the body weeps from within them
When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient a drink of leeches for three nights; after that, cut off the hair at the top, and cauterize him with olive oil in the middle; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two sorces, one little below the ears; and be careful of the artery so that you do not cover it. And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivare". This is how you make it::
And if you see so do .ij. cauteries on the .ij. warts as long as the sorcerers are; and don't leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I said.
the hair that pokes the eye Sometimes the hair of the eyes is turned towards the eyelids, and pokes the eye, and one must do cauteries according to 2 methods: that is to say, with fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state; after that, draw on the paper a figure that is as long as the eye socket, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs; then moisten cotton with egg white and apply it to the eye, then heat the cautery so that its shape is there:
After that, cauterize a little bit at a time over the figure you drew until it is burnt in place; and the sign of the healing of the work is when you see the paper pull back and the hairs rise up towards the eye socket; then lift your hand and leave it as is for 3 days. Then apply wet cotton with butter to cool the burn; after that, treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if afterwards the hairs grow and the paper softens, then start the cautery again in the same place as before; and if the hairs are ingrown, cauterize until the paper returns to its natural place, and is even, and do not prick the eye.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, then make a piece of parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrrh; then take French soap and live charcoal, each one half a denier, and grind them together well; and make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it over the shape you made like the leaf of myrrh, and apply it to the paper around the eyes; and if the disease is in one eye only, then operate on one, and if both, then do the same; and put under the eye wet cotton with egg white; and let the patient's hand be in a healthy state and place your finger showing over the medicine, and press it gently and move it every time the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he will feel the bite as much as from fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your body. And when the bite has passed, lift the area of the bite, and examine if you see the papery skin lifted as it was by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, all is well. If not, then apply more medicine to the site of the bite, or where the medicine has not worked, until your work is even and your eyes focused; then place wet cotton on the burn until the pain subsides, after which cleanse the area of the ointment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not get into your eyes, and if the papery skin becomes soft after, and the hair grows in the eye, then restart the medicine on the area which is softened by the papery skin, just as you did before; then cleanse it until it is healed; and this is the form of the mirtle twig:
And know that the eyes of humans are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, your constraints should be adjusted; and do not rely on the correct path for one who has studied this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should apply cautery according to the following method.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap, and hold their head steady so that it does not move or nod; then soak cotton in white vinegar or in juice of purslane and place it on the fistula; next, heat the cautery, which should be made of iron: it should be shaped like a pen-knife blade, and curved like a sickle; though any curved shape will do for your work.
Then press the fistula if it is open and draw out any pus, then dry it; and if it is closed, pierce it and draw out any fluid; next, place the hot cautery firmly on the fistula, hold your hand on the cautery near the knuckle below the eye, so that your hand does not shake; apply the cautery to the grease around the eye and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery to the bone, that would be good. If not, restart the cautery again once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days; after which, put on damp cotton wool in butter, and treat it with a drying ointment until it is healed. And if forty days pass and it is not healed, apply an corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and then treat the king according to what he experiences in his illness.
There is also a way of performing cautery on a fistula which some of the ancients described. Make an incision at the site of the fistula, and then insert a very fine needle into the opening; after which, put a small amount of cotton wool into the fistula, around which the wound will close. They make the amount of plaster about the size of a pea; and they hold the needle firmly in place so that the patient does not move, so that the molten plaster does not enter their eye. They then put damp cotton wool on the eye, and the plaster fills the fistula, healing it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have described, that is good. If not, it is necessary to apply a poultice to the nose, and bring the fistula back into the body of the nose according to what is appropriate in its own place.
cracks in the lips Many times cracks occur in the lips that are called "whiskers," and especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this form:
And place it gently in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; then treat the area with cerotum until it heals.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, and then causes swelling and rot and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in sections, and it does not help: then you must have .i. cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and in the opposite direction; and do this once or .ij., after treating what we have said about treatments, until it is healed; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then you must expose the site and remove the rotten bone, according to how you find it in its chapter.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't help, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heat the cautery, which will be described below, in such a way that you place a candle on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; after lifting your hand, repeat the cautery according to your desire; after filling the patient's mouth with salt water, let them gargle for an hour and spit it out.
And in such a way, the tooth that was loose is made firm, and the gums softened are restrained, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
of dental pain
When dental pain comes from coldness, either because of cold or damp weather, and medical treatments do not help, then two types of cautery are needed: cautery with butter and fire cautery.
Butter cautery: take butter from a cow, and the tip in an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and moisten it in the butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it cools down; do this frequently until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you moisten wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth, and place a hot iron on top until the fire reaches the gum around the tooth.
The cautery with fire is such that you take an iron or copper rod, and it is thick enough so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient. After heating the cautery, whose shape will come later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be relieved the same day or the next. And the patient must fill his mouth with good butter in anticipation of this cautery, and then rinse it out; and this is the shape of the cautery:
When the scrofula is due to cold moisture and is obstinate to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery so that the shape comes next, and have two openings for the fumes to exit from one side of the cautery to the other; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, depending on how deep it is, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess. And if the abscess is small, use a cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days. Then dress the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should be purged first with solutive medicines; after that, cauterize at the root of the throat, and be careful not to come up to the throat, and do not burn the heart but just a little. After that, let him have another cautery at the junction of the neck with the head of the spine; and let the cautery be called "clavicle", of which we have spoken before; and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
of the tongue When all diseases of the lungs are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is chronic, then let him have two cauteries on the breast in the hollows; and another cautery between the breasts, and let the cautery be called  "clavicle" according to the form that was described before.
And if you see fit, let cautery be performed at the tip with the cautery called   "points" of which the form is given above in the disease of the ears; and let the points reach to 30, or even more. After that, treat the area according to what was said before, and let there be three cauteries according to this form:
And so are cauteries lighter, because you make three of them.
of the shoulder dislocation When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards soothe the patient on his back and on his ribcage; then lift the heart which is inside the chest with your left hand's index finger and thumb; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two horns like this: [image]
and cauterize the vein until it pierces it, and the figure of the cautery comes together with four cauteries; and this is why there is a cautery made with a three-nerved cautery, so that there are six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the three-nerved cautery:
And sometimes it is adjusted over that one nerve, so that there are eight cauteries.
Afterwards, put crushed pepper on the cautery; afterwards, let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is well healed.
And if it is dislocated above, little happens; therefore, make a cautery on the thickness of the cautery with a nail, or with many cauteries pricking. For the joint is closed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
with a cautery of phlegm
The ancients said that one must make cauteries of aristolache root on phlegm, and in this way: Take an aristolache root as long as your little finger, the largest you can find, dried out, as thick and as long as your two fingers; moisten it in oil, heat it up, and cauterize with 1 cautery between the throat and neck, and 2 small cauteries slightly lower down on the part under the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining slightly backward; and 1 cautery in the pubis, and another over the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and 2 at the sides of the pubis opposite to the cautery between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it gently as if using a scent.
And some ancients said that a man should use a cautery like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and the pain will cease as we have said regarding the liver abscess. But with this procedure, there is fear of death for the patient, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the moon as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help at all, then there are three ways of cauterization that are all good.
Of these, one method is to make three or four cauteries, lining up according to the length of the moon, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver that we mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, but let the patient lie on his back.
And another way of cauterization is to heat the cautery which has two points, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the kidney which is on the side of the moon, or the rib cage of the patient comes towards the left, and the elevation at which you lift the kidney according to the kidney, according to the length of the body, and the cautery according to the width of the body.
After that, insert the two points until the kidneys are pierced from the other side, and then pull away the cautery, and so there will be four of them. And if you want, cauterize all the cautery with three points. After the cure, when pus has been discharged for a long time, it is as good as any of the cures mentioned earlier.
of dropsy
Cautery is of no use for dropsy except in the manner called "ascites." When you treat it according to the methods we have described in detail, and your treatment does not help, then you must make .4 cauteries around the abdomen, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two in the back on the spine, and one on the groin; and the cautery should be close to the heart's diaphragm.
Afterwards, leave the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not cease the treatment after the cautery; healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the abdomen should be a claw as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown here.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in a case of dropsy, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep, so as to push out the yellow water, and the cautery should be in this shape:
After make 2 cauteries on each leg at the tip of the tibia; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries in place for a long time without curing, until the water comes out; then cure the others that we have mentioned.
of menstruation
When a belly ache comes from chill and moisture, the retentive and digestive virtue which is in the stomach and intestines becomes slackened, and cannot be cured by methods of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly with much strength, then do this: make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before regarding the cautery of the stomach, and make the cautery circulate; and around the belly make four small cauteries with a slender cautery needle, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, make cauteries on the shoulder, and one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are old and are of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, but it does not help, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is all underneath the armpit, little by little in a triangle, and one cautery underneath the belly. two days;
and if you think that his stomach is cooled and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face swollen, then on the face put .i. large cautery on the stomach, as it is before said, and .i. another on the liver, and i. another on the mouse at all the cautery clave; and let the cautery remain long. After cure the place until it is healed.
of the fleshiness which is named "thelul"
When you cut into the thelul, heat the cautery which is like  .i. razor, and then put it all heated on that thelul cut; and keep your hand so that the cauteries reach the base of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each one as we have said. After cure the area with beneficial ointments until it is healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the armpit, it will provide greater relief.
of a poorly healed wound
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
When a fistula occurs, and there is suppuration and pus-filled sores and corrupted moisture, then you should probe it with a thin rod, and beware that you know how deep the fistula is. Then heat the cautery like a razor blade, and insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the rod entered; and repeat the cautery until the corrupted flesh is burned away, once or twice or thrice, according to the amount needed; and beware of burning nerves, and large veins. If the fistula extends to the bladder and intestines, then beware of those places, and do not apply heat to flesh that is not dead, and think that it is not dead; afterward clean the wound until it is healed, and if the wound is swollen, and the matter is not discharged for a long time, then know that the wound is completely healed; and if the matter is not discharged, know that the wound has been pierced and corrupted at its base. And thus as one of those we will discuss in their places.
of kidney disease When cold pain comes with rain and strong winds, and it does not subside with a woman's touch, then you must apply cautery to both sides of the rain with a hot iron as we have previously described; if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, which will provide greater relief.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then you must apply cautery to the area above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hair begin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as the nail of a thumb; and you should also apply 1 cautery below the back, or 2 if necessary; and the cauteries should be performed with the hot iron as described earlier.
of the marrow When the wound is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their termini tardy; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore it is necessary that one be made .iij. cauteries around the wound, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and .ii. cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be claviate, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moistors descend to the box of the hip, and because of this they move out of their place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together; and it is found that the places of the division are hollow, then you must cauterize the patient on the box of the hip with 1 cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the place all around the box as it turns, so that the box is within the circle; and let the cautery be such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then make .iiij. cauteries of the olive oil large, and let the cautery be as deep as all the scabs; and cure it until it is healed.Et se tu veis ke li malaide ne se cure pas si grantment, si covient que tu le cauterizes sus la boiste de la hainche a  .iij. cauteres grans de l’olivaire, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
of the hip pain When pain comes in the socket of the hip, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the disease is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the disease of the gross humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good-smelling pills similar.
After he makes the cautery; and the way of the cautery is according to two ways: that is, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many ways, among which one is such: that you cauterize on the socket of the hip three triangular cauteries according to this form, and one makes a deep and large one, and there is between each cautery the thickness of a thumb, and the cauteries are olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on the head of the hip, so that there are four according to this form:
And if you want, cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have already said about the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the whole hip, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
And this is how it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not extend to the thigh or leg. And if it reaches the thigh and leg, then make .ij. cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and .i. cautery above the ankle .iiij. fingers, on the left side a little; and let the cauteries be with a scalpel, and burn the thickness of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near there, then cauterize where he feels the pain .iij. points or .iiij. with the cautery called "points."
And if necessary, make more cauteries; and if he feels that the pain is below the knee toward the thigh, then use a scalpel or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more harm and contraction.
And I have seen many who have had cauteries above the ankle of the foot, and they left them on so long that the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. After this, he died from a bellyache.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and the other, according to this manner. // And the wise men said about the cautery of the hip, from which there is this manner, make a iron and it be at the top as thick as a little finger, or a little less, and be twisted between two pieces and be the space between them the quantity of a thumb-nail; and be the twists on both sides, and also like noses, and have one handle of well-made iron; and this is the form:
And it should be heated until it is all red and dripping, and then put it on the box of the painful hip, and twist it on the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery and leave it for three days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the cure of anointing until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of its fearsome appearance, and few can endure it; and yet it is one of the good cauteries, which can be endured by those who know how to apply it.
of back pain
When pain comes in the back, whether from sitting or a blow or from excessive evacuation, or by appearance of cold matter spread out, in none of these appearances is cautery useful except in that which comes from diffusion of cold matter.
After the patient has been purged of foul pills or other means, you should make three lines on his back where the pain is located, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see fit, do .iij. cauteries or .iiij. with the medium cautery clavis according to this form:
This disease often afflicts small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight and painful buttock when they wake up, and fear; and you will find it in the lower spine of the back and in the appearance which comes over the other vertebrae.
When you see this and you see it being cured, then cauterize it with the cautery of celcle according to this form.
So that the purple cautery colors each part of the spine evenly. And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery .ij. or .iij lines long, and let the points be close to each other. After cure the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware of administering cautery in gangrenousness which is in the membrane of a nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When the pain of the joints is due to moistors that are spread throughout the body's members, and when the pain is in the feet, which the doctors properly call «podagra», and when it is caused by coldness and cannot be cured by medicine, then it is cured by cauterization in such a way: make the mark of cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
And if there is a need to prick the face of the foot, then prick it with the whole cautery that one calls  «point». And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then prick each knee with .iij. or .iiij cauteries in each part, all around the cautery olive-colored; and if you need more, then do more, but hold your hand not harder than until the thickness of the skin is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cautery we mentioned in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make punctures around the wrist two lines; and if there is no pain left in the fingers, make punctures on each joint and on the palm of the hand; and if the pains come up to the armpits or up to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and give medicines. For if you take good care of him and cleanse the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
of the rut of the syphilis
When rut comes in warts, and the bowels descend to the anus and it is new, then when you see him being treated, he must not eat anything that day; and he should use things that loosen the belly so that the farts descend from his belly; after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the warts are repaired, and bring them up to your fingers, and sign with oil under the rut on the bone of the wrist, and all over a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery from which this form comes:
until it is white and dripping with oil. Then bring the bowels back to their place; and he should hold his hand over it so that they do not return; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion under him and a servant under the thighs, and another one under the foot which holds the hands; then put the cautery on the sign all over your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bowels do not slip out when you are doing the cautery, so that you do not burn him; and that through this the patient does not die, or other ills.
And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And the cauteries of children should be subtle according to the size of their ears, and those of large people also large according to their size; after three days cure the site of the cautery with butter until the scalding is removed; after that cure it with other ointments until it heals, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound is well healed; and one must let his hair grow long enough, so that it covers the wound when he stands up to walk around.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, if a well-made bandage is provided for him, and he wears it for another forty days; and has good rest, not too much work and takes care to avoid excessive drinking and eating, and too loud laughing; and when he follows this advice, he will be completely healed. And I will now describe the treatment for cutting into his shoulder joint. of the rupture of the belly:
When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing anymore, do 1 cautery with the cautery according to its quantity, and it should be hot at the third of the heart; after that cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that one must cauterize with the cautery in 3 angles according to this form:
But first mark the spot with ink and draw a line across the width of the rupture, and another from above, and keep your hand in the middle throughout the cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb from falling or injury, and the pain persists for a long time and medicine doesn't help, then it must be cauterized with a cautery called "point", and the cautery should vary according to the length of the limb, its size, weakness, virtue, location of the torsion, and the severity of the pain. If the patient is not healed by the first cautery, repeat another cautery on top of it; such is the custom that it must be changed in the limb nearest to it, so you must perform the cauteries until the patient is healed.
of bleeding
The maladies are sometimes aided by cautery with great benefit, especially those which come from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see one cauterized, take care that the malady is in its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not go away or persist, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the malady, then do five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on each horn, and one behind on the nape; and let your hand be so positioned that the cautery reaches to the bone, and as far as the scabs come out, so that the vapors of the thick humours can issue forth; and cauterize the wound according to what it is like before.
And if the malady is scattered everywhere and is manifestly improving, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery in the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large cautery on the croup and another nearby, and two cauteries on each shoulder; and two cauteries on the elbows, and two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, and one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the calf so that you do not burn them; and sometimes make one cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that the more cauteries you do, the more benefit it will bring to the patient, and the disease will feel no pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already completely corrupted. And the cauteries should be large or small depending on the members and joints, according to what you find in the ways of the irons. After that, treat the area with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
swelling
When swelling comes to a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices but does not heal, then cauterize the limb according to its size; make the cautery tool slightly warm and apply it to the depth of the skin. Then treat it with ointments until it heals. Sometimes cauterization is done on the hand, foot, or back, at the exit point of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, thus removing the swelling. However, only someone knowledgeable about the limbs and the nerves that move the body should perform this procedure.
of poplars
When the disease called "albaras" occurs, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a moderately deep cautery tool according to the thickness of the skin, until the white color is removed and the color changes; then treat it with a poultice of wheat flour and lentils, mixed with rose oil, plantain leaves, colon blood, and almond blood, each ingredient in equal parts. Mix everything together and apply it to the affected area, keeping it in place until the wound heals.
the treatment of cancer by cautery
When cancer appears at its onset, and you wish to arrest it, cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the edge of the cancer. And yet the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the cancer; and yet I do not think this is good, for I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen sometimes; and a more certain method is to cauterize around the edge, using the cautery called "circle", as we have said regarding many cauteries.
of the swelling that cannot heal
When someone has a condition called  "adubelati", and it is slow to heal due to the excess fluid, or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, very old), or due to a lack of blood, or because of the season; and you wish to hasten its healing: cauterize it with many small cauteries, piercing around; then leave it as it is. For it will heal more quickly.
And if you see it pierce through to the cautery, then heat the cautery with which this is formed:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the skin, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning in such a way that the pus flows out. After the wound has healed completely, cure it.
the cure of fire by iron
Another type of illness is called "corrodens", which is nothing other than a gangrene of the limbs, for it gnaws at the limbs just as fire consumes dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cauterization with fire, then heat the cautery instruments small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location of the disease; then cauterize all over until you reach the healthy tissue underneath, and remove all the corruption. Then let it be for three days, and apply ointments to the cauterized areas to soothe them with oil, so that the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is removed. After this, treat with ointments that promote the growth of healthy flesh. And if you see after three days that healthy flesh has grown, that is good; but if not, then recommence the cauterization on those areas where the corruption still remains. This gangrene can sometimes be cured with medicine instead of fire cauterization; but nevertheless, fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already described the treatment with medicine in the section on gangrene: use it when you need to.
of warts that appear on the feet
It often happens that on the feet there appears a disease called  "clos" in our language, and it is a thick, hard growth that bleeds the foot. There are two types of cauterization for this disease: fire cauterization and hot water cauterization. For fire cauterization, heat one cautery instrument like a pen knife, made of good steel and with a thin edge; then place it very hot on the wart, and rotate your hand all around the wart so that it reaches the bottom of the wart. Leave it thus for three days until it starts to produce pus; then make an ointment of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the ointment on overnight. The wart will drop off and be uprooted from its roots. Then treat the area with ointment to promote healthy flesh growth until it is healed.
And if they are converted by leaving the body, and many times happen in the hands and feet, then you must administer a cautery of hot water; and it is in such a way: take a cane of bronze or iron, or a feather of a vulture, and place it on the nail and the wart, that is to say, warts; and place the cane so that it covers all around, then put a little hot water, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water deep into the root; and let the patient endure the burning of the hot water for a while; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted at all its roots. Thus do one after another, until you pull out all those who are in the body, then cure them with ointments that generate flesh.
the cure of trembling
When some people tremble from the coldness of nerves, or from quartan fever or other, then you must make 4 cauteries or 4 on the spine, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach with olive cautery; then it will leave the trembling, and hasten the health from the cold disease.
of stinking pustules
None appear by themselves on the body, but stinking pustules, which come from thick corrupted matter. First, when they appear, one should make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a thin cautery of myrtle wood, whose tip is seized in the fire, or of long aristologus root, or lenticular cautery. And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from where they come from, but the superfluity from which they come is disrupted, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from outside, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grieving thing to stanch.
And yet when this happens to anyone, you should quickly put your index finger over the wound of the vein, and press it hard until the blood is stopped beneath your finger, and no drops come out; then heat the olive-oil cautery rods, both small and large, until they are all red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound and the location where the artery is running, and place the cautery on that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold it there until the bleeding is stopped.
And if it bleeds again when you lift your finger from the wound and the cautery goes out, quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped; and be careful that you don't hurt the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well stopped by itself if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by a strong ligature, or by medicines put on that have the power to stop bleeding; and it should be bound and compressed skillfully.
He who attempts to stop the bleeding by tying it tightly with cloth or putting hot things on it, or similar things, will not help if he does not know how.
And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any medicine present, then they should put their index finger on the wound as we have said, and apply firm pressure until it is stopped up above the wound; and they should not move the finger but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood congeals, swells, and stops. And they should send someone to get what they need for cauteries and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter about all the diseases that require cauterization with fire or burning medicines, and the humors, causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I will go through this chapter along the same path so that one can more easily find what they are looking for.
And so that I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore greater caution is needed.Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to be foolhardy. For many kinds of people come for treatment: some are so overcome by their illness that they quickly change due to the delusion brought on by their sickness, and due to the great severity of their condition; one must fear for them. And among these there are those who regain their senses and say: "Wait, I am healed"; but the disease is relentless. You should not give in to such people who come to you with this attitude, but put more trust in your own judgement than in your desires. Make your decisions wisely, based on what you know for certain and what you can prove, and use prognoses and indications in treating your illnesses, for success lies in these. This will also help you gain a good reputation, glory, and praise.
Dear son, may Our Lord grant you wisdom and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have ordered this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have discussed from the head until the feet, so that you find more easily what you will need.
from the head full of water
Do you know that this disease often comes to children when they are born, and when the umbilical cord is tightened too tightly around the child's neck; and sometimes it comes from a reason unknown to us.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those that I have seen, death has always been the outcome; and because of this, it seems better to me to leave the treatment as it is.
And I saw .I child whose shoulder was filled with water, and the head swelled every day until it could no longer support it; and he believed so much in moisture that he died, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the diaphragm, between the heart and the bone; and the operations are such that when the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you split an opening in the head as wide as possible; and it should be as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows out; and see the shape of spatomile:
If the moisture is deeper and the abscess is larger, then make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the edges of the head open on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it has not closed up for you: then you must split an opening in the head according to this method:
And after the incision, remove all of the moisture firmly. After that, bind up the openings with bandages and powders, and apply wine and oil; leave it like this for five days. Then loosen it, and cure the wound by tenting and anointing, and let the head hang freely, and give the patient dry food without moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at the size of the abscess and the gathering of the water; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Cut therefore where the abscess opens, and fill the gathering of water, and do it according to what you are able; and be careful not to cut the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
from gout
When it happens to someone to have a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and the medical cure does not help, then the last cure is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
When you see them covered, have the patient face away from you; then rub the area around the neck with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible; then have the patient hold their neck tightly with both hands; then examine where the vein is located, and the veins of one side and the other are after the ears, and they are pressed down; then sign the veins inwards, then cover both with a spatulum sharpened to two parts so that the vein comes up to the bone, and this should be done from the side of the neck.
And if you see it, insert the spatulum under the artery and cover it from above, cutting as deep as two fingers across.
And when the vein is uncovered, let the blood flow upward continuously.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, then you should measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then sign inwards and cut to the bone; and what it requires to let the blood flow out is .vj, and perhaps a little more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains on the bone any of the syphilis, so that the cut does not reach abscesses, then strain the wound and ligate it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
to migrate
When old inflammation comes, and a catarrh develops, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and ancient forensics and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medicine but none of it helps him, then we should extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the method of extraction is that the patient should grow a beard on his temples, and feel for the artery which opens in the temple, as it opens noticeably by its beating, and is less reponsive to pressure in some people who are too cold; and if it is responsive, he should hold the artery with some cloth, then rub the area with some rough cloth, and moisten the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulum of which there is a description below:
And the method of incision is that he should make an incision on the temple above the artery, and it must be so short that it does not reach the stone, because it is not necessary for it to be any longer when it is this short. Then he should scrape away the skin lightly until he reaches the artery, then pull it upward with tweezers, and pinch it well from under the nail on each side; and if the artery is thin, he should turn it back to the tip of the fingernail, then grip it there according to the thickness of the two shoulders. For if it is not gripped, then no blood will flow out at all.
And draw out blood from the vein until it is 1/6th full, up to 1/3rd; and if the artery is large, then tie it with a strong double silk thread in two places so that pus does not enter before the wound heals, and let the blood flow out freely; then cut away the excess between the two ligatures in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron until the bone is exposed; and this is the primary treatment if the patient has no fever and is of a warm complexion.
For cautery aids in drying up moisture, therefore it is particularly helpful for wet sores. And for the extraction of veins, one should fill the wound with old cotton and place it under well-made tents; and when they are removed, they should be treated with dry medicines that cause scabs to form, and with tents until they are healed; and if without cutting through the artery as much as you work on it, then hasten to cover it by cauterizing, or you can employ vitriolic ointment and press it in your hand so that the heat is drawn out of the vein; and if you do not have that present, then apply your finger to the site until the heat ceases, and moisten the site with cold water so that the heat stops, and press it as necessary; and what is better and lighter for the extraction of veins is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of 2 parts, but the cutting edge should be well-spaced to retain its heat longer. For when an instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less well. And it should have between the two knives a thickness of one digit, and then when you have seared both sides and place the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and open the vein in two places; and they should be spaced apart between the two shoulders because they are not welded together by this cautery all around; and this is the shape of the cautery:
teardrops
When tears fall from the eyes that are above the testicle on the head, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel in the forehead a pulsation like trembling; and if the eyes are sunken and moist so that the hair of the eyelids has fallen out, and the eyelids are burned and scalded by the tears, then this treatment is needed.
And the ancients called it "cure contused," and you do this to the patient who has this disease: make him grow hair on his forehead, then make three cuts on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; let one of the cuts be as big as two fingers right in the middle of the forehead going down, and the other two at the sides above the eyes, and beware of cutting the arteries which are at the sides above the eyes; and keep your hand away from the extension of the jaws, and let each wound be about three fingers long across the joints.
From the incision at the temple all the way to the second incision; then scrape all around the skull between the two cuts up to the skin on top of the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second cut, and then remove this spathumile.
If you put into the first cut the instrument called "culter," which is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other, it is this shape: And cut the incision toward the chest and armpit, and the other one toward the bone, and cut it deeply until it reaches the middle of the breastbone. And tie all the vessels that descend from the head to the eye until the incision is continuous up to the one that opens from the chest, and then make another incision in the middle of the breastbone up to the other defiant; and then drain the blood evenly, and express the site of the blood removal; then place a tent made of old cotton in each incision, and place moistened cloths in wine and oil and garlic on top, and be careful that no abscesses come to it; and on the third day loosen the ligature, and administer a large amount of cold water, then treat it with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
from the eye
When someone has a persistent cough and you see the eyes turn yellow and small, and the vision weakens, and the eyelids burned, and the hair falls out, and in the head there is pain, and the sick person sneezes; then know from these symptoms that these materials and this phlegm come from many veins, and the cure for it is as follows:
And you should command the patient to lower his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one from the left temple to the right, cutting through to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that control swallowing; and when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then insert old cotton between the two lips of the incision and pack it with linen; then apply wet dressings soaked in wine and oil, taking care to avoid hot abscesses; once it has healed, you should rub the bone until new flesh begins to form, then treat it with drying substances that promote healing.
In this way: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colocinth, and make an ointment; and administer it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
earaches
All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains or insects, or stones, or similar objects like iron; or seeds such as beans, peas; or flowing substances like water and garlic and similar things.
When a stone falls into the ear, or any other object that does not adhere to the ear, nor grow in it, then hold the ear towards the sun. If you see the stone, drop some violet oil or oil of myrrh, and then administer extraction; and make him sneeze with scent, and plug his nostrils when he sneezes, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and hold the ear upwards. Very often this will dislodge it; and if it does not come out, then extract it with fine pincers, thus:
If it pops out with the pincers, that's good; if not, then extract it with a fine needle of soft wire; and if it does not come out in this way, make a small brass hook and insert its tip into the ear canal firmly, and plug the area around the hook with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out firmly, for very often it will come out as we have said. And if it still does not come out in this way, take some glue, and attach a small instrument suitable for this purpose to it, and place some cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out. And if it does not come out with all the things we have mentioned, then be quick to split the ear so that pus and blood come out, and a spasmodic apoplexy; and the manner of splitting is that you first make the patient fast from the head, and draw blood according to the measure of its virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small split in the root of the ear at the fat where it depends; and the split should be like a crescent moon, so that you come to the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it strongly with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed. And if it is a grain that is there and it swells, then administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer .i. spatula gently and subtly according to this form:
And administer an incision on that grain. But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with subtle tweezers and a suction cup, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In acute ear infections, the patient should use steam from hot liquids, and pack the ear with soft cotton. And they should lie down on that ear itself where the infection is. If it drains out through the ear, that is good. If not, then take many thin stones according to the size of your finger, heat them in fire; and put one end of a stone into the ear, and press the other end with another stone; and do not stop doing this stone by stone until all the fluid drains out, and thus it will drain entirely out; and if you see that, then take a straw, and insert one end into the ear, and hold the other end near fire until the hottest straw is burned; then do the same with another straw until all the fluid drains out, as we have said for the stone.
In the extraction of insects, if it is a small body, like lice and similar things, then treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large body that can be felt, then administer an extraction with tweezers; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight; if there are any worms, treat them with fine pincers, and if none appear, take the candle from which the form [of the worm] comes.
And it is narrow underneath and wide at the top. And insert the thinnest end into the ear according to the amount of suffering from the malady, then suck firmly on the candle; do this frequently until all the worms emerge. And if they do not come out, stuff cotton around the candle as I have said regarding stones; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have experimented with for the extraction of worms, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument from which the form  [of the worm] comes, as you see it:
And it should be made of silver or brass with a narrow end and a wide top for distillation; and to press the distillate within an instrument of well-made brass for this purpose, and if you see take a rasor and wrap cotton around its tip skillfully; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want from your medicines into the candle, and let the candle be in the ear; then insert the rasor with all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled onto the surface of the ear; and he feels the malady within, and let the distillation be a little warm as it is distilled into the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not then be so good.
the cleaning of the ears
No child is born without a hole in their ear; and the same thing happens to adults due to an abscess or pus forming within the ear, and sometimes this abscess erupts inside the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes there is only a small defect in the hole, which can be seen easily.
Therefore, when the abscess erupts and cannot be seen, it is a sign of poor healing in various conditions, and in such cases, one should hold the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane appearing, then it indicates that the healing is progressing well.
And it should be thin and smooth in front and behind, without causing pain to the ear; if the membrane is due to pus or body tissue within the ear, then hold it with delicate tweezers and gently scrape it away until all the pus is removed.
And if the infection is deep in the ear, take a fine, light razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it on the body of the ear. If you feel the infection that the patient feels great pain when he hears, pierce gently, and be careful not to cut into the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this every day until the wound is closed, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on top of it; and if you see swelling in the ear, it is appropriate to pull out the tent and insert another tent moistened with cerotum made from olive oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, plunge a sponge and cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding that are used for treating distempers.
of the char of papers
This remedy comes from plants that grow on their own when they are moist and dry up; you must then extend them with tweezers and pincers, and cut off the top of a spathe at its roots; then place ground vitriol over the site.
And if you remove their bark, then cauterize them with a delicate lens-shaped cautery tool, and the cautery after the incision is good for scabs; and many times they return, as long as something remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of hail
Many times they come as plants with things that look like hail in shape and hardness, and this is why the disease is called "hailstorm"; it is an assembly of moisture thick on top and bottom. The work is as follows: take care if the hailstone cracks from one side to another, and it is a simple thing to know; they then open it with tweezers, and cut off the top. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, it will not harm the patient; and if the crack is large, then assemble it with a stitch, and heal it until it is cleaned; and if it is small, do not force it, for the ointment will restore it immediately and prevent infection.
And if the stone is descending within the ear towards the upper part, then reverse the paper, and hold the stone with tweezers, and press from both sides; and if the paper is removed by incision, it does no harm; and when the stone is crushed, wash out the eye with salty water, and cure the place of that which causes infection until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinah is a fat which is intertwined with the papers above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and it is harmful to their eyes, and they get cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot look at sunlight because of the tears that rush to their eyes; and because of this, they sleep on their faces, and their eyelids become swollen, and the appearance and cover of the exinah that opens in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers, you can feel the exinah between them.
And the method of treatment is that the patient places his head on the lap of the здорового; and then take .i. linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinah from each part, and then put it over him; and press with your fingers on both sides, so that the exinah is collected within the circle. Then, with a spatula cut an opening in the middle of the moistened skin, not any larger than the wound made for venesection; and in some cases, exinah comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Take then a piece of cloth and hold it between your fingers to the side, and move your hand from right to left until it is spread out; and be careful not to push into the opening so that you do not reach all the way to the eye and hurt it.
And if the opening does not open at the beginning of the slit, then widen the slit slightly so that it appears; then pull as we have said, then moisten cloth in vinegar and water, and place on the site, and hold with bandages.
And if there are such men who grind salt and place it there to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then treat the wound until it heals. And if a hot abscess comes at the site, then treat it with soothing poultices until it heals.Et si li malaides ne se remue pas, si met sus li leu sal et sante, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et li fiet un emplaistre assouissant sus la piere et li la met sus; puis il sera sanz mal, si Dieu le veut.
And if the patient does not move, then put salt and sand on the site, and treat it until it heals, and make a soothing poultice on the stone and place it there; then he will be without pain, God willing.of paper fibers
When hairs grow from papers out of their natural place and are ingrown, they harm themselves and cause various diseases such as tears, softening of the papers, and albugine, which leads to the destruction of the hairs; there are four ways to treat this: by cautery with fire, by medicine water according to what is described before the chapter on cautery, and by incision and stitching or splints, as I will explain.
You should place the patient's head in your lap, then hold the paper of the eye in your left hand; if it turns, that is good; if not, then insert a needle with thread through it; and this should be done at the edge of the paper where the hairs are growing out of place, and draw the thread over the entire paper, and return it to the razor; then, in the part under the paper, under the ingrown hairs, cut from the great tear duct to the small one, and extract the thread, and place a small tent made of cotton and linen underneath the paper, and sign a cross on the paper, like a myrrh ball, and still, the sign should be according to the amount you see the divided paper rising.
And if it is necessary to cut away a large amount of paper according to how soft the paper has become, then cut along the two lines you have signed and start from the great tear duct to the small one; make one of the incisions close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a hair root, then insert the needle into one of the corners of the wound, and pull it all out; then assemble the two lips with a stitch of fine woolen thread through an awl, and wipe away the blood, and let the excess thread hang over the two eyelids to any glue-like substance; if not, then have no concern for it, and leave the stitch and threads in place for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitches using dry and constricting substances, for the paper will adhere to the wound as it heals, but stitches are painful (as the ancients say), and this work is done without fear.
and if there is another way: and it is that you draw the paper with a shape that is just like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, at 3 inches apart according to the shape that is here:
then cut what is above with small scissors evenly according to the shape that is here:
And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, then take a needle and thread, and pierce it through the figure; and pierce another thread through the large artery, and the second thread through the small one, and bring the threads together between your fingers evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin that you have pierced, as we have described, then bring the two lips of the wound together by suturing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
And sometimes the hair of the paper is reversed: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but the suturing in one and the other is more artistic.
The treatment of the cane is as follows: you should turn the paper and put it inside according to what I have said, then make .ij. canes by art, and .ij. subtle bonds as long as the paper and the width of the spatumile; and attach .ij. heads from .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what is on top of the paper of the eye, and strain the .ij. canes from the .ij. formed parts; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that was strained will die and shrivel up and peel off as it falls away from itself.
If it is delayed, and the head still feels sore, then treat it until it heals; and when the wound is sewn up, and the paper is raised, and the hairs no longer hurt; and this is the shape of the  .ij. canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
the works are such that you pierce a fine needle, and thread it with a soft and subtle silk thread; then assemble the heads and knot them subtly, and the length of the threads should be a palm long; then arrange in the case another fine silk thread, and knot the head of the thread; then place the patient's head in your hand; and have this in the sun so that the works are declared, for these are subtle and fine works, then thread the needle all the way into the paper until it reaches the hair root, and draw it up through the paper until it is completely drawn out; then draw your hand away so that the hairs come out straight with the natural hair.
If the wound is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you will treat the wound underneath to the full extent that you have ordered, until the wound comes out from the opening above and you see it with your eye; then you will treat the wound and the thread, close the eye and leave it closed for 1 or 2 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, accompany one long hair of the natural hairs, and let it grow with that one which you left, until it lengthens, then you will pull it out.
from the pustule of the eye
When this disease called "alacrati" or pustules comes to the eye, there are two ways it can happen: one is natural and the other is unnatural. It happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
When the pustule comes naturally in the eye, then the eyes are swollen and large, and the pustules are not firm; but if the eyes are small and round, and the pustules are firm.The treatment for this is that you split the skin, and loosen the eyelids, and put in tents of linen, and let it heal; and one must not use in its treatment anything that dries or constricts. For if you do that, then the disease will return worse than before; but one should use things that soften, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altered and seeded linseed are cooked, and ointments of dyaquilon melted in some of the eyes, and wrap a tent around it, and treat it thus.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you must be careful that it does not heal according to the shape it was before; and these works that we have said are not remedies for this disease, but treatments so that it does not return to the shape it was before.
of the flesh that comes in the eye
This disease which is under the eye is truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental. The accident comes from a wound and split and cautery and similar things; and the way of the treatment in this is that you take a needle, with which there is a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct so that the threads come out on both sides of the eye, then the flesh above is pulled to one side, and the lid is pulled back by about a spathomile [a measure].
And if the shape of the papery returns as it should be, that is good; if not, then take a razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper, and make 2 splits along the sides inside the paper; and let the edges of the 2 splits be at the 2 angles of the incision that you have made, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter that has a "J" in Greek; then remove this flesh, according to the quantity that its sides are cut under, from what follows the paper, then join the 2 separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then treat it as we have said with softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the malady comes from a split or sewing or cautery, then you must make a plain split under the hair of the scalp, and according to what is mentioned above; then unscrew between the two lips of the tent, as I have said; and one should perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares devices with all his power so that he causes the figure to return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what they require of operation and instruments in many dispositions.
suddenly from the scalp
When this suddenness happens to humans in such a way that the scalp is separated from the white of the eye, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must stick the tip of a razor under the scalp and lift it upward; and use tweezers, so that you grasp what is cut by the spatula, which is neither too blunt nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot bear to have the eye too deeply cut; and make your incision, by which you peel off this union, gently, so that the scalp returns according to its natural form; and all of this union is healed, and sometimes in the eye there is a saline discharge, and it is relieved with warm water and a bandage; then place between the scalp and the eye a tent made of linen, and place over the eye a damp piece of wool; and after three days, use the ointment and the soothing remedies until it is healed.
of the nail of the eye
You should know that the nail has two forms: one is nerveous and resembles a tough membrane; the other is not nerveous but resembles congealed white moisture, such that when you touch it with iron and try to cut it with pincers, nothing happens. Both types originate from the inner corner of the eye, and grow little by little until they cover the entire sight and light, and the movement of the eye.
And the method of the incision is that the patient should turn his head towards you, then open their eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then grab the nail with pincers of small pliers, and stab it at the top; then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or cow's hair, or ox's hair, and a strong thread; and double over the tip of the needle a little and push it into the nail, and tie the nail to the thread and stab it at the top, and scrape along the side of the nail that follows the eyelid and the eye until the end of the lash, then cut the rest in the root of the tear duct with great care and small forces, leaving the natural membrane of the tear duct untouched; and sometimes only stab the nail at the edge of the eyelid, and the thread, as we have said. Then scrape it along the entire tear sac carefully:
And be careful that the tear sac does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, and that the eyelid is not pierced; after the incision, apply a little powdered quicklime to the eye, and make a collar out of it, and leave it on until the next day; then clean the eye as needed until it heals.
If the nail is not sensitive, and you cannot push in the needle, and the hook does not fit inside it, many times this kind of nail is cured with medicine; they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see that it covers up, then treat the eye of the patient, and take a light spatula according to this form:
And lift the nail gently, and if you see that it does not shrink and the pus is still coming out, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper and sea salt ground up, and swab the eye until the next day; then start the other treatment again according to this same method, until it is all removed.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then start the treatment again as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid is harmful to the eye in a great way, then suspend it on the hook, and cut off a part but not all of it so that the body of tears does not come; then distill into the eye a red collar made of litharge.
of the eye which grows above the pupil
In some people's eyes, sometimes red spots grow, covering the pupil and pressing against the eyelids, turning them inwards, resembling a rosebud. The treatment is for the patient to press their forehead against something solid, then open their eyes, and hold the spot with tweezers, and carefully cut it out at its base; then cut away the rest of the growth, going all the way to the root, being careful not to injure the eye during the procedure. The incision should be made as described in the chapter on nail incisions, using gentle pressure to remove the growth, as shown in this chapter.
Once the incision is complete and all the growth removed, apply eye salve made of quicksilver or similar corrosive medicines, and place a cotton pad over the eye to keep it protected and warm; if anything remains, and the white of the eye turns red, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with remedies for hot abscesses; then return to treating the eye once it is healed, and repeat this process for as long as similar growths appear in the eye.
However, you must use caution when treating weak eyes with the natural method or accidentally with iron; and do not force your hand in any of these treatments until you see that the patient is suffering from this procedure.
of the eyes
They are red veins that cover the eye, and they hinder sight and weaken the eye all day. Therefore, first examine the eye to make sure there is no other disease except for the stye; then treat it in this way: instruct the patient to tilt their head back, then gently squeeze those veins all around according to his skill, and make the incisions very small according to this shape:
And two incisions in .i. body according to this form:
Then squeeze those veins gently, and let the blood out an hour after another, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to damage the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you do not touch anything but the veins; and when you have done that, then distill into the eye green and red koliri to corrupt what is left of the stye.
And if you cannot pull out all of this in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye from things that soothe the pain of them, and let it be for several days until the pain is eased and the hot abscess is assured, then start again according to this way which is before, until he is healed; and this is the form of strength:
of the fistula of the eye
Examine the fistula closely: when you heal it with cautery and medicine that burns according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then dig into the abscess where it should be, and draw out all the moisture from it, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you will see the corruption and blackness, then it returns to all its instruments from which this form comes; and it is called a "harsh head", and should be made into a .i. sharp point, and punctured like a file as it is in the present form:
And put on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly until you know that the corruption is gone; and do this several times, then restore the site with drying medications.
If the wound is closed and healing, and the bowels are closed, and remain so for forty days, and it does not open up again and no bad accident happens, you may know that it is healed; if not, then there is nothing but to bring back the fistula to the opening of the nose according to this form: and you must uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with hot medications, and when it is uncovered, take a .i. forest according to this form, and let the head of the iron be .iij. angles, and the staff be thinned to the end so that you may see here:
then put it on the bone at the same time as the larmier, and move your hand from the eye  a little, then turn the whole forest until it pierces the bone and he feels it through his finger; and then restore the site with dry medications, as I have instructed you, and when the wound heals and hardens, he should see the matter in his nose; so there is less pain for the patient.
of the eye's output
When the eyes are fully open and there is no disturbance to the brain or eye damage, you should bind the patient; then cleanse the eye, then apply leeches or suck out the fluid without piercing, then place on the eye a poultice made of acacia gum, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla; then tightly bind the eye with bandages and cloth, the cloth being folded in half four times to create several layers, and then placed one on top of the other according to how much the eye needs; then tightly bind it from above with a firm bandage, and repeat the leeches to suck out the fluid without piercing; then remove the leeches and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the poultice softens, you should tightly bind it again; then remove the poultice after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, repeat the poultice and bandages until it is healed.
from the rupture of a woven veil
When a tear occurs in woven fabric, it opens and appears like a grain of resin, and is terrifying to look at. Therefore, if you see it breaking, the work is such that you should pierce the fabric with a needle at the root of the tear from the lower part up to the upper part, then insert another needle where there is a double thread in the edge of the tear; and pierce the fabric, and leave the first needle according to its position. Then, tie the double thread around the tear and tightly bind it, then remove the needle and place a soft pad moistened with egg white over the eye, and leave it until the threads cut through the veil, then cleanse the eye with comforting substances until it is healed. Sometimes, the tear is constrained by a circle of cloth on each side until it is healed.
And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce them with a spatumile needle which comes from the bottom of the eye, and remove the white moist film and bring down the eyes, and enter immediately thereafter; then extract it until it is healed.
of the bow of the eye
This disease, which is called "alcunnati", is only in the bow of the eye, resembling a descending water, but it is not water; and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and straight, then take the head between your hands for a while, and move it until you see the bow coming above your eyes; then it is fixed, and the light does not descend and the sight of the patient is as it used to be. And if it doesn't go under, know that it's water, and if the bow doesn't appear as we have said. Then make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatumile and pierce through the thin film on the white of the eye, through the conjunctiva and the cornea, until the bow appears; and when it is released, distill warm honey water mixed with honey, or fenugreek water boiled in honey, then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
of the eye waters
We have the likenesses of the ailments in the division, and what is needed to pierce; then act according to health. You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light so as not to be seen by the sun, and close and press the healthy eye very firmly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if they are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right; then place the point of the instrument along the crown by the thickness of a hair in that film of the eye to the part where the lower tear duct is, then carefully insert the instrument called 'almagda' and turn your hand so that it pierces the film of the eye, and feel that 'almagda' comes to the empty space; and the measure of the passage of 'almagda' should be at the bottom of the measurement of the space that is from the pupil to the end of the darkness; and this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the horny film, and then place the instrument where the ailment is, then express it underneath one passage after another. If the ailment flows out now, then the patient sees it in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After a little rest, and if the ailment flows back up the second passage, put pressure on it with the instrument, and when it is stuck in and does not flow, gently withdraw  'almagda' by turning your hand a little; then put some more egg yolk into the eye, and remove it from inside. Then place soaked linen or wool in rose oil over the eye, and bind it with the healthy eye. We, and those of our time, put on comfrey bruised with plenty of egg.
And if  'almagda' cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called  'alberit', of which this is the form:
And so pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make a small slit, then insert the almighty, as we have said; and when the work is finished, prepare for the patient a dark room in which he can sleep on his back in a dark place; and keep him still from all movements, and give him light foods, and do not move his head or to the right or left, and tie him according to his disposition until the third day; then untie him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and show him some things, and then retie the bandage until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but you must lighten it so that the water rises rapidly.
If the abscess has not drained by the seventh day, loosen the eye before then and use a poultice to soothe the abscess; and when it is soothed, loosen the sight and put an eyepatch over one eye, and keep him in that dark house. Then go out of the house little by little, and return to his own room; and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
And one came to us from Spain who told us that in his country they make a slit in the almighty, and suck out the water, but I have never seen this done in our land, nor have I ever read of it in ancient books; and perhaps this is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of almandine, so that those who do not know them can see them; and they are properly made of bronze:
And the tops of the horns should be of the same subtlety, and the tips in three angles.
of the eye above the nose
Sometimes they arise on the nose with diverse joints, some of which look like scorpions at the tip of their feet; and there are some who have them with a red hue, and others with a pale color. For those who have the pale colored one, and not the red, you should make the patient sit facing the sun; open his nostrils, and drop it onto the horns, and pull them out; then you can cut whatever you can sustain with the sharp tip of a pair of tweezers, until you are sure that the horn is completely removed.
If any of the matter remains that we cannot cover, then open it up with one of the subtle instruments lightly so that nothing remains; and if without it overwhelming you, or causing an abscess, then cut it out as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten to cauterize them until the blood is stanched and all the pus is removed, then pour on new wine and water.
If the nose works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not break through as it should, know that there is pus in the bone above, and the instrument will not come to cut: therefore you must put a piece of linen thread about a thumb thick into the nostril, with the tip of your finger, and have an interval of a finger's width or less between each finger; and let the patient hold the end of the thread in his hand to his power, and pull it through until it comes out through the nose; and many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for whoever wants to do it; then hold one end that comes out through the nose with one hand, and the other end coming out of the mouth with the other hand, and move them both in a sawing motion as you would do with your fingers. Do this until you know that the pus has corrupted the pus, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the nostril as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the pus; and then put a plug in the nose made of some soft material for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, then use them. This is the form of the instrument to cleanse the nose with which one distills oils and medicines into the nostril:
It should be made of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and the conduit as well; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be hollow for purging the nose; and it should have a handle at the end to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquid.
of the heart through the chest
Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the top of the chest, and grows and becomes large, until it is visible to the eye; and for this reason you should cut it at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then place the cautery or burning medicine on it; and if one delays cutting it until it has become large, then be wary whether it is hard, of a dark color, and lacking in feeling: do not touch it with iron, for this is an abscess, for when it is cut at any time, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due only to pressure, not from a dark color, and you see that one can completely cover it, then empty the wound and cut it without fear, and cure the place of dry and constricting things.
when the chest has been cut and sewn
You should know that when the rib cartilage is broken, it does not benefit most men. Therefore, whenever this happens to someone, examine whether the wound is fresh and full of blood; then you should split the 2 ribs at one stitch, then cure it until it is healed; and if the ribs are separated on both sides, you should scrape all the parts of their chest until they heal, then unite the 2 ribs with a stitch, and tighten them, and powder dragon's blood and incense over them; and place an ointment of strong or other adhesive ointment over the powders, and leave it to heal by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles as we have said in sewing the belly; or with thread, as I have made you understand.
from abscesses on the lips
At home, there are hard abscesses on the lips, similar to grains of wheat, both smaller and larger; therefore, you should turn over the lip, and cut above each pustule, and squeeze it with tweezers, and then apply vitriolated powder to the incision until the blood is staunched. Then use garlic and treat the area with dry substances until it heals.
from gum swelling
Many times a growth appears on the gums, which the elders call "albus". You should hold it with tongs and cut at its root, letting the blood or pus flow out; then place ground vitriol or other restraining and drying powders over the site. If the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; it will not return after cautery. These are the forms for treating growths.
from disorders
Sometimes they are gathered at the base of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, and there are ugly and rough growths; sometimes teeth are black, green, or yellow, so that corruption has reached the gums, and they stink; so you should have the patient hold his head in your hands and open his mouth wide, and examine the teeth where the growths appear, removing everything completely. And thus you will do with the blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other discolourations, cleaning them all up. If you remove what is there at first, that is good; if not, then do it again the next day and the day after, until you have removed everything. Know that teeth require diverse forms of instruments for scraping, depending on what the work shows you, so that the tools used to scrape between teeth are different from those used to scrape the gums. And these forms and others should be prepared for you.
When you treat a tooth for its pain, you should delay drawing it as long as possible, because one must not do that; for that is a very high substance up to the point that one has no excuse to pull it out. And so when the patient is compelled to draw breath, you must be certain which tooth hurts. Often the pain fools the patient and makes them think it's a sound tooth, and then they pull out the good tooth; and yet the pain doesn't go away because of this as long as the rotten tooth remains, for we have already tried this with these patients. And when you are quite certain which tooth hurts, then you must scrape all around the tooth to the gum; then use your fingers or fine tweezers to pull on the tooth in small increments until it is well loosened, then grip the tweezers tightly; and let the patient's head be between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it doesn't move.
Then pull out the tooth carefully without breaking it, and if it won't come out, take one of those instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and rotten, then you must fill the holes with cloth; and hold it tightly with the tweezers so that it doesn't break while being pulled; and you must work gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful not to break it and leave a part of it behind, causing greater pain for the patient due to the root remaining. And be wary of acting like ignorant healers who, in their haste and arrogance, sometimes break a tooth, nor do they pay heed to what we have instructed; instead, they often bring great harm through the roots that remain, or by breaking the tooth, as we have often seen. Once the tooth is pulled, wash the socket with wine or garlic and celery; and if there is bleeding, which often happens, then apply a paste of vitriol; and if that doesn't work, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, which are mute to the teeth first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not break when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And they should be made of thick material so that they do not bend when pulling, and should be well-made iron, and should be toothed to hold the mucous.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains during extraction, one should apply wet cotton with lard for a day or two until the gums are softened, and then use forceps called "algefri", which make the gums look like a surgeon's mouth; they should be made inside like a file, and this is its form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with these tweezers, then you should uncover the skin all around the root, and insert the instrument called "althali", which is a spatula, whose shape is like this:
And let it be firm and wide so that it does not break, and if the root comes out with this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, whose forms come after this:
And one should use this instrument which has two ends, whose shape is like this:
and other tools which are in the reason of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, whose shape is like this:
And have this instrument ready so that it cannot break, and know that there are many instruments for teeth; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise master finds his own instrument through his own skills, according to what his work and the disease show him, because there are many diseases for which the ancients did not teach an instrument due to their diversity. And if it does not break in the cart or other bones, but protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, as I have told you, and helps with gestures; this is how it is done: And let them be thick and well-fitting so as to hold the bone, so that it does not slip but can be held and removed; and then restore the site with appropriate medicines. And if there is protrusion in the bone, and it is small, then treat it with this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to nature and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, you should know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down; then pull it out. And if there is an air pocket with the tooth, take this instrument, of which there is a drawing, and it should resemble a small beak, and be made of tempered iron:
And push it gently into the gums for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with a type of file as shown in the drawing:
and is also like the file with which we make needles; and file the tooth a little bit each day gently, so that it does not move until it is straight; then smooth it at the end completely with any file, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file down the roughness so that it is even and doesn't cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
when the tooth is loose
When the front teeth loosen, through either a blow or falling, and the patient cannot bite down on anything without causing pain, and you have treated them with constricting medicines to no avail; then they must be restrained by a gold wire, because silver wires turn green and rot, but gold never moves or deteriorates. The wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, depending on the amount of space between the teeth. If you want to straighten the teeth, take the wire and wind it twice between the two healthy teeth, then slide the wire between the loose teeth, as far as possible towards the tooth on the other side; then gently pull your hand back, so that it does not move. Repeat this process until the wire is tight against the root of the tooth. Then, using pliers, twist and crimp the wire ends together, so that they do not come apart. Leave it in place as tightly as possible, and if it comes loose or the wire breaks, then restrain them with another wire. It will remain in place and serve its purpose for a long time. This is the shape of the teeth and how to straighten the two healthy teeth and the two loose ones, as you can see:
And when a tooth falls out, if it is replaced in its place, fresh after fresh, as we have said; and only a wise and experienced person should attempt this. Sometimes, the shape of a tooth is made from cow bone, and placed where the deficiency is, then restrained as we have described, and remains and serves for a long time.
to cover the vein of the tongue
This vein sometimes comes from under the tongue naturally, and sometimes it is caused by an abscess; and the treatment is to open the mouth of the patient, and place his head in your lap, and lift up the tongue; then cover the large nerve vein widely so that the tongue is dislocated from its socket, and if there is hardness or swelling due to an abscess, cut into it deeply and cover the vein; and be careful not to cut too deeply into the artery underneath. When you have finished, apply rosewater or vinegar, then place a tent of linen under the tongue; and paint the patient's mouth every night with vitriol so that the wound does not heal. And if there is blood discharge, then apply crushed vitriol to it; and if the bleeding stops, cauterize it with a lentigo cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
And if you see it discolored black or hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it because it is a ulcer; and if it is declining into a blister and there is moisture, cut into it with a spatulum, and free it from both sides; and if the bleeding starts at your action, apply crushed vitriol until it stops, then return to your action until you draw out everything; then raise the area with vinegar and salt, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
of abscesses in the throat
Sometimes within the throat there grow masses called "godath", which are properly called "almonds". And when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, be aware: if they are hard abscesses of a small size and of a dark color, then do not touch them with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood; but let it be until it bursts, and then you will separate it, or it will burst on its own. And if it is of a white color and the root is thin, then have prepared an instrument to pierce it, but first look to see if the abscess has cooled down and is calm. Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head be in your hand, and open his mouth and press the tongue underneath with the instrument, from which comes the form; and it should be of silver or thin brass, just like a knife:
Then you press the tongue with this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the hook and insert it into the almond, and pull it out from above as much as you can; and draw some threads of the fabric along with it, then cover the instrument with which comes the form, resembling a needle; and even so the points are bent, one to the left and the other to the right, and they are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cover it with tweezers, from which comes the form:
And it is sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, then cut the other according to the same method, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, and with vinegar and garlic, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with water, or with pomegranate peels that have been cooked, or with bay leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so cut them thus as you cut the two tonsils.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely, one abscess of small size; and she had almost closed her entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the opening that was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if it continued like this for another day or two. And the abscess had risen so high that it had forced its way out through the two openings of the tonsils. So I immediately inserted a knife into one of the openings, then pushed the blade outwards, and removed a large amount of pus; then I made an incision in the other opening of the tonsils and cleared her throat and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I inserted the knife into the abscess and cut out a portion of it, and only a little blood came out; then I cleared the passage of her throat, and she began to drink water and wine, and I continued to cut the abscess for a long time. And the abscess would shrink and then grow again and fill up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; so I lanced it and cauterized it inside her throat; thus it stopped growing. And I left those parts and did not know what happened to her afterwards.
of the grape
When the iris is lowered and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round underneath, it is called an "iris". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the chaus of abscesses is calmed down, and it is subtle, then you should cut it; and if it is round and not long, and it is blood-colored or the color of pus or black, then you should avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger in doing so. Therefore, when you see it according to the way I have described, by its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument that we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the iris, and pull it downwards, and cut it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two mandibles. You should not cut further than the superfluity that is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more, it causes grief in the voice and speech. After the incision, use what we said about the incision of the two mandibles, and treat it until it is healed. And if the patient fears being cut, then you should use an agent to cauterize the eye without pain. The method of cauterization is as follows: the patient puts his head on your shoulder, and then presses his tongue against the instrument that we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; he should breathe in sharp, hot breath so that it is not too thick or too clear, and then apply the tip of this instrument, whose shape I have described,
and has a hair or thread to hold the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and puts the instrument into all the medicine on the iris; and the patient lies on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth due to the medicine inside, so that it does not go down into the throat and lungs. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the iris for the duration of half an hour, until you see it hardening and the bites of the medicine calming down. If you see anything, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton all around the eye, so that the cotton adheres to the iris; do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry for 4 or 5 days. If you need to renew the cautery with more medicine, do so, and after the cautery, wash the area around the eye with cold water, and treat it with gargles until it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is treated with fumigation in this way, take calaminus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and assemble all of them or some of them in one pot, and add vinegar, and let it boil. The pot should be well-glazed with strong earth, and the instrument inside should be cheved according to this way: And it can be made of silver or bronze, and one end is placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is mortified; afterwards he begins again frequently, until the eye dries out; and take care not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of the hot abscess, because many things happen; nor do it except at the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put inside it an egg-shell so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the egg-shell does not allow the vapor to burden the mouth, and this is a good remedy together with salvation.
Many times there is stuck in the throat a bone or spine of a fish, or some other object; therefore you must pull out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you move the object; and if it does not appear to you and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie a string to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will stick, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have said, take an instrument of lead according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and let the end be lifted upwards; and beware of touching the epiglottis, lest he choke, nor push the bone inside; and move as long as the patient has to vomit, so that the object is dislodged; then he swallows it, or pulls it out with the whole instrument equally, until it comes out.
of the blood from the throat
The blood is sometimes stopped by medicine, as I have said in the division, through the treatment of remedies; and when that does not help, then examine the throat of the patient in the sunlight, then press his tongue with the instrument that I told you about. And if you see the blood, then draw it out with a small hook, or with tiny tweezers that are suited to this purpose. And if that doesn't work, take a small needle, and insert it into the throat of the patient, then heat the end of the needle, and do this frequently. And if the patient turns pale all day, then take a full glass of cold water, open his mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with his hand often; and as soon as the blood meets the water, it will stop.
And if it does not stop as we have said, then smoke the patient's throat with assafetida, using the instrument that I described for the fumigation of the larynx; do this many times, for it will surely work. The method of the fumigation is to place burning charcoal in a pot, and cover the pot with a perforated lid, and insert the tip of the instrument into the hole; then blow your smoke into the instrument, and have the patient place the end of the needle in his mouth, and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches the blood; and the blood will stop flowing at once. And if it does not stop, then repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient be thirsty, and eat salty and bitter things, and drink no water; and then it will surely come out through this treatment.
And if he needs to drink before the blood stops flowing, then let him drink warm wine or grape juice; for the blood will want to go to the stomach and be relaxed, and once it is there, the wine will take hold of it and draw it out.
the chapter on abscesses
There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what the recollections that come here later in this book from one and another, and they differ in penetration and size; and there are two ways in which this happens, the first being in its very appearance, and due to moisture. And the second way is due to the location in the body where it occurs. For example, an abscess on the head is different from one that occurs in the fundament, and an abscess of fleshy tissue is different from one that occurs in joints, and each has its own treatment method.
And if there is an abscess that one must not pierce until the boil is mature according to its development; and there are some that one must pierce when they become crusty and do not heal according to their development, such as abscesses that occur near joints. For when abscesses occur near joints, and one lets them form a pus pocket around the joint, it can corrupt the ligament and nerve of the joint, causing contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the principal organ, and one delays piercing it until it is mature, it will harm the principal organ. Or if it is near the fundament, one should pierce it so that it may drain and mature inside, and a fistula may develop, and it will not heal for a long time.
And one should know the time of piercing the abscess that is mature according to its development, and that is when the pain subsides, and the decline of fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and from the discharge and the sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and one should make the piercing where the abscess is most dependent, and where it appears there is pus. And the piercing should be made from the long side of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints affecting nerves and arteries, and in all places where there is no fold.
For those that are swollen, pierce according to the affected member. And when an abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to let the puncture remain until it is healed and the digestion is complete, as we have said. For if you pierce it earlier, the body's poison will flow out, and it will be filled with filth; and the lips and depths of it may harden. And for any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member requires. And one must treat small abscesses with small punctures, and large abscesses with large punctures, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where one should slit the skin, and cover it; when it has become like a drape, and is deadened, one must do as one does with blisters. And there are some that are split into three angles, and some that are covered like a myrtle leaf, as with abscesses of the entrails; and there are some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions, and similar covers.
If there is no head to an abscess, such as a superficial soft abscess, it is better to pierce it directly; and when the abscess is large, and it has drawn out a lot of pus, but not all at once in that hour, but some part of the pus; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more pus; do this several times until all the pus comes out, especially if the patient is weak, or a woman carrying a child, or a small child, or an old decrepit man. For the pus sometimes rushes out with the opening of the abscess that the patient may die without you realizing it. Therefore, practice great caution with this chapter; and when you have pierced your abscess, wash the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain incision, then dress it with tents made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many punctures, then insert a tent into each one so that they press against each other. And if you have slit the skin around the abscess and opened it, then fill it with old cotton or rags of linen without moisture, and leave it for three days; then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your treatment, apply cold water and vinegar, and soak a cloth, and place it over the bleeding area repeatedly. And if the bleeding persists, administer governance and treatment, and the powders that I mentioned with my hands in this book; and if it is in the winter, and the area around the abscess is very nervous, then place wet tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil over it; and if it is in the summer, and the area is fleshy, then place wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or cold wine and oil over it for three days, as we have said; then remove the abscess, wash, and treat it as it should be, until it is healed.
And so it is necessary to know generally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should go about treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
of sores
Or of the head come small abscesses, and are the manner of us that are in webs, as the jaw of a hen, and there is much of its kind. There is some that are fatty and such that there is moisture; and there are some that are hard and stony in texture, and there is no fear if the artery does not cause otherwise. And the works of the body are that you must test every instrument that is called a "trocar", from which the shape comes later, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then pierce it from above the long one. And when the moisture is emptied, then scald without leaving anything, the skin that contains the moisture, for it will return as soon as one leaves it; then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and repeat this the next day and the third, until you know well that it no longer remains at night; then cure the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it heals. And if the abscess contains a fatty lump, then cut it according to this shape, from above; and squeeze your fingers, and scald all over, and put all of your care into drawing out the coat in which it lies; and if the artery causes otherwise, then do what I have told you after. And do likewise for the abscess if it is stony, and for cutting and curing as I have told you.
And the incision over the stony and moist abscess is lighter, for they are full of blood. And there are some abscesses that come on the head or the ears, where the opening should be most dependent, so that the pus can flow out; and cure them as appropriate.
of scrofula
Many times these abscesses come in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and they are numerous, and they are interwoven with one another. And each scrofula is properly within its coat, just as the nodule and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities among these scrofulae. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that are stubborn and refuse to heal. Therefore, for one that you see with a good disposition to be touched, and which resembles the color of the body, and is even all around, and is not swollen in the nerves of the neck or in the artery or the duct, and is not deep; so you should cut it from above, and scrape away each part, and the two lips of the heart are curved inward, if you need to, as we have said about abscesses in the head; and draw it out little by little, and be sure that you do not cut into the nerve or vein, and let the spatumile not be sharp or trenchant so that the hand does not slip, and do not go too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut into the vein or artery and it will not let you work, then put vitriolated powder into the wound, or some powders that stop bleeding, and tighten the wound; and leave it until the abscess is quieted and the wound softened, and begins to suppurate. And when the blood is staunched, return to your work, as far as you can accomplish it; then seek with your finger whether there are any small scrofulae remaining, and cut and clean them. And if there is a large abscess in the root of the scrofula, you should not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread, and let it drop from it without harm; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then heal it.
And if you scrape the entire scrofula, you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now that there is no superfluity remaining due to the size of the scrofula. Then you must tend to covering its root and drawing it out, sewing as we have said before. For those scrofulae that hold a superfluity, pierce where it appears dead; and pierce in the same way as mentioned earlier, depending on it, then administer tenting with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, cure it with an ointment enfolded in cloth, until it is healed.
of squint
The ancients spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the script of their words.
For those who have squint, the slit in the throat called the 'epiglottis' should be cut; and one must not make an incision by this, because all the veins and the lung of the sick person are at those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in both armpits. When the disease is in the channel of the lungs, one must cover the epiglottis to prevent loss due to strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it under three or four small circles, or a small slit in between the two circles, but not in the cartilage.
and those places that are suitable for splitting the epiglottis so that there is no flesh and the vessels are long within it.
And if the master is fearful, he should extend the skin of the throat to the very edge, then split the skin as far as it will go, and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cover the epiglottis, as we have said.
and is demonstrated by the section of the blood vessel of the finger which has jumped out of place through the hole which is broken, and by the defect of the voice.
and leaves the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed and one no longer doubts about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the heart wound, and heal it completely without the cartilage; then administer medications that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim says one should not do this until the throat is completely swollen and the patient is judged dead and the pulse has ceased. Then grasp the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and he will breathe through the wound, and thus be guarded from death.
And for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease was passed, and it is passed in 3 or 4 days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maiden take a knife, and she stuck it in her throat, and cut through part of the windpipe;
and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
I uncovered the wound and found that the blood which had issued from it had not flowed further than the throat, and the windpipe was intact.
I hurried, and stitched up the wound, and healed her so that she recovered;
and had not the maiden recovered her wits, but had returned to her former state;
therefore I say that in cutting the epiglottis one should have no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called a 'hernia of the throat', and it is a large abscess in the color of yellow, and it occurs often in women;
and it happens in two ways: naturally, and accidentally; a natural dislocation has no cause.
And the accidental kind happens in two ways: one resembles a cyst, and the other resembles an abscess arising from an artery. And there is fear in it, and one should not operate with fire except on someone who is small, and test and examine throughout the orifice. If you find it like a cyst, and it cannot be cut into at all, then cut it as one would cut a cyst, and treat it throughout its coat, if there is no pus. and search thoroughly, and treat it as needed until it is completely healed.
of us
There are many ways of us, which I will describe all the similarities;
and now it is necessary that I say all the difference between birth and issue.
I say that discharge is hot and feverish, as long as the effusion has not passed, and the swelling is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
With this method, there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains a pustule which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and starts like a pimple and becomes large.
and they are according to their appearances, either greasy or moist, and very colorful as I have said in the division.
When you come to the treatment of the eye, you should first test and examine it with the instrument called an "optical probe", according to what its shape will appear in the chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring into abscesses in the brain is to press at the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and gently turn your fingers a little at a time, until you feel the instrument has pierced through, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then remove the probe, taking care that it doesn't slip out.
If the pus runs clear, whatever color it is, treat it as I have described for other abscesses.
And if after the probe no pus comes out, know that it is thick, so treat it in a cross shape, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape away the scabs on each side, and guard the skin underneath where you draw it out to make it healthy.
and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains inside.
For if nothing remains inside, then the pain will return many times;
and if a little remains and the pain troubles you, then employ some corrosive powders on the wound, and tighten the wound, and place warm healing poultices on it, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and if the pain is great, then cut into the edges of the wound and treat it with that which causes pus to flow out.
and if the vein underneath is contrary to you or another, then hasten and employ the place of vitriol ground, and leave it for two or three days until the wound suppurates and the ebullition of blood subsides; then return to cover what has been delayed by the night.
Here are the forms of the trocar, which come in three varieties: large, medium, and small; and there are three types of which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb"; and there are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, for probing abscesses of fistula.
They are also like the needles used to pierce sorcerers, and are made of brass, iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more effective, and are more tested with black pitch for probing the tunnels of fistula.
They are of three varieties: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the holes.
The forms of warts are very similar, as you can see here: large, medium and small; and some warts have two curves in three ways too.
and some have three curves and are in three ways; and some have two curves and only one way, and all of these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these warts that one cuts are sharp, and there are some that do not cut except from one side, which cause burns to the brain, so one does not cut the vein or nerve.
and those who are experienced in these things are placed on the fingers, so that the patient does not hurt themselves when opening abscesses;
and they are of three types: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and we should not use them except in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and fingers, and similar places;
and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling a punch, according to this shape, with which blood is stopped;
and it is put sometimes in the place that heals by gathering veins, and sometimes according to this large shape:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they become corrupt, so that they resemble women's breasts.
and remain ugly and swollen; and if one wants to cure them, one must bleed according to the form in this line [b] up to [g]. then cut into the fat, and fill the wound with ointment, then close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and heal it until it is healed;
and if the breast sags down and becomes soft due to its size, as it does in women, then cut into it in two places above, through two similar slits; one is attached to the other at their end, so that the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g; then scrape the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient will not rest, or due to blood flow, you should fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and let it remain until it eats away the remaining flesh and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the armpits
These abscesses that come from under the armpits are like hard scrofula, and some contain moisture.
Therefore, those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b. up to the line g.: And when all the bowels which are in the abscess have been emptied, employ the wound with soft cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, they should be treated as we have said for fissures of scrofula, and if the wound is closed, the cautery should be administered as mentioned earlier.
of the rupture of the artery
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sewn together, many times there are abscesses, and also the vein swells.
And if one knows it is because of the artery, the abscess is long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you will feel a pulling; and when it is in the vein, there is a visible swelling;
and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpit and in the groin, and in the neck, and many other places; and it is large. Therefore, one should avoid cauterization with hot iron, and that which is at the head should also be avoided, as well as in the case of inflammation of an artery that bursts through the skin;
Therefore, one should avoid cauterization with hot iron, and that which is at the head should also be avoided, as well as in the case of inflammation of an artery that bursts through the skin; then operate with scalpels, and carefully cut open the artery, so that it is exposed;
then insert a needle underneath and pierce it all the way to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread, according to what I have instructed you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples;
then probe the space between the two ligatures of an introducer until blood emerges and the abscess is drained;
then administer a cautery that burns black, as long as the ligature bleeds; then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed;
and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, then you must hold in your hand as much of the abscess as you can across all the skin, then insert the needle under the area you are holding in your hand, and pierce it, and use a .i. double thread, so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I told you, at one of its two ends with the thread;
and if you doubt that the thread will slip out, then tie another needle to both ends of the thread under the abscess at the incision site of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four places;
then cut the abscess until the pus flows out, then cut the pus from the chest and leave what is attached.
then place a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil over it, then administer poultices and ointments until it is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Also, as abscesses come to the artery and vein, they come to the nerves when they are injured, or from too much exertion, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulders and the elbows and everywhere there are joints, and it is a deep abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various states without pain;
and when one squeezes it firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep in the body, but under the skin;
and it does not move in any direction, neither forward nor backward, nor downward nor upward, and that which is in joints should not be covered with iron; there may be contraction.
and that which is on the head or forehead, cut the skin to the skull. If the abscess is small, hold it with tongs and cut at its root;
and if it is large, they suspend it with a hook, and cut it open, then remove the bone and close the wound with stitches, and let it heal.
large boils hanging Sometimes they occur in the abdomen and not anywhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to a mushroom, and its root is fine, and its head is large; and there are small ones and very large ones.
and I saw .I. man who had .ii. or tumors on his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and had no difference, and they were white, and had a thin root, and they were cracked open, and moisture was running out of them.
I cut them open and found in one weighing .xviij. ounces, and in the other .vj., and their interior was such that if you look at it, and the malady is moist, and the color of the articulations are white and moist with a subtle root;
if the cut is wide and deep, then you should quickly cauterize it, for there are often great flowings of blood when cutting into the stone, and if the blood flows out, then you must quickly cauterize;
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision of the iron, then take a well-made thread, and tie off the articulation as we have said, and leave it for .ij days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to squeeze the vein tightly until it pops out at the joint, and cut through it without effort; and if the roots are large, you may have fear of popping them out in the same way through the belly, but you can certainly pop out half of them,
then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to squeeze the vein which is of a dark color and of poor sensation and of milky appearance.
For these are encrusted abscesses, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers next.
when the boil has burst
If the appearance of a hernia comes from cauterization of a wound or fissure in the syphilis, and is on the abdomen and some of the bowels, as it happens in other ruptures, or blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from flatulence;
and if it is from the rupture of syphilis and from the exit of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a slight thing without pain, and it opens with various exits. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it springs back, and sometimes it is constricted, and grows larger at the entrance of the bath and from great effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a slight thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrict at all; and if it is due to blood, then it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity;
and if it is due to flatulence, then there will be a light touch, and the actions will depend on whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or flatulence. If you should let it heal. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, both for arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bladder, then you should instruct the patient to tighten his abdomen and extend it straight, then sign all around the navel; then command him to sit upright between your hands, then go around the area that you have marked all over the spasm. then cut through the abscess from above with a large hook;
then cut through the middle of the abscess stretched over the tie, and push your finger inside, and grab the intestine; if you find it caught in the linen, then release it, and stuff the intestines back into the abdomen.
and if they find the bowels, they grab them at the anus, and cut off the excess;
and if the artery causes contrary action, or the vein, then go around it nicely, then return to your task and take two needles, and thread them with two strong threads, and thread the two needles through what you have pierced in a cross shape;
then draw the abscess out in four places over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the hole as it is, and let the dead flesh come out on its own; or cut it when it is delicate and soft, then treat the wound as needed, and lance the abscess as we have said.
or cut it when it is delicate and soft, then treat the wound as needed, and lance the abscess as we have said. and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as needed, and close the wound.
the ulcer
We have discussed the types of ulcers and how to treat them with medications, as well as the importance of cauterization with iron. Now, let's talk about ulcers that develop in the mouth, especially in the gums, and similar areas. It is important to treat these early on by removing any dead tissue. However, once they become larger and more established, it is best not to disturb them, as I have never seen one healed through such treatment, nor has anyone else as far as I know.
And the treatment, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile sometimes; then make him bleed if he has manifest repletion, then prepare the patient .i. good place to perform the operation; then cut off the nails or calluses, and shave the hair all over, and remove the bone all over without leaving anything; and let the blood flow out completely, and squeeze the site well with your hand or something, and if the bleeding makes you hesitate about cutting the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood is stopped; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
of dropsy We have already discussed the appearances of dropsy, how the accumulation of fluid is caused, and the signs of each appearance, as well as the treatment through medicine and surgery. Now, we will focus on the use of cauterization for this condition. You should not use cauterization in all cases of dropsy; it is dangerous and can be fatal. Therefore, when treating this type of dropsy with medicine, and the treatment does not provide relief, you should consider whether the patient is weak or has other illnesses besides dropsy, such as stomach issues and similar conditions. If so, do not use cauterization, as it poses a risk. However, if the patient is strong and their only issue is dropsy, and they are not too young or too old, you may proceed with cauterization as follows: Take the patient straight in your hands, and the assistant presses his belly by thrusting water to the lowest part of the foot, then take the spiny spatula according to this form: And it should be .ij. parts pointed, and yet not so narrow that it can come up to the intestine when one thrusts it in, and not able to pierce;
then look to see if the dropsy is pressed against the intestines: then you should split under the belly .iij. times straight below the armpit; and if the dropsy is because of the disease of the liver, then your split should be on the left side of the belly .iij.; and if it's because of the gallbladder, then it should be to the right, and the patient must not lie on the split so that the excess does not flow to that weak place;
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and plug it, and lift your hand up to the whole spatula between the skin and the syphus as much as when skinning in the quantity of a fingernail or inch; then pierce the syphus until the spatula comes to the desired place, and that is the place of the water, then pull it out, and plug this instrument from which this form comes: And it is similar to a subtle silver cane, and it is made of brass or lightweight archaut, and has in the lower part  .i. small hole; and on one side,  .iij. holes; and  .ij. on the other, and  .i. on the other; and the head is tailored like a feather, and that is the form of the incision from which the scribes cut the pen:
at the top is the handle, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it descends immediately upon the instrument; therefore empty half or a third part, for if you empty more than it is convenient in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit into the weapon, or he will fall into a coma, or he will approach death;
But empty it according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the illness indicate, and his pulses; then take up the instrument and hold the water, which is now retained by the keratoma that blocks the opening above the syringe, about which I have spoken, so that you pierce it according to this manner; then use the instrument again the next day if you see the patient bearing it, and take a small amount of water.
Do this on any day and guard against following him until he remains, but a little water. And if you doubt the patient, and leave a lot of water in him, then the cure is by burial or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing, and sunbathing; and the cure with desiccating medicines until he is healed, and cauterize over the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
of the stopping of the penis Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place. So it should be immediately pierced with a very thin spatula according to this form: then put into the opening a very thin plug of lead, and tie it and hold it thus for three or four days; and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, and then replace it; and perhaps it is not necessary at all, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed. Those whose opening is small, if they are medicated with the plaster of lead, as we have said, will be enlarged. Those who do not have an opening in their place are swollen, for some are born with an opening at the head of the penis, because of which they cannot urinate before they lift their penis up; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the urethra, and this is a serious illness.
And the way of doing it is that the patient lies on his back, then the head and glans of the penis are made as large as a pena, with the opening in the middle as it should be; and take care to prevent bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, stop it with what stops blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the penis Many times these whitlows come on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must grasp them with a very small needle, and cut and clean them all, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on them; then cure it with fine ointment until it is healed. And if the ulcer is malignant, with a foul color and pus, then you should apply cautery to it. When you have burned it, and if the ulcer is on the glans, and part of it is inside the foreskin and part outside, then you should first remove the ulcer that is inside; and when it is healed, cure the part that is outside. For when you cure them together, the skin of the glans is not assured from being pierced, and blackness and corruption come in his glans and in the scrotum; so you should cut away all that is black and corrupt, then apply an ointment made of honey and flour, made from pomegranate rinds and hazelnuts, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: Cauterization has two purposes: namely, for bleeding and for corruption. And if the head of the glans is swollen and drawn up, then you should insert a lead canal through the glans, and let the patient urinate through it; and when the skin at the tip of the glans becomes raw due to either a wound or an abscess, then you should cut away all around until the foreskin is detached and the head of the glans is completely relieved;
and if it is difficult to tell which one, then you should cut with a spatulum at some point on the glans and foreskin; then, having made an incision, put in a very thin linen cloth moistened in cold water so that it does not bleed again.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not a dislocation like other wounds; nonetheless, when we do this work of our own volition, and properly on infants, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the least harmful to health.
I say that the ancients did not teach the circumcision of their children, because they didn't use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experimentation.
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision all around, and in many places, and on all new-born infants; thus it happens that the foreskin shrinks because there are two membranes, and sometimes one membrane is cut above and the other below remains.
Then they recover consciousness, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleansing which is from the head there is not sufficient confidence in the movement of the limb; and in the cleansing of the fingernail perhaps the iron escapes and ruins the work, and many times it happens that they do not need cleaning and I have seen this.
I have found the goodness of the experiment in the cleansing that is done with strong thread all along the length of the wound, for the stitches cut just as well above as below.
Because when you press your hand, you cut evenly all around the wound; but the thread must be tightly wrapped around the skin. And the method of the first operation is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around his penis, and then you make him urinate in every way that you can. Then hold the penis upright between your hands, or under your feet so that the child does not see it, or any of the instruments; then put your hand to the penis and breathe on it, and draw it up so that the head of the penis is exposed. Then cleanse it thoroughly from the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the cut area with a double thread, then tie it under another knot; and hold it in one hand by the second knot at the foreskin and the index finger, and stretch it, then loosen the skin over the glans, then draw out the head of the penis.
Then hold the penis upright between your hands, or under your feet so that the child does not see it, or any of the instruments; then put your hand to the penis and breathe on it, and draw it up so that the head of the penis is exposed. Then cleanse it thoroughly from the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the cut area with a double thread, then tie it under another knot; and hold it in one hand by the second knot at the foreskin and the index finger, and stretch it, then loosen the skin over the glans, then draw out the head of the penis. then let the blood flow a little at a time, for that is the ulcer; and apply powder above the powder on a cloth glued with an egg yolk cooked in rosewater, confit with good and fresh rosary oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
The shape of the force for the purification is such that the two ears should be thin and pointed, and the ears should be as big as the palm equally:
the error of the purification is when the incision within the ear drum; therefore, you must stretch it with your fingernail, so that the eardrum forms an abscess; and then, equally, cut it, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
And if it persists for 3 days, and what is under the eardrum is swollen, let it be until the abscesses are soothed and the skin slightly peeled; then cut it as much as you can, and beware of the part of the eardrum, it will not harm him at all.
Therefore treat the site of a sudden wound with powder, as we said in the treatise on powders, and if it bleeds profusely and goes above, it will not harm; therefore treat it, as we said, until it is healed.
from retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or a tumor, or similar conditions that we have discussed in the divisions;
and if the urine is blocked, and you see that it is blocked by a stone which is frozen in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should bend his knees, and put his feet up on his back, and extend his stomach from above his back, and restrain himself as much as he can; and thus the neck of the bladder is forced upward to express the stone above, so that the urine is released;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with an instrument called a "syringe", of which this is the shape: and let it be of fine silver, light like the feather of a bird; and let the tube be a palm and a half long, and fine at the tip.
And the way to extract urine is to take a double thread and tie at its tip a small piece of wool or cotton, and insert the tip of the thread into the syringe; and cut off the excess of wool and insert it into the syringe up to the tip, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and rub the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;
then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the body; then insert the syringe further in until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel it arrive at the empty space, and if this is not done according to this order, but because the conductor where it goes is crooked, then pull out the thread and the wool, and let the urine flow along the wool, then withdraw it, and let the urine flow;
and restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and let the patient relax.
of bladder diseases
When scorching or bleeding occurs in the bladder, or pus has gathered there, and you see fluids and medicines seeping out, then use the entire instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its shape:
It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see. The end of the tube through which the medicine flows should be such that it blocks the penis without addition, so that one can draw out moisture and push in when necessary;
and when you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, put the end of the catheters into the moisture and draw it out through the tube that is in. Then squeeze the tube firmly, and the moisture will enter the bladder, and now the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle catheter used to catheterize the bladder: it is as follows:
And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher up; and under it there are two strings tied together; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the fluid with which you want to catheterize the bladder, then tie the bladder between the two strings formed from a length of double thread, and heat the fluid on the fire; then insert the tip of the catheter into the penis, then squeeze your hand over the bladder to allow the fluid to enter smoothly, until the patient feels that the fluid has reached the bladder;
And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and cut it into a circle, then pierce a hole through the center; thread a strong wire through the holes and twist the ends together to form a seal, and fill it with oil, fluid, or water, and insert the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, squeezing your hand until the fluid reaches the bladder.
of stones
We have already discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction along with medicines; and I have described the difference between a stone lodged in the ureter, and all the signs, and in which kind of stone one should operate; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the water passes from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and they open their arses, and the patient feels great pain in his penis, and they urinate many times, and then it becomes constipated; and most of these have a hernia; and healing is easier for children until they are four years old, and it is much more difficult in the elderly, and it is in between for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have larger stones than for those with smaller ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema to draw out any feces that may be blocking the intestines and impeding the extraction of the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift and move him from side to side so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above; then let him sit between your hands which are prepared, and his hands should be under his thighs so that the bladder is completely tilted downward; then examine and feel for it inside.
If you feel the stone in the bladder, then hasten to cut on the stone. And if it does not move when touched all over, then moisten your left index finger with oil if the patient is male or your middle finger if female; and insert it into its opening, and seek out the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, draw it towards the neck of the bladder; then press on it with your finger, and draw it out where you see fit to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and instruct the patient to extend his testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum, which is shaped like a spoon.
And cut between what is between the testicles and anus, not in the middle but along the left side of the scrotum; and hold the blade straight against the stone, and press your fingers firmly on the anus, and make the incision slanting so that it is wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
By chance, the pressure on the fingers at the anus may cause the stone to emerge without effort; and know that there are two types of stones: one has angles and edges, and the other is smooth, round, and easier to pass.
Because of this, where it has angles and a margin, make the incision larger; and if it does not cut, then you must use pincers which are like a file at the tip to extract the stone so that it does not slip; or insert a flexible instrument under the stone; and if you cannot grab it in this way, widen the opening a little, and if the blood vessels burst, stop them with vitriol.
and if there is more than one stone, then insert the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then pull it out, and the smaller ones after it, if there are several. And if it is very large, then it must be split, and a larger wound made. For two things can happen to the patient: they may die, or the urine will come out through a place where the wound cannot heal; but nevertheless, keep trying to pull it out in pieces with pincers until you have removed all of it.
And when you have finished your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it steady, and place a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then re-bandage the patient over his wound, and do not loosen the bandages until the third day.
And when you loosen the bandages, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment, until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses and corrosions come into the wound, and blood clotting in the bladder, and there is retention of urine due to this, which is perceived in such a way that it comes out with the urine: therefore press your finger into the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrode and burst the bladder;
then raise the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and treat it in every way you know until it is healed; and it is necessary that each hour as you treat it, to tie the two thighs together, and put the remedies on the spot.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and fixed there, and the urine cannot pass; then he should be treated in the way I have described above, that is, to cut it many times, until it is loose due to this treatment. I have already proven this.Et si li piere est en la verge et que li urine ne puet issir, et qu’il soit fiachiez ens, si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.
Take an iron spike according to this form, and let it be tipped with three angles:
then take a thread and tie it around the urethra under the stone so that it cannot return to the bladder; then push the probe gently into the urethra until it reaches the stone; and push the probe in your hand back and forth on the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another angle; then the urine will flow out at once, press your hand against what is stuck inside the stone. Then it breaks, and flies out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
and if you cannot do this because of the stone's position, tie one thread under the stone and another above it, then push the urethra against the stone between the two threads, then pull it out and untie the threads, and clean the congealed blood from the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
of stones in women
It sometimes happens that a stone becomes lodged in women's urinary passages, and if it does, the cure is difficult and prohibited for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a good woman who reveals herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that one cannot find a woman who is skilled in this art of medicine; and the fourth manner is that the woman's stone is more embedded than the man's stone, so it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear in it.
And if you need to, have a skilled midwife, and with difficulty cut it out of her, and if you cannot cut it out, then do not desire a fine, subtle stone; and present to her a wise dance in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command from the interrogation about the stone.
And look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then he should push his finger into her vagina and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it under her finger, and he recommends that she pushes her finger into the vagina where the patient feels pain, and press her left hand firmly on her bladder.
If she finds it, then she should move it little by little from the entrance of the vagina until it reaches the root of the thigh; then feel for the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the urethra, where it feels most painful; and do not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first.
then pour the hot oil into the incision in the waist, and feel the stone if you can; for there are many types of stones: some are small and smooth, while others are large and rough, long and round, or hollow. Know their appearances so that you can find them.
And if the blood flows out, apply crushed vitriol and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your task and have available the tools I mentioned for extracting stones from humans to assist you in your work.
And if the blood flows out and it is an artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the wound and use bandages and bandages to stop the bleeding; do not touch the stone or attempt to extract it, for fear of killing the patient. Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, then return to your task and extract the stone.
of a fleshy hernia
RamiCe aquoUSe n'Is aUtRe choSe QUe aSSemBlEe dE mOiStoR ou blAnC syfAc, QUI eSt dEsOz lOu keUr deS coiOnS, QUe cOnTIenT l'uef; et eSt apeLeZ «Syfac», et aUnqUoe fOIs eSt prOpReMEnt en La ToIlE dE l'uef, SI C'on cUIdE QUe CE sOIt .i. auTre oef; ET CeU n'AvIEnT Se poc Non.
And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness that comes to the intestines, and that matter is spread out.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the intestines, and this moisture has many colours; it may be yellow, or colourless, black, white and watery, and it happens in various ways.
and these are the signs of knowing this assembly, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have said, then the abscesses are red, i.e. slightly long like the shape of an egg, and does not open the skin, for there is moisture all around it.
And if there is moisture in the skin itself, then the abscesses are red with part of an egg, and because of this they think it is another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphilis, then they feel good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, probe throughout the foreskin, as the shape is described above. According to this, then, what comes after the foreskin, judge what is inside.
According to this, then, what comes after the foreskin, judge what is inside. And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be healed according to their strength and the fullness of their body; then have them lie on their back, on something slightly raised, and put a lot of clothing underneath them;
then sit on their left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on their right, and extend the arm toward one of the two ribs below the armpit;
then take the spatulum of lead, and cut the skin between the ribs from the armpit down to the little finger, and make the incision straight through the skin, cutting only the skin, and not going too deep, according to their strength.
Then pierce the armpit with water through one large hole, and draw out all the water, then put in your fingers, and let the armpit drain; and do not touch the armpit itself, but only the skin around it; cut it gently along the rib, if you do not cut it well enough to bleed, the water will come back.
and if the wound jumps out of your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work with the syrup; then stitch together the two lips of the wound with a single stitch, then treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the wound corrupted by another disease, then you should tie off the vessels that are suspended, fearing a flow of blood; then cut into the wound throughout its suspension, extract the wound, and treat it as we have said.
And if pus is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two wounds; then cut into the other part just as you did the first equally, then wash out the blood and put soft lamb's wool soaked in rose oil into the wound.
and put another piece of lamb's wool soaked in wine and oil, and place it over the two wounds, and place doubled cloths over them, and tie it all together with a ligature following this shape:
Take two pieces of cloth, and stuff them with wool according to this appearance, and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, and let one end press against the anus up to the back, and the other end against the perineum; and the other two ends on both sides against the two buttocks, and fasten all the ties in the loop of the breeches.
And sometimes this ramice of cautery is used instead of an iron tool, and you should press a thin scalpel gently against the skin of the testicles, and it should be heated as we have said, so that the white puss containing the pus is exposed;
If you take the cautery in this shape, and pierce that pustule gently, and scorch it with this thin hot cautery:
And scrape it in all ways that you can, as much as you can; and be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle; and know that this action is safer; and fear bleeding, and injuries from cutting tools.
and if nothing contradicts you, then treat any abscesses, bloodletting, or other issues, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and unwilling to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then perform an incision, as I have told you, and when you are certain through the signs that we have discussed that the watery humor is expelled,
let the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess at its lowest point with a long spadone, and insert the incision deeply into the body; make the holes wide so that all the fluid can flow out;
then place cotton on the wound, and ligature it, and let it drain until the remaining fluid is gone, then treat the wound until it is healed;
and if the white membrane does not allow water to exit through the mouth of the wound, you should insert a feather or the instrument used to treat dropsy, as described earlier; and widen the wound slightly, and know that the water will return, and is gathered after 6 months or so, and when it has gathered as before, and thus the patient will pass his days.
of the testicle abscess
Know that in the section of this chapter there are many dispositions of fear, because of which it seems better to me that one should not be performed.
and I will tell you about the procedure and the similarities of the abscess.
I therefore say that many abscesses come about in the body, and especially in the testicles; and this happens for many reasons.
This is to be known through bitter excess and ague, which is spread to the testicles, or from a blow;
and the colour of the abscess follows the colour of the body; and it does not hurt, and it is a serious abscess;
and sometimes there are dark, pus-filled abscesses, and some come from a burst artery or vein swelling.
When it is through a vein, it is known by the hot feeling of an abscess when you press it with your fingers. And one must not touch it.
Those that are caused by wind are known by their appearance when pressed with the fingers,
and one can do well to make an incision on this appearance, and on other marks; and then you grasp the heart of the testicles, and the yolk goes up, and the white part goes out from under the yolk, and you release the suspensory ligament from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already cooked with these new eggs, then you must break the egg and grasp it.
And if it is aered in the white, or in what is inside vessels, then you must release all that film and grasp it roundly.
And if the birth of the egg is in the rear location, then you must grasp it all and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is finished, then apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
of the testicles
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to a .i. bud, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient feels great pain when he urinates;
and the treatment of this disease is as difficult as the one before.
And yet we will tell you how to treat it according to what the ancients did.
You should make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspensory of testicles tightly with your fingers, grabbing and extending all the vessels that are close to the penis, and pulling the master veins, and stretching them firmly;
then cut the spathan with a sharp knife through the middle of the vessel, so that it is exposed
and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
then insert a needle with a doubled thread into the first place where the thread came out, and tie it off at both ends; then cut them straight through the middle, following the length of the body, and cut out any corrupted moisture;
then treat the wound as the others, except we bandage it so that any blood vessels that nourish one of the testicles are constricted;
for through this there is no harm, and if blood comes from all the vessels then one must draw out the testicles with all the vessels; so that the artery does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot help themselves.
of the rot of the eye socket The cause of this disease is the rupture which comes from the syphilis, or the swelling on the belly in the region of the intestines, causing them to descend from that opening to one of the testicles.
and this rupture occurs from the syphilis, or from the swelling of it, and these two ways of the discharge come from many causes: from a blow, or jumping, or straining, or lifting a heavy load, and from similar things;
and the sign that it is from the swelling of the syphilis, is that it occurs little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are evened out towards the bottom, because the pus presses on the intestines.
And the sign is when it is from the section of the abscess, that it brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear diverse, beneath the skin close to the surface, and that is for the exit of the intestines and the body from the abscess.
And sometimes the intestines descend with the abscess, and are retained inside, and cause great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these cures of iron with fear, from which one should keep away.
And the manner of the operation is that you instruct the patient to grip the intestine with his hand inside the wound, if he can reach it. Then press on his neck between your hands and lift the hips.
Then push the chest upwards, and cut all the skin off the ribs from top to bottom. Then insert knives into the waist according to what you need to open the wound, so that the bowels can come out.
then scorch the syphilis which is under the skin of the testicles, until the hard white syphilis is exposed all over.
then thrust your index finger into that which follows the testicle, between the white syphilis which is under the skin of the scrotum and the second syphilis.
and separate that which is behind the testicle and between the second syphilis; then move your right hand inside the scrotum, and the white syphilis will be on top of your left hand, and lift up the testicle to remove all of the syphilis towards the abdomen. and instruct the assistant to extend the testicle upwards, and loosen that which is tight behind the scrotum.
and feel with your hands if there is any hard, wrapped-up intestine or syphilis, and if you find anything, put it into the stomach underneath.
then take a needle with .1. large thread made of 10 threads, and pierce it through the back part of the syphilis, which is after the skin of the testicles; then tie the shoulders that appear from the threads, so that there are 4 threads. then tie them one above the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the syphilis, which we have said is underneath the skin of the testicles, with a strong ligature of 2 parts; then wrap the threads around the shoulders and tie them tightly at 2 parts, so that none of the blood vessels that nourish them can enter, so that no pus-filled abscess can form; and put the ligature according to the first long line. Two threads of it, and after these two lines leave the cotton which is under the heart of the testicles the size of a bean;
and then the other according to the roundness that the scrotum carries; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the testicles, as far as the blood flows, and the bowels, as we have said before;
then apply moistened wool in oil, and put it on the wounds, and then apply the ligature that we have described. And sometimes the white cotton that we have described is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bleeding.
For this often happens, and leave the ligature in place until it cuts through the skin; and if it takes a long time to fall out, use a warm poultice, and apply what we have said until it comes out.
Then treat the wound with another treatment until it is completely healed.
of a fleshy hernia
In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is done like the thread that is together with the screw, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the cut above and below lightly.
Then bandage it up, and cure the abscess of he who operates, until the vessels heal; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a hernia comes with the testicles, as we have said, and the place opens up; and none of the intestines come out into the scrotum, and if any do, it is a little bit, and one must be careful all the time.
And yet if it stays too long in this state, then gangrene is believed to occur, so that the intestines protrude.
and this happens through the extension of the syringe, which is in the veins, as we have said, because it is extended, then the place becomes soft and swollen and open;
and the treatment if by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way:
and the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then you cut the swollen area around the wound according to its size, about the thickness of three fingers;
and then pull out the syringe which is under the skin that is swollen, then take the cloth and place it over the visible area of the syringe;
he presses it firmly against the abdomen, then cuts through the two visible veins on the neck, and cuts both of them;
then he removes the head of the penis, and does not cut or stretch the vein or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines;
then he treats it with the treatment for wounds. And when you cut the veins, clean and treat the wound until it is healed.
The vein is constricted, and has no appearance in the rupture, and cauterization is more effective in this case, and closer to recovery.
of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Many times the skin of the scrotum softens in some men because the testicles within are softened, and it appears milky white; and when one wishes to treat it, he should make the patient lie on his back, and cut away the softened skin above the natural membrane; then join together the two edges with a single stitch, or up to four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
of chastisement
You should know that chastisement is prohibited by our law, and I would prefer not to discuss it in this book; however, it is necessary for two reasons: one is so that the doctors can respond when asked, and know how to perform the procedure; and the other is because we often need to use chastisement on certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, and goats. Thus, I say that chastisement is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the method done by attraction, we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles become soft and pendulous; then, hold them in your hand until they are reset and you no longer feel them. As for the chastisement of cutting: one must castrate the animal, and cut away the skin of the scrotum with their left hand, then tie off the suspensory ligament, and cut above each testicle once when they have been well-squeezed; some apply a poultice of honey and fine honey to the vessels; this method of chastisement is better than that done by attraction because in the attraction method, something may remain in the scrotum, causing the animal to desire lust; then, treat the wound until it is healed.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites are of two types: one in which the genitals appear male but the body has the characteristics of a female, including hair and sometimes urination from the penis; the other type is found in women who have a penis on their pubic area. The treatment for both types is to treat them as you would any other wounded person, except for the second type, where there is no treatment for urination through the skin of the genitals.
of the testicles
Tentigene is an abscess on the scrotum that is unsightly and unpleasant to look at; some women have one as large as a hand, and it needs treatment. You should cut away the excess tissue from the testicle with your hand or fingers, being careful not to go too deep and cause bleeding; then treat the wound until it heals. There is another type of abscess that forms in the mouth, resembling a cow's udder, which is why it is called the 'cow disease'. You should cut this as you would the tentigene, and treat the wound until it heals.
of erratics
If the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that came to be there; or it is due to a foreign object, or a thin or thick syphilis, and it is formed deep in the mare, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever it may be; and they should understand conception and childbirth, and perhaps flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is through observation of the bitch. If the swollen testicles are visibly nearby, then take hold of them with your fingers or a stick. If it is due to a thin syphilis, and it is close to the scrotum, then quickly do this: place your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the testicles, so that the thin syphilis is drawn out, and cover the swollen testicles; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the area, and let the woman rest at home every day so that it does not stick. And if the syphilis is hard and thick, then you should cup it according to the spathumile, resembling a myrtle leaf. If the swelling is due to necrotic tissue, then they should suspend it and cup it; and have medicines to stanch blood, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together with abundant egg white; then administer a large plank of wood, so that the wound does not stick together; and so for a long time, and then administer a tent made of dry linen; then cure other cures until it is healed. And when necrotic tissue comes in the mare, one should cover it according to this manner, if it is not encrusted abscesses. For with an encrusted abscess in the mare, one should not touch it to treat it.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are opened veins that usually cause pain, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become throbbed; and we have already described their likenesses, signs, and how to treat them. I say that hemorrhoids and throbbed hemorrhoids, when they are completely formed in the anus and do not appear on touch, cannot be cured with a needle. Those that can be felt at the mouth of the anus can be treated. Therefore, you should first put the patient in a cool room, then constrict the hemorrhoid with tweezers, and cut off its roots, then apply powdered medicines to stop bleeding, such as acacia gum and dragon's blood, and similar substances; then tie her feet to the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water; and if there is any bleeding, make her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, and gall, and similar things, then take barley flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and make an ointment which should be applied to her back. And if it stops, that's good. If not, use leeches on her back and breasts without piercing them; then take wool, soak it in plantain juice or dogwood juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the affected area. And when the abscess has healed, treat the wound with ointment until it is cured; and that which is called 'albathir' is red and resembles a rough patch, so it should be treated as I said for throbbed hemorrhoids; then cure it until it heals.
and wounds of the anus
There are many types of abscesses that can occur in the anus, such as sores, piercings, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, as well as other diseases that I have described in the previous section. Therefore, I will now describe the treatment for hot abscesses that occur in the anus, which are different from those that occur in the bowel. When you examine the patient, look at the abscess, and if it is red and painful with fever, then do not rush to pierce it right away; instead, let it heal first until the pain subsides. Then, make the patient sit on a chair with two small cushions to lean against, so that their back is supported, and their feet are spread apart with their arms under their knees; tie their arms with a soft bandage, then suck the orifice of the anus using a straw-like instrument to create a vacuum, and insert it into the anus to open the passage. After creating the opening, insert a small rod to feel the depth of the passage and ensure that the instrument does not go in too deep and hurt the patient; if the instrument is large, cover the anus with a cloth to protect it from being irritated by the instrument. Then, insert the tip of the instrument and release the vacuum. When the abscess opens, apply a warm poultice made of rose oil or virgin olive oil, and place it over the wound and the surrounding area; also, apply a poultice of clean linen soaked in water or malva flowers that have been boiled, and change this poultice every two days until the wound heals. Sometimes, it is helpful to insert a catheter into the anus and rectum to release water and honey, followed by water infused with lily roots and aristolochia, and then return to using ointments as mentioned before. If the wound in the anus has healed, then avoid using any sharp instruments; instead, treat it as described earlier in the text.
of childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural signs of childbirth, and these are when you see a woman struggling to breathe and wanting to smell aromatics; then you should hurry the baby out; this indicates that the childbirth follows nature's course, with the baby emerging head first, followed by the placenta. If you see these signs, gently apply pressure to her abdomen so that the child is delivered promptly. Because when the baby emerges head-first, the placenta will follow, and the mother is cleansed of her excess fluids through natural purification; and those born in other ways are not natural births. Sometimes a baby may be born feet first, or the body or shoulder may emerge first, or the hands, or from the abdomen or pelvis, and they might get stuck in the birth canal due to being in an unusual position. Therefore, the midwife must be wise and skilled in these matters, cautious of mistakes and disappointments, and I shall guide you through all the possible scenarios and how to assist them.
If the baby is born head-first naturally but the mother is struggling and her vitality is weak, make her sit on a chair or have other women support her. Prepare an emollient of rose oil or fried fenugreek, and then the midwife should insert the small spatulum into the vagina to dilate it gently: and tear the placenta, and squeeze her finger in so that the fluids inside flow out; press on the mother's abdomen to help the baby descend, and if it doesn't descend, use a mussel of fenugreek with sesame oil as a clyster; then make her sneeze and cough repeatedly, and hold her mouth and nose closed for an hour; the baby will come out. If both hands emerge first, gently push them back in little by little; if they cannot go back in, have the woman sit on a chair with her feet raised; then lift the chair off the ground and tilt it forward so that she is not fully upright; if the hands still don't go in, use the knife as before to cut the umbilical cord and pull out the baby, and then push in again.
of the child's feet When the child comes out feet first, then he should be turned upside down. And then turn him slowly and gently until he is straight.
Then hold one of his feet and stretch it out gently.
When it jumps up to the armpit, have it grasp, and cause it to sneeze with a scent. if it jumps out, so be it.
And if it does not jump out as we have said, then slowly turn it back and forth until it is in its natural position. For then it will be easy.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then take mussel shell ash, and oil of sesamum, and melted gum, and grind them all together in one mortar; and apply this ointment to the nature of the woman within and without, then let her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
and when she is thoroughly soaked beneath, make her a collar of myrrh and put it on her beneath, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her stomach, for the baby will come out at once. with the birth of the child on his knees When the child comes in this way, he puts his hands on it little by little.
of the issue of the child which comes from a width of one hand during We must find a way to bring back the hand: if we cannot bring it back, then have the woman lift and walk;
if she cannot walk, then have her lie on a bed and raise her legs straight;
then bring the medicine that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, then let her sit on a chair, then try to bring back the hand; and turn the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to hold on until the child emerges.
from the emergence of the child onto its neck, and spread out his hands, and turn his face towards his mother's back I must twist her wrist, then rock him gently back and forth, and hold him lightly;
and when it is even, put on the mixture of vinegar and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little.
and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair and instruct her to sneeze; and make her yawn. in the same way for all of the afterbirth
in the same way for all of the afterbirth When it comes out in this way for all of the afterbirth, catch the afterbirth with your fingernail, as long as the moisture is drained.
and if the fetus pushes up against its face and neck, and the mother does not give birth, then the fetus will die.
then insert the child inside, until you have positioned it correctly, and instruct the woman to hold on for a while.
of the twin's birth Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; this is not a strange thing, but it happens seldom. Twins are rare, and if they live at all, it is seldom.
I know that they are multiplied by the syphilis which divides them, which is bound to the womb;
and sometimes they issue as naturally as one alone, as we have said.
And if they move strongly, then the treatment as we have said, and let the bail be subtle, and quickly and easily do what it does; and act thus as it benefits health. of many children
of many children Sometimes they are formed in the womb - one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the glorified Sage,
and it is necessary for the surgeon to know all this because similar things might happen; then act according to what is appropriate.
of the dead child
When you are treating a woman for a dead child or in her womb, as I have said in the previous section, and there is no progress, and you are forced to use manual manipulation; if you should know whether a woman is of sound health, and has no accident that causes her to fear death;
it is necessary for the woman to be lying on her back, with her hips inclined downward and her legs raised;
and the midwife should apply a poultice of .ij. parts to her abdomen if she is being treated for delivery;
then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with myrrh, fenugreek, and flax seed; then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and myrrh; then gently push them back into the socket, then release .i. the arm where they fit, that are suitable for this,
and take care that the child is equipped so that it descends onto its head; if it pierces the eyes, or in its throat, or in its mouth, or under the beard, or in the armpit, or near the sides,
and if the descent is on the feet, then pierce or pinch and at the middle sides;
and it is necessary that he grasp the needle in his right hand, and place the thread between the fingers of his left hand, and wind it around his whole hand lightly, and insert the needle into one of those places which we have mentioned, until it reaches the hollow;
then pierce with another needle, or a third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;
and then they should be moved equally from one side to the other, so that they exit, and the needles should be bitten down to hold them in place, as shown in this diagram:
And if a part remains, anoint the ball of one of his fingers with oil, and press it into that part, and draw out the other part;
and if nothing remains inside, put the joint back in its place, and do this until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the dislocation, you must wrap it in a cloth, until it comes out completely;
then the cautery on the joint of the sole or on the wrist, and so you should do with the other hand, and with both feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is tight in the birth canal, or it has a sharp point assembled at its head, you should push the spiny spatula between your fingers, pierce the head, and extract the fluid; or you can use the instrument called "almidach," from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and so also will happen to the infant naturally; and then pull out the bones with tweezers,
and if the head pops out and it is forced out, so that the moisture which was in the wound comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it off piece by piece as you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
And if the swelling is on his feet, the pull is slight, and the movement towards the mouth of the wound is light.
And if it is strangled in the belly or foot, you must stretch it with .a. cloth wrapped around your hand; and open the belly or foot, so that the moisture that is in it runs out;
and if the other limbs are paralyzed but the head remains mobile, if he extends his hand into the wound and pulls it towards his mouth; then he places a digit or two in, and pulls outward;
and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by a hot abscess that has formed there, one must not manipulate it, then one must administer moist and fatty things; and apply poultices, and soak in warm water that softens and moistens.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can make it lie evenly, then administer what we have said for a living child;
and if they are not strong enough, then carry them in pieces, and do not leave any of the afterbirth.
And when you have done this, if they are suffering from ulcers that come in the sea;
and bleeding occurs, let it be stopped with a ligature, and other remedies administered.
I also saw a woman whose child had died in her womb, then she gave birth to another on top of it, and the other died as well. After a long time, she got an abscess in her armpit, which swelled up so much that it opened and began to discharge a lot.
I was called to the priest, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
I put on a strong吸引plaster, and an bone came out, and after a few days, some more. I marveled much, because the belly has no bones.
I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
I examined the wound and put my hand inside until the woman felt better. and the woman stayed like this for a long time, and then she suddenly let out a fart.
And I have only included this chapter because when the masters encounter something strange, they know how to provide a remedy.
to bring back the dislocated joint to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the press, to which one applies books; and at two turns at each shoulder from the two lines. Nevertheless, let the horns be more subtle on the constrictor, and let it be made of boxwood or ebony;
and let the mouth of the stick be one digit wide, and the rim of the wood one digit, and from top to bottom a palm and a half; and in the two ends are two adjustments of this same stick, which are firmly joined in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two settings are pushed into the mouth of the wound to open it when you turn the two horns.
A similar form, more subtle and lighter, should be made of boxwood or Ebony, in the likeness of tweezers: and has two branches, two settings, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide;
and when you see to open the wound with all the instrument, then let the woman lie on her back, her feet hanging over the edge of the bed and her legs spread apart; then press the two parts of the broken bone together in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between his thighs; then work your hand on the entire instrument, just as you did with the tongs, according to the amount you see opening the mouth of the wound, until the patient does what he wants.
These instruments are all decorated, and they have many similarities; and when the patient sees them prepared, he is more eager for the operation, and more confident due to their quantity.
Do not despair of the instrument until you have prepared it, for their need is不可避.
When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold in her breath and then make her sneeze with an ointment, and hold their hands over their mouth and nose. and if it comes out on its own, all the better.
If not, then take a pot and make an opening in the lid, and put herbs into it that can open the mouth of the womb, such as camphor, fennel, aniseed, chamomile, and centaury.
All these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over the fire. Then put one end of the cane into the pot and the other into the mouth of the womb,
and the dye until the vapors come inside the wound; then make it sneeze, as we have said. Then cut out the pus gently. And if it remains after this treatment and is not removed, command the patient to soak their left hand in sesame oil or elderberry juice, and then put it back into its natural state.
and feel for the pus; and when they find it, grab it and stretch it little by little straight up so that the wound is not pulled; But it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then drawn out; so it will come out and be released.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, we have described the treatment for sneezing, and the fuming of herbs;
and if it is not one of those that we have described, then beware of using traction;
but it is necessary for the one who is at the mouth of the wound to tie it to the woman's thigh, then cleanse it with tetrafarmacon ointment;
if she urinates and voids it, but still, when she urinates, there is a foul smell in the stomach and head, and it affects the illness.
So therefore appropriate fumigations are necessary: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one smokes out the woman is for the retention of flowers and the afterbirth, if it is that:
And it is made of glass, resembling a cane, and one puts the thin end in the woman's nature, and the wide end above the fire;
and let there be fumigation over the coals, and the dye until it is wasted, and begin another.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born without their foundation pierced; instead, they have a thin, subtle membrane. Therefore, the midwife should pierce this membrane with her finger, and not with a sharp instrument, and she should guard against piercing the baby's skin;
then put on soft linen in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until healed.
And if you doubt it will heal, insert a wooden peg into the hole and leave it for several days, then remove it when the child wants to go in rooms.
And sometimes this filling comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; it should then be stopped suddenly: then it should be treated as we have said with the wooden peg.
from the fistula in the fundament Fistulas which come from under the anus are nodular and grow larger than those that originate from within the anus or in the space between the two parts of the rectum.
If there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodule becomes old, it opens and secretes a white or thin pus.
And sometimes these fistulas are piercing; and they are caused by what comes out of the anus or by flatulence when the patient expels gas, and sometimes one pops out.
And if there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they can reach the joint of the thigh, and up to the scrotum.
And so one knows a fistula is present in the anus, and not at all flowing: and you push your index finger into the anus, and thrust in a small needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when it is not twisted.
And if it is twisted, then you thrust in a flexible probe of thin bronze, or a horse hair, until you feel the probe or hair at your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no passage of gas or wind, as we have said: that it does not pierce through; then quickly treat it.
And when the fistula has pierced through to the bladder or the urinary tract, and the urine flows out, and cannot be stopped with medicine.
If it has pierced through to the hip joint, then the tent will be seen protruding from the site of the fistula. If there is twisting and pain in the groin, then it will not heal with medicine or poultices.
and in these perianal fistulas there is no cure other than work, and vanity of the foolish remedies that are used for them.
In those that are not perianal and not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
and the patient lies on his back; and lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs bent towards his stomach; then inserts an iron tent, or a lead one if there is tortuosity, as far as you know the tent goes.
If the pain is felt around the anus, you must insert your finger there.
then feel if the skin is piercing; and if you feel a piercing between your finger and the anus, then know that it is piercing; if one does not treat it, it cannot be healed.
One can still recover in some cases, but this rarely happens;
and the aid that is given, one burns the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and insert it all the way into the fistula, as far as the anus; and do this two or three times, until you know that the charred flesh, which looks like a feather, has been burned;
and then treat it with moist bandages dipped in butter, until the scorched flesh comes out, and then treat it with ointment that heals and seals.
If he is healed, that is good. If not, it cannot be healed otherwise;
and if the tent extends inside, and does not pass all the way to the bottom which is at the foundation, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula following the covering of the heart; if it cuts through at the beginning of the fistula, and then fills in before the tent, and then cauterizes afterward, as far as it reaches the head of the tent;
and the tent will be delivered, and will fall off; then cut away those false meats which look like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
And if the pus runs out, and cuts between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
Because fire cautery brings together two things: the scorching of flesh and the stemming of blood and drying up of moisture.
And then treat the tent with butter or crushed substance until the place weeps and the flesh comes away.
Then treat the wound with sudatory poultices of hard dried charcoal.
Because when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes all the way to the surface from the depths, and is distant from the body, put your finger or a plug in it, and probe it.
If you feel the membrane, and between them is pus or mucus, or it is about to pierce, there is no need for fear or despair, with the administration of one of the three remedies:
either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can, put in tents and treat it as before;
and do not go too deep, so that you cover the membrane which holds the fistula, and let the discharge come out through it as it wishes; then treat, as we have said;
then treat, as we have said; by chance if you are cured, remove that covering and cleanse it once it has been cut away from the root, either by probing or with another pointed instrument; then probe the wound as deeply as you can;
then work to close the wound and keep the fistula in the part above the root: this will be easier on the patient.
And sometimes there are fistulas according to this manner: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation next to the skin above, take a tent pierced at the tip according to this shape: and insert a twisted thread into it in two parts, and insert the tent all along the thread into the fistula as far as the tip.
If it pierces through at the margin within, then pull out the thread from that hole, so that you can put your finger on the foundation;
and draw the head with thread, and bring the two heads together, and hold them for one or two days;
and he will restrict it sometimes, until the threads cut through the flesh between the two.
then heal the wound until it is closed and healed.
If the fistula does not open, then make it open in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
For it is not appropriate to cover the wound with a bandage right away, before cleaning it, as we have said, until it has healed.
The form of the spinuous spatulum, which they use to create a fistula, is very sharp and pointed at one end. and blunt at the other end, so that it does not cut what it should not, as you can see here:
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: sometimes they are inside the anus, like grains of resin; there are small and large ones, and sometimes blood flows from them. And sometimes they protrude outside the anus, or at the tip of the anus; but those which are protruding have less moisture.
And sometimes they leak a little green water or a little blood, and their color is that of the body.
And the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you should command the patient to strain himself until they come out in stool, and then the hemorrhoids will appear. if you have it, hold it with tweezers or your fingernail, then pluck it at its root.
and if they cannot be held with tweezers due to moisture, they can be caught with a cloth or cotton, or a piece of camel hair; pull them out with your fingers, then pluck them, and powder some warm powders on top that act as a cautery; or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and if the foundations cannot come out, then cleanse the patient with a strong and rough enema to wash away what is in the bowels, so that it can come out clearly;
then the disease is cured, and if the threads come out of the anus, then the cure is easy; and you should grab them with your fingernail or tweezers and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed and no longer fear cutting with iron.
If you need to perform the suture in this way: take a twisted thread and put it through a needle, then bring the two ends of the thread above the needle, and pass the needle from the other side, and bring the two ends of the thread below the needle, let it be as wide as possible; tightly wind the thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one [needle] to draw out the excess blood;
then place on the wound a wet cloth moistened with rose oil or cerate, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then let him defecate, and when he has finished, treat the wound with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
from dryness of the anus or rectum Many times there is a drying up of the bowels within the intestines, due to the constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine fails.
You should cut at the tip of a spatulum or your fingernail, the skin on top, so that it does not become moist. Then you should treat it until it is dry and healed as it should be.
And if it cannot heal, then restart the cutting more forcefully than before, until it heals thoroughly and is scoured. then treat it until it heals.
where it trembles Antors is a small appearance with a hollow center, and goes very deep.
And sometimes the ant causes trembling, and it feels like death, and it comes to all parts of the body, but more in the hands than anywhere else.
And the treatment is that you take a cane of an goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place that cane on the tremor, so that the purple circle tremors all around it; then turn your hand over the whole cane so that you touch all around the tremor and put it deeply in, and draw out the tremor from its roots.
And if you see that you should make it of a cane of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be thin underneath and drawn out on top:
do not pierce it, so that you can hold it with your fingers, and press it, And if you see, cauterize the tremor, as it is before in the chapter of cautery.
of the form of the enema Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or of molten copper or chainmail; and sometimes they are made small and large, depending on those to whom they are administered.
Those which are administered for curing children, and who are feeble and suffering, are made small.
The form of the small and large enema is above broad; or the bellows are bound according to this manner:
and there is a rupture in the abdomen, as you see, and the intestines are pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other;
and one puts medicines in the abdomen in a bladder of animal skin or parchment, and it is pierced all around with tiny openings;
and there is a distance of an inch between each opening, then one threads a strong piece of twisted gut through the openings, and gathers the abdomen together like a goat's belly; and when the medicine is inside, one ties it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then they cleanse; and this is the shape of the circle:
Let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the کلیستر (enema) with oil or egg white, or similar thing, then insert it gently.
Then the minister squeezes his two hands together, so that it is completely empty, then pull out the enema, and let the patient his legs to the side,
and if the medicine wants to come out, let him straining as much as he can; and if he sleeps for a night afterward, it is more helpful.
And if you enema him for a disease of descending stomach, and the medicine is in a hurry to come out, then let him strain until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus or an abscess, then let the enema be as delicate as for a child.
and this is the form of the delicate enema that causes the skin to stretch:
of wounds
We have already discussed in the division the cure of wounds; now we will discuss manual and medicinal cures according to their accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and what makes them.
The objects that cause wounds are stone, and sword and knife, or lance or club or arrow, or similar things;
or according to the places in the body where they are made, such as a wound on the neck, or head, or leg, or stomach, or liver, and similar organs;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care whether it is from a blow of stone or similar things, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you doubt quickly of a hot abscess: then make the bleeding from the cephalic vein itself if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction to the injured part;
and let the patient avoid overindulgence in wine and rich foods.
And if he does not want to bleed, then his food should be reduced, and he should neither drink wine nor eat meat;
and put on the wound, if a hot abscess comes, cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in wine that constricts.
and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh and bleeding, and not moved by the air, powder which I will describe shortly.
and if the burn has been moved by the air, then put on some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like that of a sword, and the lips cannot be brought together by sutures, then bring them together by stitches, as I will say for wounds in the abdomen, from the ribs.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it can be reached, and holds only by a little bit, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also like fowl, and similar things.
And if you find pus in the skin, and it isn't reaching the bone, then cut out all of the pus, and pour it out, then cure it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which is bleeding profusely and cannot be staunched with medicine, then grasp the artery and tie it off with a thread. and if this does not help, cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: you should apply this powder that heals as soon as the scorch has healed.
And the way of making the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind them subtly together. and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it heals well and joins to all its flesh;
and then bind it well, and leave it untied if it is not swollen; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with chalk alone, when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but the wound has been burned.
And if the burn has moved the wound, it should be treated with this powder;
but one must apply some digestive ointments, or porridge made from barley flour with water and honey, until it becomes soft. then treat other wounds until he is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with slender tweezers;
and I will tell you about head fractures afterwards.
of the wound in the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but let it be and not put anything constricting on it, because it harms the nerves and makes them retreat. And do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
But let there be the medication underneath, such as washed chalk in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked washed also in sweet water, and other wet stones according to this method, and moist poultices.
And if the wound is large, then cut it and tie it with bands, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and she has a hernia and it is full of bowels, then pierce it or cut it lower.
and if the artery is cut and bleeding occurs, then ligature it, and cauterize it if necessary;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the neck, and the windpipe is preserved, through which the meat passes, cut the neck above the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then stretch it gently, and leave it for a few days, then treat the wound with cleansing ointments until it heals;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then cut it; and if there are pieces of bone, pull them out as much as you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave until the wound heals. and the dislocation should be made loose and flexible;
and if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder I described. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
of the wound from spear or knife
If it is a spear or knife wound, and the wound is deep, then examine whether from the wound winds escape, as the sick person breathes: know therefore that the wound is deadly;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder in it at first, nor bind it because of the blood that flows from it profusely, and return to the body, and heal the sick person; but I apply an attractive ointment, and bind it .ii. times a day;
and if you do not have ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture,
and let the patient sleep on the wound for 3, or 4, or more days; if there is no Spasmus, nor tremor of the heart, nor shaking chills; and when you see good results, then you know that the wound is healed. Treat it with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, and there is pus, then you know that there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or on the front or back, then treat it as one who is in front;
if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has split into pieces, then treat the wound, and pull out any foreign bodies if they are loose. and if they are not loose, let the wound fester, and so ease the extraction.
and for other wounds in other members, the judgement is as we have said.
from a rupture of the belly
There are large, medium, and small rupture of the belly;
from a great wound sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, through which the entrance of air;
and the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes the smaller wound is worse than the large one;
because it takes longer to sew up the intestines, if they are not placed in gradually increasing heat; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, they return more quickly when pricked.
and because of this, the soft wound heals more quickly, therefore one should reset the intestines to their place before the others [i.e., the other wounds].
And know that hernia of the abdomen occurs in four ways:
the two common hernias occur in the abdominal wall,
and the suturing of other wounds on the body, and .2. other proper sutures are common to other wounds;
And yet they are more appropriate with abdominal suturing, and I will describe each one and clarify:
I say that when the wound is small, and something from the intestines pops out, and the best way to fix it is through one of the following .2 methods:The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. or by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a way: wet a sponge or soft cloth with lukewarm water only, or you cook in water with squint and cypress and spike, and boil the intestines until the swelling is gone;
and sometimes make this restraining wine, and it is used to soothe in order to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling leaving, then moisten the intestines with water or old wine are cooked, for thereby the entrance is constricted by a little thing;
and if it cannot enter, then they make a small wound with an instrument that is used to cut off the hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is bloodletting rather than cutting, that we should not cut unless there is great need;
and this is the instrument to split it with:
cut inside the curve, and not out, and see the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines pop out, And use this instrument: cut it and put it back according to its natural shape in its proper place, if you have the power, for this is useful.
When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part under the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, place the affected part higher than the other;
and thus one must manage what I say about large and small wounds.
For small wounds, use what you have available,
then have ready in your hands .i. minister pith that fills the wound all the way to the hand, and bring together the lips; and this is the common method of sewing.
and this is the common method of sewing. Take a needle or needles, depending on the width of the wound, then leave about an inch of space from the edge of the wound, and insert a needle with a strong thread through it; and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the wound,
then strain it with a double thread around the needle, then gather the two heads of the wound smoothly,
and then leave .I. space, and I stick another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need of needles, until the entire wound is restrained;
and let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, because thin needles pierce all the flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well: therefore they should be medium-sized;
and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin,
that they do not cut and open the wound before the scab forms;
then cut the heads of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and put tents or bandages on the needle heads to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one needle or at most two.
The second stitch is common, and is where you join the two pieces of skin and the two pieces of flesh together with one needle and a strong thread; and when you have pierced these teeth all four together,
and when you have pierced these teeth all four together, then reinsert the needle into the part where you began, in the manner that one sews clothes;
and put space between each stitch equal to the thickness of a thumb nail;
this stitch severs the man,
and I sewed up a wound that a man had on his belly,
that had been stabbed with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm-width wide, and the intestines protruded about .ij (two) palm-widths,
and the wound was in his belly. I returned the intestine to him then when it had been out for twenty-four hours.
and the wound healed within fifteen days, and he was cured.
And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where no such things were to be found, nor any medicine; and applied cotton soaked in honey twice a day, and washed it with honeyed water until it healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle and pierce it through the outer part just up to the inner part;
when it has pierced the heart straight through, then press on the spot where the needle entered or where you see blood coming out.
and pierce another spot in the affected area all the way to the skin;
and the technique for this stitching is the same as how a leatherworker sews hides; and you leave one end of the thread on one side, and use it to sew back and forth until the entire wound is closed.
The second method of stitching, which Galen describes correctly,
is when two pieces are joined together naturally, and they apply one end to the other, in such a way that:
they pierce only one side of the membrane near the edge, and leave the two chins of the syphilis; then turn the needle and pierce it from the outside inwards until you reach the inside, as two chins of the syphilis;
then pierce one and the other from the outside inwards until you reach the inside, in two other chins of the syphilis that are on the other side;
and this is the usual method of sewing and the most common.
Galen says these words, and some testify to it,
one should sew the belly with two needles, with thread in each;
and one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew sores;
and know that when the hernia is in the abdomen, the surgery is more difficult than in other places in the abdomen.
The diagnosis of the wound is the same as for other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound still bleeding, as long as the wound has not healed, then replace the intestine and the rectum; then put the powder on a piece of cloth,
then replace the intestine and the rectum; then put the powder on a piece of cloth, and if the armpit is painful, then put some ointment on it, as long as the wound bleeds; and cut the thread, and tie the sutures, and the ligatures; then treat the wound as with the others, until it is healed;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and if you have no medicine, apply old cotton immediately when it begins to flow. and stir it twice daily until it is healed.
For you do not need any other medicine in various situations when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will cause infection in the principal limbs, if necessary, moisten a light cloth with tempered oil, or rose oil, and place it around the joints, and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or swelling in the bowels, and this happens often, if the black wine enema makes him feel better, and especially if the swelling comes up to the intestine;
and it pierces inside, and you will know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "young" cannot heal when it is raw, and it's because of the thinness of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the thread jumps out of the wound, put it back as soon as possible while the intestine is fresh;
and if it is old and has turned white or black, then you must tie the area that is black so that no bleeding occurs; because there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligature, and hold the two pieces of skin dangling from the wound underneath until it is healed to facilitate healing when the scabs fall off and the wound heals over.
of the road of boiling
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, one can restore it in some ways,
because I saw a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became a fistula, and issued from it were both excrement and wind.
I treated it with cautery according to what I knew, and did not cease to cauterize until it was healed and the wounds closed.
And when I saw it healing, I doubted that the patient had evil in his belly;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. and it did him no harm but he remained in good spirits, eating and drinking;
and some sperimentators say that when there is a small wound in the intestine it should be bound up in such a way: take a large thread, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened the mouth, place it on top of both lips,
then put another tremor afterwards in the same way, until the wound is completely seized;
and watch the wound. If these worms enter the intestines and do not harm the patient,
one can tie off the intestine with a slender thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such a way: take the head of this intestinal thread that is very dry, and then tie to the head of this thread a thread of fine twisted linen, then thread the needle with the thread and sew up the intestines, and reset it in place;
and this way of sewing up the intestines is not useless except according to faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there will be no healing unless with great subtlety.
of fistula wherever it may be You should know that any wound or abscess, when it breaks open, is universally called a 'fistula' and especially when it is deep and narrow.
A fistula is a hard, white knobbly lump that does not hurt, and is as smooth as a bird's feather;
and sometimes it is transparent and clear, and sometimes opaque; sometimes thin, and sometimes thick;
And I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no scar, this happens only for one of the eight reasons:
that is to say, from little blood or body; or because of their wickedness; or because there is hard flesh within it, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; where there is too much bowing; or the skin is porous and the matter of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for the treatment; or because the putrefaction is of a pestilential nature; or because of the nature of the region, digestion is slow, and health is delayed, and it swells naturally; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Now I will tell you about the treatment of a fistula that is done by hand.
Know that a fistula can occur in any part of the body. This is because they come from large veins and arteries, as well as nerves, either in the sinuses, intestines, bladder, or any of the sides, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this way are of grief, there is only labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have described, and you are confident in the treatment, and you want to identify it, take an iron or bronze tent, if the fistula is straight, pierce it;
and if the fistula is crooked, then probe it with a thin, blunt instrument, because the blunt instrument will bend with the crook;
and if the fistula has a narrow opening and you cannot probe it well with instruments, then cleanse it through one of its openings,
for moisture quickly passes from one hole to another and cleanses;
then let it bleed at your will, so that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and if it is deep inside.
and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and where they feel it.
And when you know the true location of the dislocation, whether it is near a joint, nerve, artery or vein, and if she be sore in any of these places, or on either side, or both, or in any of the ways I have told you, then cut it according to what I have said.
or in any of the ways I have told you, then cut it according to what I have said. and remove the foulness and corrupted humors within; and then treat the wound until it is healed,
and if the fistula is deep in the right place, you should cut it as deeply as you can, then I wet tents with medicine water, and place them around the fistula up to its head
then I wet tents with medicine water, and place them around the fistula up to its head until the medicine corrodes away the excess that remains at the bottom;
and then I apply warm ointments to make it healthy, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it off. If a vein or nerve causes you pain in the principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then treat it with the king's touch until all the corruption is removed, then cleanse it with things that draw out pus until it is healed;
and if he is not healed, and then return as before, know that you have not gone to the source.
Uncover it and want to go to the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus without pain, it is good. But if not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; if there is no other way except to let nature take its course;
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with tweezers, if he pulls it with a suitable instrument,
and if there are many bones, he should pull them all out without leaving any behind.
And if the moisture causes contrary effects, and there is no error or fear, examine both the bone and the moisture, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something over the wound to encourage pus. and let it remain until there is pus around the bones,
and then they will have the bones more easily;
and if it's a large bone, like from the leg or thigh, if you only treat the corruption until the darkness is completely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a great deal of corruption, and it reaches to the bone; then he should cut away and scrape away all the way to the corruption, and then treat the wound until it is healed;
I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man on his leg. so that you may take example and aid from it in your work.
He was a young man of about thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to an internal cause that came from within the body,
until the matter came to his leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no pus to drain from it;
but they looked at their madness so much that the abscesses opened, and many matters ran out and became a fistula, and there were many openings all over the body that discharged pus and moisture;
and many of them had treatment for more than two years, but no wise man in medicine could help
as long as I was called there, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and that which runs through the pores of the body; and the body of the youth became red, and his color was yellow.
I pitched a tent at one of these openings, and then I searched all the openings,
and found that they came together from all parts of the leg.
I hurried therefore, and struck one of the openings, so that I uncovered a portion of the bone, and found it rotten and piercing, and the corruption was coming up to the bone inside;
I removed what appeared to be rotten bone, and I believed that there was no other corruption except for that which I took out;
and began to heal the wound with strong medicines over a long time, but it would not heal;
and then began again, and uncovered the bone as before,
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then removed the bone, and worked to sew up the area;
but I could not as much as I copied around a palm of the bone, and the wound was left open for all its length; then I treated it with medicine; and it healed and closed quickly,
and it is not necessary to repeat the procedure except for the weakness of the patient who cannot endure, and out of fear of his death which I had for him. For despite the bloody evacuation, he was completely healed,
For despite the bloody evacuation, he was completely healed, and there grew in place of the bone a hard lump, and he was of good disposition and had no harm or ill effect at all, neither when walking nor standing.
and are at the head, so that you draw out the corrupted flesh from below, and expose the flesh above the area where you see it bleeding, so that the bleeding does not clot the flesh; and place a hot iron or a tablet under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and one must bleed as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and bleed again.
And if the bone is broken, and does not open, and the breakage is in the middle or in a part, and uncovers all the flesh; then put a burning brand underneath,
and then sew from one side of the breakage to the other, with the sewing being done from the long part of the breakage, as we have said;
and if the breakage is in the joint, then cut the joint, and sew the bone where it contains to the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to cut it off;
and if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, this is a very serious matter, but nonetheless you must investigate the corrosion, how it appeared to you; and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful not to damage the vein or nerve;
and you should know that there are many types of chisels for cutting these bones, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the joints. their thickness and their thinness, their size and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason one should prepare a tool for each type of work.
and you should know that the work will show you which tool you need according to your knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; then prepare the instrument you need according to what is appropriate.
by fire The shoulders may dislocate due to internal causes or external causes;
and when you have treated this corrosion with various remedies but they are ineffective, then cover the limb up to the site of the corrosion, so that the patient escapes through the door of death or through the greater wickedness, due to the fault of the limb;
so that the patient escapes through the door of death or through the greater wickedness, due to the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black and appears burned by fire, and after darkness comes, then the corrosion of the limbs goes from limb to limb, and affects the whole body; so you must hurry to cover it up,
and if it is caused by the sting of venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions, vipers, and similar creatures,
then cover it up from the head to the jaw, and do not give it any space to reach the hand.
And if it comes to the hand, then the cupping should be on the joint so that the cauterization doesn't come up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then cupping should be at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that's it for death, and there is no need to worry about the quantities of its strength;
and so it is when cauterization comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then cupping should be after the other joint;
and if it affects the foot, cut off the whole foot; and if it climbs up the leg, cut off at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to kill the patient with a lash;
and the way of binding the member, whether above or below, is that you bind it above and below, and one attendant holds one of the lines down below, and another attendant holds the other line above, and you loosen the skin that is between the two lines to a width of one span, so that the bone is exposed;
then the thread or silk, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the thread does not touch the healthy area, and bring about another injury and abscess.
And if bleeding occurs when you operate, then cauterize the area thoroughly. Or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the dislocated member with a suitable ligature, and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what happened to a man in a dream:
there happened to him a darkness which looked like a burn from fire,
and this erosion first came upon his toe on the foot, so that it spread over the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered the foot, and was healed;
and after a long time, the corrosion returned to his finger on the hand, and he came to me,
and I placed repulsive things on him after cleansing his body, but he could not stop the corrosions;
and he wanted me to cup his hand, but I did not want to, for I had no hope of repelling the matter; And I doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die, because the man's strength was weak; and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land, and he covered his hand with a glove, and was healed;
and I have not told this story except to encourage others to do the same if they need to.
Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it causes great swelling; and then burst, and the flesh stays out, like vessels; the skin on top is as thin as a loose napkin and they do not grow to the bone or nerve, and such an illness is called 'healthy'.
but if it is so long that it comes all the way to the bone, then it is called a 'fistula'.;
and cook it so that you cover the entire skin, especially when it is thin, just like a cloth; and do not worry about its spoilage.
And if you are worried that the skin will spoil, and the spoilage is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then cook it in this way:
examine if the breasts are large, and if the bowels within them have a putrid odor, then cleanse him with an Egyptian medicine made thus: take asafoetida, oil, and litharge, in equal parts, and mix them together and cook them in a vessel over fire, until the medicine turns red and as thick as honey;
and then take some of this according to your need, and they make it with water and honey, and they use it in an enema for the breast, and constrict the opening; and leave the medicine in for two hours, then extract it by squeezing;
do this as many times as needed, until the breasts are relieved and the pustules are gone;
and sometimes they are blisterized with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you must grind ash wood of the vine, and pour water over it,
then let it run, and blister as much as you know that the wound is well cleansed;
and if the patient cannot endure it, or the Egyptian medicine, or the water of ashes, if he is enema with water and honey or with a little powdered litharge; or you can enema him with honey and sweetened wine, so that the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the body perspire;
and when you have done this, and you are sure that the intestines are well cleansed, if he enemas with what makes him defecate,
and you should press out a suppository, and make it with rose oil and wine; or you can enema with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in the chapter on ointments;
and if the opening of the anus is small, and the cannula of the enema cannot enter, if you enlarge it with a knife a little, and put in some Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then cut it and leave it only as wide as the syringe can enter,
and if the orifice that urinates is above, then cut it or lower where it is. For when the bow is fully drawn, do not allow the string to slip. and if you cannot grasp the breast underneath as you wish, arrange it in such a way that the bow goes to the lowest place it can reach,
and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish to apply it in such a way that the bowstring runs lightly down, and let nothing of the bowstring remain; and take consolidating medicines to put on the breast,
and they are on a linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then press hard on the opening of the breast .i. poke a little larger than the first, then apply grease on a small cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it over the breast opening to ease the bowstring, and do not remove the large bandage until after many days once.
and the one who is on the breast opening, remove often to remove the bowstring, and know what flows from the bowels, whether it is venom or pus or sufficient, or digested, or undigested;
take note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been applied in this way and you see the nature that rises from the opening of the breast, if you know that the breasts have dried up and are approaching health;
and then loosen it in the morning, or at noon, and when you loosen the wound, change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast milk flows abundant and unchanged after many days, know that the breast is not drying up. And if subtle venoms spread over a long time, do not despair of healing,
for the saints approach. For there are men who have putrefied flesh in their wounds, and those that do the contrary;
and if digested food rises from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach is not averted;
and if the stomach is slow to digest, and is distant, then apply dry medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, if like an ointment it is diaphanous, for it contains a great part of vitriol, and that is the last medicine;
Take diaphanous ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and dilute old wine to the same consistency.
Then cook it and use it. And in the same way you prepare honey. When diaphanous ointment is not available,
or take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them into powder, and sprinkle it over the honey while it is on the fire; and then they apply a poultice, and hold it over the chest, and sometimes they administer a long aromatic stick, and celestial lily roots, which are like wheat flour and incense;
and celestial lily roots, which are like wheat flour and incense; and in the use of simple or composite remedies: grind them into a powder, and place it over the honey that I have described, and use it; And if the wound is deep, and is not healed by this treatment,
And if the wound is deep, and is not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is profound, and makes an impression on the bone, or on the hard members, or on the soft tissues; if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the nail
Panarice is an abscess that arises underneath the fingernail of the hand, or from the foot, or perhaps it sprouts elsewhere;
and when it is infected and left untreated, an abscess forms, and they run and ooze pus until they reach the root of the nail, and sometimes they even eat away at the entire nail;
and the erosion reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the toe becomes swollen, and its color turns yellow.
When you treat them as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, you must cut away all the surplus skin around the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward. Cautery is very helpful if the bone and nail are healthy;
and if the nail presses against the flesh, and begins to poke through, and bleeds. then you should put wax under the nail so that it does not poke through the flesh, and press down on it, and gently and lightly cut the flesh, and put burning and corrosive medicine on the remaining flesh to remove all of it;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, dig it out and remove it, because as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal.
and if you see the tooth decay, dig it out to the gum, as previously described. then treat the ulcers until they are healed.
and if it is wild, and biting, and it feels great pain, then you must treat it first; then cut the nail of the big toe diagonally from above,
and be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
And if it happens, put something on it to soothe it.
You should treat the warts that grow on some men's hands by chance, which are all fleshy, and sometimes it has hair, and sometimes nails,
and some grow from the root of the joint, where the growth is in some of our fingers. He who is born with a hernia in his navel does not die, and he who is born at the junction of the navel, by chance dies;
the size of him who is fleshy is slight, in such a way: cut it at its root with a wide spatulum.
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; so you must keep it covered.
For one who is born where the anus should be, you must first cut around the flesh circularly up to the bone, then cut the bone to a convenient depth, then cure it until it is healthy.
Joints that come together come by birth, or by wound sewing, or by burns, or by similar things.
You must cut this suture so that it heals according to its natural shape. Then place between two tent-like or folded moistened cloths in rose oil so that they do not stick together. Or you can place between two pieces of thin plywood, until the seam is sealed as it should be.
If sealing occurs on either palm with the fingers, cut that stitch as needed.
Of the wicked
Vessels are large enveloped vessels filled with melancholy excesses that come from various parts of the body;
And more occurs in legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Therefore, you should administer an emetic to him once or twice, and then heal him with basil.
The treatment with fire is according to two methods: one is to cut it and draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you open a vein and draw it all out.
The incision is made in this way: first, heat the leg with very hot water until the large veins are made thin, then hold the leg of the patient from above the thigh to the part below the knee; then open the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide cut,
then squeeze and draw out the black blood into your hand, from one side to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient can tolerate;
and then bandage it, and instruct him to eat foods that cause black bile;
and restart the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, which benefits the patient.
The treatment of it is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs, then put him into a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red, and dilate the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, heat it with fire, and then press the vein from the top of the knee to the bottom of the ankle, or in the part below the ankle;
then open the skin at the ankle, and scorch the vein on each side, until it appears when one feels it;
and it appears red and black, and when it enters the skin, it looks like a white cord;
then it goes under the skin, until it is raised from the skin, and then it can be cut lightly at the edge,
then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it with a forceps, as you did before, and cut it with another cut, as you did before;
then cut another vein, or several if you need to, then release it, and cut into the big toe.
then draw and release it until the second vein; then pull it out from vein to vein, until it all comes out, then cut it.
And if you cannot draw and lift it, then thread an needle with a strong double thread, and tie it and draw it out, and insert it under the skin, turning your hand from side to side, until it all comes out; and make sure it does not break, for if it breaks, one cannot milk or lift it, and harm comes to the patient.
and when you have finished milking, place wet wool soaked in wine and rose oil over the wound; and treat it until it heals.
And if the head is bent, twisted, and wrapped together, not straight as we have said, you must split it crookedly but do not break it; and milk it as we have previously said.
you must split it crookedly but do not break it; and milk it as we have previously said. The shape of the knife used to cut the vein is curved, and it does not cut unless it touches the vein.
It has a thick curve, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein; but it should be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is found in the legs, in hot places where no herbs or trees grow, and in land where there is no moisture;
and by chance may grow elsewhere than on the legs, and this happens from the pustules that come under the skin,
like snakes and worms, crawling between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the onset of this illness are that there is a great inflammation in the leg, then the color changes, and the wound breaks out, just as with the root of a plant.
When the head is exposed, you must wrap it around with a piece of linen one and a half yards long, and tie it.
and let the linen hang down to the leg, and every time he falls out of bed, wrap him around with the linen and tie it again. If it is too long, cut off a part of it, wrap the remainder around him, and do not cover his head at all while he is coming out. Because if you cover it, it will enter the body and cause abscesses and pus and illness.
for this reason it is necessary to treat it little by little until the end, and for there to be nothing left in the body.
and sometimes this vein is treated with a length of five or ten palms. and once a man came to me whose vein was twenty palms long; and when you open it, it makes one hole or aperture, and goes all the way through,
so that all the matter inside comes out; and after emptying it, apply healing medications for several days, then treat it like an abscess.
And sometimes this vein is not raining, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and it comes out a lot from the hole, and so it rains; therefore cure it as we have said before.
Of worms that grow between skin and flesh:
This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land, because it often happens to oxen:
and there is a small worm that emerges between skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body, both ascending and descending. It travels from one part of the body to another, until it reaches the skin where it departs and jumps out.
It is caused by an excess of humor, like worms and serpents and earthworms and roundworms in the belly;
And one fears its wickedness, for when it moves through the body and ascends to the head, and reaches the eye, by chance return, and destroy the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and milked, one cannot help but feel compassion when looking at it:
so you must tie the udder above and below with a strong string tightly,
then squeeze it from above and milk it firmly, and if the milk is in abundance within the udder, and you do not milk it out, if he is cauterized with fire above, until it dies
and the greater harm that it does, so it runs in the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye, then squeeze under his eyebrow firmly, then pull upwards and out.
It is necessary to use the patient's body for cleansing medicines to dissolve malignant humours,
and if the wound is caused by rotten meat.
Of pain which comes from flatulence This disease is called "vomiting" in our language, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and then moves from one member to another; and I saw what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm;
and soon after, I saw it rise up like a worm to the shoulder, quicker than anything else, as fast as quicksilver when it flows from one place to another;
the pain left that spot and settled in the shoulder,
and then a little later it ran throughout the body until it reached the other arm;
then she told me that it was turning around in her body, just as I saw.
I marveled much at how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease progress in this way before. Nevertheless, I had seen many who experienced pain moving from one place to another, but I have not wanted to do so, as I saw it in a woman.
and I thought that it was because women had dry skin and uncovered veins; and due to this, the wind is forced out;
and it does not appear in this way to those who are healthy, and who have moist skin and covered veins.
And when you see to cure this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, examine it above and below carefully, and then press gently until that windiness is forced out of its place; and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it with your own eyes,
if the cure of those who cast out windiness, such as foul-smelling pills, and pilules of serapin, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse according to their appearance and according to the part of the body where they strike.
The diversity of their points is that there are some which have large points, and small, and hooked, and smooth; and of those which have .ij. angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those in which there are pieces; and that which falls into a limb falls in two ways: it falls into a principal limb,
such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs. When it therefore falls into any of these members, and the signs of death which I will tell you about appear to you: You must be cautious about extracting this arrow, for death often follows in various ways. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces and breaks through the bone, and the membrane that covers the brain, is when there is heat and blood in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and disturbance of the mind, and vomiting of phlegm; and perhaps it comes out of the nose, or ears; and perhaps he loses speech and voice; and white pus-like moisture oozes from the wound, and it also seeps out like blood;
and if these signs appear, cease the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not stuck inside.
The signs of a wound when it is on the heart are that it is close to the left breast, and feels as though it were pierced into a hard object, and not empty; and perhaps the seven will also become mute like the pulses, and turn black blood, and come coldness and cold sweat, and syncope: then know without doubt that death will follow.
And the sign of the arrow that never leaves the lung is that there are no blisters around the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes colour, and gasps for breath and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow hits in the covering of the foot, then it is between the small ribs; and there is great swelling and pain, and gasping; and all the limbs move from the shoulders.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, by chance some indigestible food may jump out of the wound.
And if the arrow hits the belly and nothing comes out through the intestines but feces, then there is no hope for a cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine spurts out and the patient dies, the wound is deadly.
The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, elbow, spine of the back, hip, thigh, and leg, and similar members, are safe according to several arrangements. When an arrow is in a nerve or artery and is not poisonous, as I will tell you about what happened to me, so that you can do the same.
It happened to a man that an arrow hit him in the armpit at the root of his elbow: I probed it, and dislodged it from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any numbness.
And I removed an arrow that hit him in the fatty tissue of his eye below the eyelid: and the arrow was removed, and it could not reach except for the tip towards the shaft, and it was a great arrow of a Turkish bow, at all .I. light-colored ears; the game was healthy, and no bad accident came to him.
And he drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic at the ears:
I slit the foreskin, and I cut it off so that I could draw it out, and the Christian was healed.
And I drew an arrow out of a man who had it lodged in his head or belly, and I thought he was going to die.
and then after thirty days had passed, his condition did not improve; I cut into the arrow, and dislodged it, and pulled it out, and he had no bad reaction.
And if you see a man whom an arrow has hit in the back, and the wound is closed over;
and keep the arrow inside him, and do not change his natural disposition; and find no harm in any of his natural works.
And see another man to whom an arrow fell on his face and the wound was sewn up;
and remained like that without feeling much pain; and many other similar things.
And drew an arrow at a certain man of the prince's house, the king, whom he had great hatred for in his heart, and was somewhat inclined to the right side; and the arrow was completely relaxed;
I was called to the cure after three days had passed since it happened. I found the wound very tight.
I examined it with a very thin needle, and didn't feel anything; and he felt piercing and pain beneath his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
I placed a soothing and digestive poultice on the area, so that the swelling would go down; and I saw the location of the arrow.
and I saw the location of the arrow. I applied the ointment many times, and the wound healed quickly, and the patient recovered after a long time.
as long as he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me so. I applied corrosive medicine to the wound many times until it healed.
and I probed the wound and felt the tip of the arrow which was lodged in the wound; then I adjusted the opening of the wound with this astringent medicine until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
and it healed well within four months,
and then the wound opened up so that I could force it open with tweezers, and it would not close again;
so I did not cease to use subtle and cunning methods with tools until one day I took the tweezers that were well made, According to what its appearance will be at the end of this chapter, as I have traced it, and restored the wound.
And the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I therefore restored it, and the wound was sewed up and the patient completely healed.
Now I have told you about the extraction of some arrows, so that you place your treatment on what I do not say, because books cannot cover everything;
but the wise masters compare much to a small amount of things, and about what is present and lacking to them, find new works and new tools, in the descending of strange things that come into this art.
I say that arrows grow in the members where they are stuck according to .ij. manners: or through the opening they enter, or elsewhere;
and those that exit through the same place they entered are arrows penetrating deep into the flesh, and sometimes now they exit.
And if it does not exit immediately, leave it until the flesh around it becomes rotten and decomposed;
and if it is lodged in the bone and cannot exit, leave it for several days, moving it slightly each day;
and then it pops out; and if it does not pop out, then pierce around with a thin stick until the opening is enlarged, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged deeply in the body and cannot be seen, then treat it throughout the body; and if you feel it, then treat it with an appropriate instrument;
and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein in the way, then cut as deeply into the wound as necessary; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that are holding it in place,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that are holding it in place, take out the arrow that is stuck in two parts at the joint that you can, then break or bend the feathers of the arrow, so that you can pull it out;
then break or bend the feathers of the arrow, so that you can pull it out; and carefully so that you do not break the arrow, that you would pull it out more painfully.
And if you cannot in one go, then leave it until the area around it is swollen, and then pull it out, because the extraction will be easier. And if the bleeding makes you feel contrary, then bring about what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of cutting into the nerve and of opening a vein, and put on a bandage as you can best draw out the arrow without danger,
either quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow hit him, for that is the greatest help there is; and if you cannot, then put him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another place, or where something appears from it, or the skin is swollen in such a place that one sees or feels it apparently:
Cut above therefore, as far as the tweezers can reach, and then pull it out: if it is not now extracted.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand rapidly, as far as it goes into the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for now, and then try again to extract it until it comes out;
and if there is an arrow in it, then fill the whole shaft with it;
and if the shaft breaks, and you see a need for treatment, then treat it with an instrument that is made smooth, so that the point of the arrow goes into the groove of the instrument; and then pull it out,
and if the arrow is grooved, then insert an instrument with a pointed end to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow touches the skin, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can. then cure the wound as it should be.
And if the arrow pierces the foot or the belly or the bladder or the ribcage, and it is close to the skin, and you can cut above it;
and be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, and then pull it out, and then sew up the wound if necessary; and treat until it is healed.
The shape of the tongs used to treat arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and you should see the shape here:
There are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
of the common veins of the body Of the veins from which one bleeds are 31, from which there are 16 in the head,
this is to say: .ij. bones which are after the ears, which are called the two "ear bones"; and the 2 arteries that are in the 2 temples, apparent; and 2 veins that are in the 2 eyes, which are called "veins"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is in the head of the nose; and the two windpipes which are in the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips at the mouth, and they are the veins called "augerich." and 2 veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are 5 in each arm:
one is cephalic, and is from the left side; and the common people call it a "wound to the head." and the middle one is called a  "fastening," and is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and they call it a   "wound to the heart"; and the basilic is from the right side, and they call it a    "wound to the belly," and it is above the navel, and is that which one heals, which becomes manifestly apparent above the scrotum.
And the saving vein is that between the little finger and ring finger, and it has .ii. branches;
and in the leg and foot there are .iii. veins: one is under the curve of the scrotum on the left side, and the second superficial vein which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein which is called 'nesse', which is in the ankle of the other side;
and under them are three veins in the other leg.
The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old cataracts and with emigration; and the qualities of the bleeder, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the bleeder, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then press the patient's neck with one hand, as long as the two veins appear behind the ears, coming from the head: take them to your finger and where you feel the pulse under your finger, press in;
then take the lance and insert it below the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein upwards, and cut through both skin and vein well two fingers across, and let the blood flow until you see it;
then pull and bind it until it is healed
and I have already described the incision and cautery in the first book.
The bleeding of the two arteries in the temples, it is worth to know about ancient bleeding, and sodomites, and habitual ophthalmia, and the body of tears as well;
and the qualities of the surgeon are as I have said: and it is that the patient stretches his neck, so that the two veins appear clearly; and feels pain under his jaw, and then passes out;
then press the vein above on the index finger of your left hand, and insert the lance below, and open the vein at the top, and the vein, as you have done in .ij. other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then untie the bandage, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton;
and then ligature it tightly, and let it be until it is healed; and we have spoken of their bandaging and their extraction in the beginning of the book.
The bleeding of the frontal vein is just as effective as the bleeding of the cephalic vein for diseases of the face that are long-standing, and for migraine, and redness;
and the qualities are such that the patient turns his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called a "blades", which has this form:
And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount you see; then loosen the neck of the patient, and tie the vein until it is healed, and sometimes the wound is treated with a broad flame.
Nevertheless, the flames should not be too sharp; and the patient must not move about, for the bone is near, and by chance the flames might break when they are thin.
The bleeding from the two veins that are in the two temples is useful for diseases of the eyes, and for the tinea, and for redness, and for eye infections, and for facial diseases;
and the nature of their bleeding is such that the patient turns his neck by twisting some ligament, as before;
then the bleeding follows, and it should be bleeding from the deep vein, with a long and wide flame, because there is no flesh.
And if the flames are subtle, they may break; then let blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind it with a thread, and tie it well.
The bleeding of the vein in the nose is good for nose bleeds and for disorders and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that come to the face, and especially when they are chronic;
and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient tilts their head, then pinches their nose on their left hand, take the subtle flame, and thrust it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein will not open properly, and the blood will begin to flow now;
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligature it for one night, for it is soon restored;
The healing of the two windpipes helps with the constriction of the throat, and with hoarseness, and with many illnesses, and with impetigo, and with ulcers, and with herpes, and with stomachaches.
And the quality of this healing is that the patient stretches his neck back, as we have said. And the master stands above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair,
then heal the vein of the neck, then draw blood tempered, or as much as is needed;
then do the same to the other vein, then untie the ligature, and gently compress the veins. so that the patient is not strangled; and leave it until the morning when the wound is healed.
Of bleeding from the lips: Bleeding from the veins of the lips helps with sores in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and pain in the teeth and gums.Si li sainie des leivres soit par tuit li corps, si convient qu’on l’estreigne a la fin; car il adont a meins et a membrains.
And the qualities of healing are to make the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn your lip, and look at two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and you can recognize them because they are black, and because around them there are small black veins: therefore grasp both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt,
therefore grasp both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, take the thickest of each part, and do the same with the veins above and below, for it is the same method.
Of bleeding under the tongue: Bleeding from the veins under the tongue helps after bleeding from the head, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the liver, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient holds his hands before the sun, and lifts his tongue, and looks underneath each cheek for a black vein;
Clean both of them thoroughly, and do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
Veins of the neck from which one usually bleeds are healed in two ways:
either by pricking them with a very thin needle, or with an olive-shaped sharp instrument, and it is called «anesil»; and they are wide and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the flame is very famous, and it is broad as you can see.
And it is necessary to open veins that are bald, smooth, full of blood, and that contain a lot of blood and are troubled; and this is the shape of the olive-shaped flame:
and it is more pointed and subtle, and it is used for bleeding the subtle veins where there is subtle yellow blood.
The vein of St. Basil, which is one of those veins, helps diseases that are under the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen;
and the surgeon must bleed copiously, and be wary of the artery underneath. And if he pierces the artery, and there is pulsating blood, then it must be staunched as I have said. and he should not grip the flame, but cut it off as one would a branch.
And if the basilic does not open clearly, then you must extract it and replace it with another. or you can insert a vein in his arm: it will open clearly; and apply the cautery to the flame, as we have said.
And if you want to find the location for bleeding, then you must stretch out the arm and touch the spot until you feel the pulse; then sign the spot with a cross, and then tie the arm, and cover the vein with flame-soothing moss;
and be careful not to cut into the artery when you see the spot pulsating, for that is an artery: avoid it.
And if you see it bulge upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is arterial blood: hasten then, and place your finger over it firmly, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, for this often happens;
bind the arm and leave it thus, and do not move it until he is healed; and keep him from fear and do not move it until he is healed.
And if the blood is not staunched and he bleeds out and there are no medicines available, cut into the artery to stop the flow of blood.
And take a piece of fir wood and split it in half, and take one half and bind it tightly over the wound until the next day.
If the blood is staunched, that is good; if not, then use a tourniquet as we have described, made from powders that stop bleeding.
and the bandages are not tied in various positions because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
The vein's bleeding is helped by its position above the head and below the body, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and the bleeder must be careful not to pierce too deeply and find the nerve, and it swells and the saint is weakened, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve opens up in many places, and if it doesn't open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must heal it with instruments gently; and cut the nerve to your ability.
And if it has a vein between the two nerves, they will make an incision there.
The healing of the cephalic nerve helps, it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it must be bled with a flame of olive oil or myrtle, for that is the safest of all veins, for it has no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Nevertheless, one must seek out the lightest vein, and not worry if there is an error the first time, and then try again. And sometimes it inflames the veins in some men, when one makes a mistake the first time, but it does not matter. The quality of the bleeding depends on your opinion.
The first thing you must know about bleeding is that it is not performed solely for the purpose of healing, but also to maintain health.
and to prevent diseases from occurring; and bleeding is performed in one of the three veins: namely, the cephalic, the fast, and the basilic; and bleeding should be performed at the beginning of Spring, Autumn, and Winter after eating, when the signs of repletion are apparent;
and one must bleed on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
The bleeding which is administered for diseases has no specific time, but whenever there is a need during the day or night, at any time and in all seasons.
And one must not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor women carrying a child less than four months or more than seven months. Nor should the elderly over 60 years old be bled.
And when someone wishes to cleanse themselves, in whatever way, then they must gently clear the intestines with an enema. if he has retained feces, so that the veins do not attract harmful, excess waste from the intestines to the principal members;
do not cleanse those who are bloated with meat, nor the drunkard, as long as he is so, nor the diabetic;
and if one wants to cleanse after a colic attack, and vomiting, and abdominal discharge, and frequent sexual intercourse, and from exertion, from staying up all night, and fasting, and anything else that weakens the body, whether due to an injury or illness;
then subtly expel the humours, if the body is fat, through meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
then enter into a bath, if nothing else can cure him, to purify the blood,
and heal the vein around the navel, as we have said;
and abstain that day from labour, and pain, and lust, and similar things;
and be tied and joined, and the one who is being healed should be higher than the one doing the healing, and he rubs his arm two or three times.
then loosen the bandage above the wound, for when it is too tight or too loose, it cannot heal;
and then rub the area with your hands, until the veins swell and you can feel them;
then wet the bandage with a little old oil, then put his finger from his left hand on the wound under the spot where he wants to heal, that the vein does not burst and bleed when cut. For there are veins that flow like cords into the body, and some that are filled with air. So if one places it over the flame, it draws in flame and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with some people.
And if the vein opens, the wound is too narrow, so the surgeon must be skilled in these matters.
And if the vein is working for the first time, it is good; if not, try again a little lower down or higher up, if the area is not swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient is afraid, leave it for a day or two, and do not bind the arm. Perhaps hot abscesses will form; then enter the bath, and then start bleeding again if she wishes;
and if the wound is small, cut the vein carefully and subtly there, and you doubt that it will not bleed as much as you want, then cut into the vein itself directly with the flame;
and work gently, so as not to inflame the wound; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the area inflamed, do not restart the bleeding, but apply a little lamb's wool soaked in oil, because it lightens the body of blood and is beneficial to this area the lamb's wool that is soaked in oil;
and thus administer the lamb's wool with oil in every bleeding that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and this same thing is done with triacle and bowels, when one puts it on the area; so subtle is the skin and splits when it is too thick.
And if it comes to a large abscess, which happens many times, especially when it is not cleaned out except for that one time or when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry and place on the site a sponge soaked in water and a little warm salt water, and hold it for an hour;
and you must do this after the blood flow from the vein, and if it remains in place for several days with some blackness or greenness, it will not harm him; and if you see that you put on the site something of aloe or myrrh made into a poultice, a plaster, or similar.
And often an abscess and appearance at the opening of the basilic vein: put your hand over it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is bad. So be sure not to put anything on it from what we have said, for it might cut into an artery; but make a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And treat each wound according to its quantity and the nature of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it is red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it is thinned out; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And one must have broad wounds made on him who is full and swollen, and needs bloodletting, so that the veins may be made wider.
and for him who is weak, do the contrary, and one must let blood little by little, often, and one should let blood by cutting across, not piercing.
and this way of bleeding is safe from blood loss and from damaging nerves, and is better than bleeding from the long or the wide vein.
And for one whose body needs bleeding, one must give wet bread in pomegranate juice; if he is burning hot, draw out blood three or four times.
And if he is of a cold complexion, then let him eat before bleeding moist bread dipped in syrupy water, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and aniseed, and sweet-smelling syrup.
And if he faints after losing a lot of blood, then let him inhale the scent of warm meat broth and sweet-smelling syrup.
and use the other remedies we have mentioned in the chapter on fainting, for opening a vein.
And if he wants to open his arm and bleed again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by significant bleeding, that he bleeds a little at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
And who wants to open their arm after the first bleeding, and they have a strong body, then heal for .7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the new hour.
And who wants to bleed elsewhere, then they should bleed on the second day or the third.
Because there is a lot of blood inside the body that has already heated up and caused fever; so one must draw a large quantity and widen the hole until it drips onto the palm. Then you check all the conditions of bleeding, and put your hand on their pulse when they are bleeding so that death does not come through the palm, and this happens many times when the surgeon is negligent;
and you should not press directly on a vein when you see the arm dislocating and blood coming out a second time, and the wound is closed; nor if it is crooked, that he extends his arm suddenly, for that would be harmful;
but let him keep it until it heals the second time; or you may apply the point of the flame to the edge of the wound, until the congealed blood at the opening of the vein melts away, and put on .i. little of salt mixed with water, and press it gently.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it at all, until the abscess has subsided.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, then bleed in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.Et se li sang est rouge, si est bon signe; et s’il est sanz couleur, si est mal signe.
The veins in the arm are bled in the place of the vein in the head because it is composite.Et li voinne emmi le bras et le chief sont sainie en leu de la veine emmi la face.
And the manner of healing is for the patient to place his hand in hot water until the swelling turns red.
then he should be allowed to move freely, so that the vein appears well, then heal it now through the thickness, not through the width or length.
and the opening should be wide, and it should be healed close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
and if it is in the summer, do not put the hand back into hot water, because in summer it is put in more than in winter.
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves in it.
The healing of the right little finger is beneficial for all diseases of the liver, and this is how you do it:
Hold the hand and pour in warm water until the vein swells, as one observes. And if it heals crookedly, and you cut it from top to bottom, it will not hurt anything.
and do not go too deep, for the nerves are beneath all stripped of flesh,
then put the hand in hot water if the blood is congealed in the wound and cannot flow out.
And when you have treated the blood as necessary, then place oil and silk on the vein to heal quickly, and do this for each vein.
The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the right side, and do everything as I have told you for the right side.
The remedy of soda is good for all diseases that are underneath the body, such as diseases of the uterus, and retention of urine, and diseases of the kidneys, and ancient diseases of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
And its quality is such that the patient puts it in hot water, and rubs it on the wound until it disappears, and if the wound is at the ankle, and all over the foot there are many veins;
then treat it with a larger poultice, or at the ankle, which is better.
And if you treat it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath, and treat it across as well by cupping; and let the flames be anaesthetized.
And if the poison cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
And if the poultice fails the first time, then apply it a second time higher up, because the site is salty. do not doubt a nerve, as we have said, and likewise do with the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its remedy is worth the pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
And the qualities of its remedy are that the patient should bathe and then twist the ankle four times in alternating directions.
Otherwise, the vein will not open; and if it does open, then remedy it in all ways that you can, and by crossing over; and it is best to cut it off, for the leg is saved, and she is very relaxed by many men.
and it is best to cut it off, for the leg is saved, and she is very relaxed by many men. And if you do not believe this, cut a vein in the leg that opens towards the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves.
Let the blood flow as you wish, then untie the ligature and put on cotton and press it; now she is healed.
Of cupping wounds:
Cupping glasses are made from horns, or copper, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
And this cupping without striking is also done in two ways: either it is done with all heat, or without heat.
and .2 other on each side of the neck; and the cupping glass under the chin; and the cupping glasses on the shoulders; and the cupping glasses on the hips; and the cupping glasses in between the .2 arms; and the cupping glasses on the .2 legs; and the cupping glasses on the ankles; and the ventilation does not draw blood, unless from small veins that are scattered throughout the body,
and for this reason one weakens it not at all, as is done with bleeding of the veins; and it should not be administered in any disease that comes from fullness until the whole body is emptied.
And if, because of the necessity of diseases, one must bleed, or due to habit, then we should do it every hour at the beginning and end of the month, in the middle and at any time.
For there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
and if to such people there is distension and redness on their face, and on their head, and neck, and darkness of the eyes;
and some who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and a swollen tongue, and bleed; and if there are among them those who faint, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is during the moon month, we command them to fast after the third hour of the day.
The bleeding of the nose helps in treating headaches ... that reaches the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this ventilation is in the place of the bleeding of the head,
and it should not be used by those of a cold complexion or who have catarrh, as it does them great harm;
and for this reason the elderly should not use it, nor those with cool-headed diseases.
And those who often heal from it become oblate, and because of this, the cupping glass should be placed a little lower to guard against oblateness.
The application of cupping glasses on the neck is in the region of the head and the basilic vein, and because of this, it is useful for relieving pain in the feet. and for splitting of the gullet, and for toothache, and for bloating;
and one must be careful with it, because if it is held too tightly, it can cause oblateness or stomach and heart problems.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Wind in the stomach causes pain in the head, and eye problems and migraine, and strangulation, and toothache.
It occurs at the point of pain in the basilic vein; and you must instruct the surgeon to press his hand against it while he works so as not to cut the artery and cause a flow of blood.
Wind beneath the chin causes disease in the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar diseases which affect the mouth; it occurs at the point where the two lips meet.
Wind at the shoulders causes a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Ventilation of the armpits is as effective as three incisions in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply, because the area is naked of flesh and underneath are nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass placed on the back is effective for hemorrhoids and diseases underneath; and it should be large and made of brass, so that it can effectively draw out fluids; and in some cases, if it is too small, it may break and cause large wounds.
The leg cupping-glasses heal openly, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains in the joints, and of the muscles, and of the bladder, and they realign the bones; and they are placed on the two thighs, and on the two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after a long time, and bring on fainting in various conditions.
The way to apply the cupping-glass is that you first place it empty, and suck gently, and place it quickly, and move evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see the area red and swollen, and the redness of blood appears; then stop, and replace the cupping-glasses, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have such thin skin and small pores: so one should only strike once, and make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to sottily open the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we wish to draw blood a little at a time, we only need to strike once.Et se li sans est clers et legiers, si covient ferir .iiij. fois soulement: la premiere fois si est por subtiliier la voie dou sang, et les autrs si son por sucer.
And if we want a lot of blood, then we often fainted; and if the blood is thick, then fire it with a needle, and the ends so that the heart be pierced suddenly,
and it befits those who have thick and tough skin, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the places of the leeches with an astringent oil and a dissolving one: if it is in the armpit, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
and if it is in the groin, with watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or other similar thing.
And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or oil of aniseed, and similar oils.
And if one is healing tender flesh with large pores, then no oil should be used,
but afterwards wash with rosewater, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of gourd, or water of porcelain, or similar waters.
And for those who have a lot of moisture, it helps to rise with garlic, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large bumps should drink old wine, or water from a swamp, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things;
and one should not bleed with a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and one should not sleep after cupping,
and it is necessary that he should fast when he is to be bled and when he has been bled. And beware of those who are choleric and whose blood is too thin and inflamed; if he should grip cold things like pomegranates, endive, lettuce with garlic, and similar things.
and eat soft foods, porridge, and moist meats.
And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup and moderate old wine, eat soft porridge, soft meats, young birds, and pigeons.
and on the day he fasts, he should drink more than he eats;
and one must give some people triacle or musk before or after venting, to strengthen the main members; and dilute the wine, but those who are hot-tempered should not drink it.
The leeches that are placed without bleeding are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the gout, and on the stomach, and the groin, and the hips, and the loins, for these members do not tolerate being bled on the eyes,
and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we place them on the breasts when the milk is healthy; to remove the粘性 which is in the limb, as we place cups on the abdomen and armpit to reduce the limb;
and removes pain, when there is gangrene or stone, or by its attractive power accidentally removes the gangrene, or the stone from its place;
and thus it acts when placed on the liver and the stomach when there is retained wind,
and these cups are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water,
as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way one fills the cupping glass with hot water, or water in which herbs suitable for this have been cooked.
The shape of the fire-cupping instrument is as follows:
And it has 2 digits in width and half a palm in depth, and on the edge all around the middle there is a small hole, as well as for pushing through a needle,
and it should be made of brass, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
and he has in the middle a curved rod of iron or steel, to hold a candle,
and they come in all sizes according to the illnesses and ages of those who take them;
because the ventouses for children are different from those for the elderly, and for the thin than for the fat.
And so you must put this ventouse on the member:The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
take a candle of wax or a dressing, and place it inside the cupping glass through the tube which is inside the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the body part, and your fingers should be on the hole we mentioned, so that when you want to, you can release the air and remove the cupping glass;
and use the dressing as before, and do this often if necessary.
In the cupping glass which is administered for a disease of pneumonia, in any acute illness, there is no tube or opening, and it is not removed until it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only briefly.
And this is the form:
Leeches are not removed until in members where one cannot place cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places. And in bare skin, such as ears or nipples, and others like them.
and the quality of using it is such that when you find leeches that are in clean, sweet water without mud, take them.
and put them into a bucket of clean, sweet water for as long as they need to be familiarized, and have nothing in their stomachs; and then cleanse the vein and wound with a cupping glass, then rub the member until it turns red, and apply the leeches;
and when they are full and bleeding, if there is a place where one can apply a cupping glass, do so, for it is much better.
If not, then raise it with ash, and then with water, very gently, and then squeeze it out.
and if the vein bleeds too much after the body of the leech, then moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it there until the bleeding stops;
and if the veins are multiplied, then apply powdered vitriol, or gall, and similar things, until it is stopped;
or you can place half a handful of peeled peas on the site and leave them there until they turn cold to the touch, and it will stop bleeding immediately;
and if you need more, take other leeches.
And if the leeches will not attach, then stroke the fresh blood, or pierce the skin with a needle so that some blood emerges. Then place them on top, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach;
And when you see that they are excreting, then powder some aloe and salt, or ash, and they will stop now.
Here begins the book of fractures.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is a cure for fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the foolish masses are ignorant of this chapter, and have never seen it in any ancient books or letters.
And for this reason, the science is strange in our land, for I have never found any good ones.
and I know nothing of it except through the study of ancient books, in which I have worked so hard that I have attained knowledge of them, and through experimentation and the habits of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained in it, and summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I did in the two previous chapters.
Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book the subjects of the discussion and the chapters where the sage places his understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture, dislocation, twist, or break occurs in someone, you should hurry to treat the patient from both sides with a cautery, if there is nothing else holding him back, such as weakness of the body, or old age.
or if the weather is very hot or too cold; and eat cool foods, that is to say, cool games, and meat of squirrel and squirrel, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill up too much on meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have suspected a hot abscess, or the spreading of matter in the limb; then return the patient to his former regime.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, one should feed the patient foods that promote swelling and viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, feet, and belly of a cow, offal, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. Because with this swelling, the bones will be held together and heal more quickly.
And know that broken bones of the old and feeble cannot heal or fuse well according to their nature due to the dryness of their members, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of small children;
but it has no cure, reset the broken bone with the large tendons that hold the limb together, forcing it as it was before; do not stop working on it entirely, and for this reason one should eat a lot of meat, as we have said.
And you should know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from that of the foot, or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all types of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in piercing, just as in the cutting of a quill for writing.Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.
For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in piercing, just as in the cutting of a quill for writing.Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire. And if there is a fracture with a wound, then there is a break all over, like a small split.
And each type has its own remedy and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory comes to mind in its place;
and it is known that the fracture of the bone is due to twisting, and it is clearly apparent by prodding, and it sounds hollow when pressed with the hand;
and when there is no twisting or sound when pressed, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture;
but it may have crookedness, or split, or small crack. You should not move it by hand, but apply remedies that follow, and then hold it firmly yet gently.
And know that the fracture that goes into the bone, and are the two parts separated, they should now be put back in place evenly, so that abscesses do not form;
and if abscesses form, let it be for one day, until the abscesses are soothed; then reset it evenly and gently, as you can easily and smoothly; and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration of that which has been broken; then hold it steady, as it should be done afterward.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, whether it is in two parts, as in the hand or foot, or in your hand if it is a small member, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand;
and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are brought together, you reset them with all your skills into their places as smoothly as you can, and be careful that your treatment does not cause the patient injury or pain;
and adjust the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
And you can feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not in the right place; then dress it nicely, and do not pull on it too much or press as those who bring about hot abscesses and contraction in the limb by their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is healed, then beware of the patient moving it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and be sure that the limb is so secure that he does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, then it is not at all, and you should put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
For when it feels no pain, then it is not at all, and you should put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain; and make sure it is set straight so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored.
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and size and shape.
For there are small members, such as fingers and toes and the like: one should wrap them with soft, fine linen.
and those that are large, like the thigh and leg: these must be wrapped in a broad and firm bandage, because the broad bandages embrace the whole large limb, and constrict it equally all around, so that there is no swelling.
then wind around it with light bandages, 3 or 4 turns depending on the limb, and tighten your hand all over the bandage a little at a time, then go above the dislocation and loosen it a little less than the bandage, then move the dislocation away a little;
and soften the bandage gradually until you grasp most of the healthy part of the limb, then take another bandage and wrap it back over the dislocation;
then go to the part under the dislocation and constrict it gently, neither too tight nor too loose, as we said above in the first bandage;
then place between the ligatures lint or rags, so that it is completely even, then tie it all tightly with a bandage above, and then put your well-made stars on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then put on something to soothe the abscess and hot, which removes the swelling, and leave it like that for a few days;
then strain over your stars, and they should be made of half a wide cane or of wood from which cleavers are made, or from palm branches, and they should be shaped like this:
but it is necessary that the star that one puts on the fracture be slightly larger and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as is appropriate for the smallness or size of the limb;
then hold it steady over the stars, just as you did at first, then bind it tightly with a thread in the same way as before on the break.
The tighter it is bound, the better; and the thread should be medium thickness, not too thin nor too thick, and made of soft flax.
because if the thread is thick, as I have seen fools make their knots from tightly twisted flaxen cords, and this is a great error, for the knot cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be less than two threads' thickness between each star.
And if the patient is nervous from the cold of the stars after their constriction in a healthy manner, then place beneath them pieces of linen or other soft material so that they are not hurt.
When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the bones are broken, I will describe the treatment for this below.
And you should know that one must not dislocate all the broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, one should not put on the stars until after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on the hot abscess that is coming out.
And here is the way of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations and twists: you take flour that is held in the walls of the mill, and cook it with egg white, and place this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it. This is the common way of restoring fractures in various conditions, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Another way of plaster restoring fractures, dislocations and twists: take three parts of bark of willow, and alder, and elecampane, and asafetida, and gum arabic, each weighing 10 grains; myrrh and aloe, each weighing 5 grains; and alchangel, weighing 8 grains; and grind them into powder, and mix with egg white. If the person's complexion is warm, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful for many people.
Another way of plaster that is useful for twists: take mastic and viscud, each weighing 10 grains; myrrh and aloe, each weighing 8 grains; acacia, weighing 6 grains; and Armenian bole, weighing 10 grains, and grind well, and cook with water or egg white, and administer it.
Another way of plaster for joints and bones displaced from their sockets, and to soothe the resulting pain, and shrink the swelling: take new lamb's brain, and cook it in oil and garlic, and place it on the affected area. This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess and removing pains.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves, and leaves of the earth pebble, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method of plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to reduce swelling from an abscess: take the root of marsh-mallow, chamomile, violets flowers, wheat flour, one part each; grind and cook in wine. If the member is scorched, cook it with moist coriander water or water and use it.
Another method of plaster stronger than the previous ones, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member: take marshmallow roots, and flax seeds, borage, melilot, and santolic, and violets flowers and camomile, one part each; grind and cook in salted water or sweet water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member and its comfort.
Hypocrites says in his book that one should not put on the broken member for restoration other than a cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else; it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galen says one must put on the broken member, to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of making an ointment that helps with injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair cut short, or bird feathers, and bee's wax, and mix them together, and crush them, and make an ointment from it and apply it.
And then loosen it a little later, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor does the bone move from its place; if so, loosen it again after several days.
And if pain comes in the area, or itching, or discomfort, or swelling, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the ointment now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea moss, and dip it in water, and apply it to the area until the itching ceases and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a wet towel, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it to a nut, until you are sure of a warm abscess;
and calm the inflammation of the limb, and relieve the pain, then restart the binding gently, and a little ointment, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you need ointment and binding, then restart it, just as you did at first.Et se il adonque s’en va par fin et est sainz, si mettous embaumeure de l’esguileure, si com tu as mist premierement; et se il a duré longuement et qu’il soit osté, si mist li embaumeure et li lien, si com tu as mist premierement.
And if there is nothing of what we have said that comes to the limb, do not remove it until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days, and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, as long as the fracture heals and the bone draws closer to the skin.Et se il adonque s’en va par fin et est sainz, si mettous embaumeure de l’esguileure, si com tu as mist premier igalment.
then restrain the one more than before, and increase his food, as I have said before; and if you see the place drying out more than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot come to it; then therefore give him hot water to drink, every time you loosen him, and this should be done every third day, and ease the pressure a little;
through this work therefore the nourishment reaches the limb, and it quickly heals what the foolish doctor did, who misaligned the limb: it is harmful, and if it is worked on foolishly, I see nothing else but wearying and doing it properly.
of various ways of breaking There are many ways of breaking bones, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct.
Because there are breaks that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collar bone is broken all the way to the hyoid bone which is under the collar bone, just as with a hatchet or club; and this type of break is called a 'hatchet break'.
Or the sword cuts into the bone without breaking it, and this type of break is called 'absolute'; and the wound from these two breaks is large or small.
And if there is an impact with force, or splitting, or from the collar bone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
If there is a fracture piercing to the membrane under the bone, or on top of it, and this wound is large or small.
And if there is a wound that has entered the bone as thin as a hair, and the crack is small, and because of this such a fracture is called "capillary."
and if the wound is made by stone or falling, or similar thing, and the bone has entered downward, and the site is shaved like what the smiths do when they work on kettles; then the bone enters within.
And this happens more to those who have moist bones in their heads, like children's heads;
and it happens with all these types of fractures that small pieces are dislodged as described above; I will speak about this in their place.
And we recognize all types of fractures by examining them closely, and through interrogation while the patient is stretched out, and by the discolored skin that appears above.
The capillary resemblance is known when, after exposing the bone and rubbing it gently, a black Bruch appears.
In the treatment of a fracture, be aware of any bad symptoms, and if you see no evil signs such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, convulsion, paralysis, fever, eyes popping out and reddening, and other similar things in various conditions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
And if you see no terrible accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the new-born comes to you first, and it is winter, you should remove the foreskin before the fourteenth day that you can.
And if it is in the spring, you should hurry to remove the foreskin before the seventh day, otherwise, the tissue under the foreskin will be corrupted and the accidents we have described will occur.
And if the fracture of the bone extends to the tissue that covers the brain, then you must split the broken part thus: and you must grip the head of the wounded person firmly, and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and according to the shape of the wound more gently than you can.
and if blood flows upon uncovering the bone, or a wound is caused, aid him in the way that it befits, and you must fill the area with moistened linen in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is soothed and there is no more flow of blood; then begin around the bone to remove, and it can be done in two ways: one way is that you cut closely at the front, and this is the form:
And then make another cut larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have various cuts, some narrow and some wide, and they are pointed and made of iron; and work lightly so that you do not bleed the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, you must pierce it all around, so that you administer cauteries with a chisel, not so deep that they penetrate beyond the bone of the chest, and it should have a rim or .i. circle above the tip, which does not allow the tip to pass beyond the bone; and you should have several, so that each one comes in its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have chisels for all tests; and this is the form of the .iij. ways of chisels:
The qualities for piercing around the bone are that you put 1 chisel on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the chisel somewhere else a little later, and do this all around, then cut into the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this most subtly and lightly, as we have said, so that you draw out the bone to your hand, or with one of the instruments that you have, such as tweezers, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, it is appropriate that you resect the membrane which is remaining on the bone with any other instrument similar to an incision knife, but it should be more flexible and sharper than the other knives.
and if it remains in the small bones, or any scales, then remove the bones slightly with instruments; then treat the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is safer; he praises it highly, and his word is final. First, you must expose a part of the bone where the open fracture is located; once you have exposed that area, place under the edge of this lenticular incisor, from which the shape of the instrument comes.
And do not cut from one side, but the part is hooked on both sides, so that the cutting edge is toward the bone; then strike it gently with a small mallet, so that you slightly scrape the bone all around, and be very careful of the membrane below.
if it is dislocated at the bone, then the bone must be moved slightly, for the bone can be moved without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on the surface, and there are small pieces, then one must smooth that roughness, and remove the scales with a subtle razor, of which you should have several quantities, in order to use the most suitable one according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Take first a large razor, and then a more subtle one, and do not cease doing this until it is smooth.
In each of the other hair cuts and subtle fractures, one must prepare the wound according to its nature; and this is not a matter that can be entrusted to someone who has not dedicated themselves to this art.
And if the ulcer is exposed, you should take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another double linen cloth in two or three layers, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not burden the ulcer, then apply pressure above with another ligature, without tightening it more than to hold the wound only;
and let it remain like this for one or two days, until the abscesses are soothed, then loosen it and apply medicines such as roots of iris, and flour of wheat, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and from these ingredients make a powder, and place it on the wound, and then apply medicines that soothe without biting;
and watch that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave the ointment or any bowels there, because when bowels assemble over the brain's membrane, they腐敗 and putrify, causing great harm to the patient; for when one applies something biting to the ulcer, it腐敗 from above.
Therefore, take care that no evil accident comes to the patient, as we have said, for it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if blackness does not come except from the medicine that one has put on it, how great its power is, so you must take a part of honey and .3 parts of rose oil and in glue .1 cloth and place it on the ulcer; then treat it with the usual treatments until it is healed.
You should know that sometimes the two parts of the jaw are broken, one by itself, because they are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is pushed or twisted, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should put your little finger or a needle in the wound and hold it in place with your index finger, and tie it off so that the nail returns to its natural shape. and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is on top of the nail and the fingers cannot reach the spot, then you should put it in the same way at the end of a thin rod.
And if the break is in two parts, then do the same, and try to restore it on the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is healed, then attach to the head of the nail a tent made of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you attach another to another part, if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the holes of the nails.
And some say that one should soften the tents in butter, and change them every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but they should be softened in egg white and flour; then leave the tent, until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes one attaches goose feathers instead of tents, and wraps a cloth around it, and holds the fracture in place, and the patient blows among it; then do as you wish.
And if a hot abscess comes in the nose while you are operating on it, then put cerate or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in a little diaquilon.
And if a hot abscess doesn't come, then apply a poultice by force, of flour of hempseed, and powdered incense, confectioned with egg white, then put it on light gauze and do not bind the nose tightly.
and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments for that purpose, then cut the wound, and treat it with warming things, and binding, as with poultices and ointments suitable for that purpose;
and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tenting, and put in splinters of plum wood, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the jaw
When the jaw is dislocated underneath, and there is no external wound, and the joint is only slightly displaced, without being broken in two, they know it easily.
If the dislocation is on the right side, you should put your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the dislocation is on the left side of the jaw, then put your index finger from your right hand, and gently push the joint back into place, and hold it steady with your other hand.
And if the dislocation of the jaw is displaced in , you should administer an extension of , so that it is even.
And if there is movement in the teeth, or looseness, then hold them with a gold or silver or silk thread; and put cerate on the broken jaw, and put on a double cloth; and put on top of the cloth a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather the same size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it on as tightly as possible, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
And if you see that the face changes, then loosen it after three days and then reset what has changed; and put an ointment on top of the powder from the mill with abundant egg yolk or flour of sisament, after removing the cerate; and put a thin linen cloth on top of the ointment, and if the ointments become hot, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it takes to heal; often it is healed within three weeks.
And if painful abscesses come, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone is dislodged; then remove it skillfully with suitable instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with flame according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains nothing inside, then stitch up the wound, if it is large, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing as long as necessary.
of the armpit: The armpit dislocates in several ways forward towards the shoulder, and there are three types of dislocation: it can be broken and separated into two pieces, which is the easiest to treat; or it can be broken with a wound.
And the work is when the fracture is without wound, that you have .ij. ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which feels the broken bone; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then place the break evenly in your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no appearance or displacement.
And if you need to stretch further, place under the shoulder of the patient a round pillow of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your need; then raise and lower the bone, and press the pillow against your hand, so that you place the break evenly, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the bone out of joint because it comes in too deeply, then the patient should lie on his back, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and the ministers press the shoulder upwards, until the bone is raised.
And then press the break with your hands, and if you find it splintered, you should split it; and draw out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any protrusion, then cut one of the incisions that you have made deeper, but place this instrument under the bone to guard against the sinew:
and resembles a spoon, and is not hollowed out, and is as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work; and has 2 handles, as you can see, and one is wide, and the other narrow, just as the shape of the wound that you have made when you treated the bones;
and when you are certain of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the opening is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, then fill the wound with bandages and tenting, according to its size.
And if hot abscesses come, soak 1 bandage in rose oil and in garlic and wine, and place it on top.
The dislocation of the bone, when there are no wounds and no incision, is to place on the bone the plaster of the mill-powder and egg white, and place light bandages on top, and place a pillow beneath the shoulder, if necessary. take a very wide bandage of one palm width, then put a double draping of towels on it and anoint it; then take a subtle pillowcase of three yards long and wide, and wrap it around that bandage so that the end of the bandage is hanging. and put the pillowcase on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the sick armpit; and adjust it from each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture in alignment, and you see clearly that the pillowcase does not move over the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the ligature loosens, restrain it.
and let the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under the armpit when he sleeps to raise the shoulder; thus the fracture will be lightened by the alignment of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it if an evil accident does not occur, up to twenty days;
then restart the anointing, if you see that he has need of it, and hold it, and leave it thus, until it is healed; and it is healed in the most people in twenty-eight days, and less in some.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
It sometimes happens that the shoulder is dislocated in the broad or middle part, and it does not hurt unless it is touched; therefore adjust the bandage according to the shape of the dislocation, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can. Then apply powder from the mill with egg white, and light compresses, and place a double drape over that. Then put on a wide and thin splint, slightly larger than the shoulder, and if there is any swelling under the shoulder, use a pad of linen compresses so that the splint sits evenly; then bind it tightly with a large bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the binding every day. Each time it loosens, tighten it again, and adjust the splint if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on his side. The shoulder will be restored within 20 to 25 days. When this period is complete, remove the bandage and all will be well, for it is not a bone that can be put back easily.
And if a piece of the bone sticks out in front, and not under the heart, cut it away and do what we have said about the dislocation of the shoulder to soothe the hot abscess.
of the dislocation of the foot
The leg is sometimes broken in the middle, but that rarely happens; it often breaks at the end. And when it's broken in the middle, it shifts downward, and the patient feels great pain, and loses their color, becomes feverish, and might vomit blood, and the bones stick out through the broken bone, and they feel great discomfort.
And the treatment is to have the patient lie on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders, then press their shoulders, and bring together the ribs on both sides with your hands, and carefully adjust them so that the bones are in the correct position; then apply poultices and bandages made from the subtle salt, or another light substance, and wrap it up in a cloth, and tie it onto the broken bone so that it does not move; then turn the leg gently to the side, and bind it firmly but comfortably, and check every hour if it has softened, and if it has, bind it more tightly; and if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion or itching that comes to the area, or pain or an abscess, then do so quickly, and loosen the bandage, and clean away any pus that has formed, and apply remedies to treat the area; then reapply the poultice, and bind it up tightly until it is healed.
of the broken ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs only occurs in the large ribs near the back, and in the chest area, and they only bend due to their being slippery; and it feels good when pressed on both sides.
And the restoration is that you put the break in place, as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and hold it in place with a bandage, if you need to.
And if the rib fracture is declined inward, the patient feels great pain and puncturing, as with pleurisy, for the bone pierces the membrane; and he also has pain in his arms and chest and vomits a large amount of blood, and this is a serious condition, and the ancients have given it great importance.
And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that bloat the belly in order to push the fracture outward.
We do not believe that hot abscesses will come, unless they have already come. And if he has come, then heal him.
And some say that one should place cupping glasses over the area to draw out fluids, and that this is sensible advice; nevertheless, there is a doubt that the cupping glass might attract excess fluids to the site due to the weakness of the patient.
And some say that one must cover the area with moist woolen cloth in hot oil, and place tenting between the ribs to apply pressure evenly all around; then it should be bandaged with a pleurisy poultice made of meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that punctures the tenting, and there is doubt about the patient, then one should cut over the site of the broken rib, and place an instrument underneath to guard against the syphilis; then one must split the bone, gently pulling and sewing up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treating it with poultices until it heals. And if a hot abscess forms, one should place moistened linen in rose oil over the site; treat the area around the abscess as one would an abscess, keeping the patient lying on his side where he should be, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the neck
Sometimes there is a fracture of the bones of the neck, and it sometimes bends; and also of the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will recover or not, take note: if you see their hands soft and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that they are in a deadly condition in many cases, but if they can move and feel the pain when you dislocate the joint, know that the joint is healed, and the disease will be cured if treated.
And if a similar condition occurs in the spine, and you want to know if it will be healed or not, take note of the following signs: if their feet are soft, and they have the same symptoms in their hands, and they experience windiness and urination without control; and when they are turned onto their stomach, they urinate without control. And when they are turned onto their back and want to sit up, they cannot. Know that this is deadly: do not delay their treatment.
And if this accident does not happen to them, then the thing is much easier.
And if there is a hot abscess, then the physician should put rose oil or chicken egg white on the spine until it is soothed, then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters and bind it with a bandage; and he must command the patient to rest and not sleep on the painful side until it heals. And if any bone is exposed, then it must be covered with a cloth; and remove the bone, then join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a single stitch, then the physician should apply ointment around the wound, until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the 'head of the shoulder', squeeze your left testicle in your left hand, and the right one in your right hand as much as you can, then apply the plaster and bandage, if necessary; then hold it tight, and if there is an exposed bone, cover it, remove it, and treat the wound until it heals.
of the break in the hip bone
Then the bones of the hip may be broken, and if so, there will also be a little lessening in the head; they are long and sloping towards the buttocks, and the patient feels pain and piercing in the affected area, and swelling where it is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over the fracture so that you are on the break; and you know where the fracture is and what its shape is; and if the fracture is only in the head, then put it back into place so that it is restored to its natural shape.
And if the fracture is long, or it slopes downward, then let the patient lie on his stomach so that the restoration of this fracture may be prepared for.Et se il decline ou pardeins, si fai gesir sur son dos, et tant li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie; car ele ne doit pas decliner a l’un cotez ne au chief. And when you have put it back into place, then apply the plaster, and then put on a splint of wood or horn, and bind the fracture so that it does not move; and press on the area under the ribs so that the clavicle is restored.Et si le malaide ne peut demorer sou la estele, si met le sur une table ou un leu plan, et tant li restoration soit aparillie.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if pus-filled blisters appear, do not touch them until the pus-filled blisters have drained and dry up, and then apply what we have said before; and then return to the healing process, and bind it as it should be, if there is no bad outcome; and that is how it's done.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The adjutoire is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two methods: one method is that you take a stick, smooth and straight, according to this shape:
And take two chairs, and lean them against each other, and seat the patient on one chair; then let him stretch his broken arm out over the top of the chair, so that it hangs down, and place a cushion under his hand; then lean him back against something heavy or have someone hold him upright; then place the mirror so that the break aligns with his hands, so that the bone returns to its proper position.
Another method is to have the patient lean back against his heel, and tie his hand to his neck; then instruct two ministers, one to hold what is above the break in place with their hands, and the other to hold under the elbow, and each to stretch their respective parts.
And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then tighten the one ligament under the break and over the break, and have each of the ministers stretch their respective parts. And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you should put a ligature under the heel and another towards the elbow, over the break; and also, if the break is towards the elbow, you should put a ligature gently, without effort, so that the bone returns to its proper position, and tighten it, unless an abscess forms.
And if an abscess forms, do not tighten it for seven days, and put cool linen in vinegar and rose oil over the abscess until it is soothed; then tighten it, and the method of tightening is that you put the plaster over the break, then assemble the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and lay a cloth and tighten over the shoulder and arm so that the arm is straight, without anything bending it or the bone moving.
And if you doubt that the bone will move, use pins and place a pin larger and stronger than the others on the fracture, with .1 inch of space between each pin, and let each pin be large enough to project .3 inches beyond the fracture on either side; then pull on the pins, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the fracture, strongly and without moving them too far.
And if you see the pins and the pulling, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the ligature every three days to ensure that itching or swelling do not develop at the site, nor does pus collect in the member because it is too tight. Then loosen it, as we have said.
And if none of these accidents occur, then loosen the ligature after three or more days, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and place beneath the shoulder a flat cushion of wool, equally soft, and examine every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or the ligature become softer; then release it through the power of medicine, and give him the meat that we have mentioned earlier, so that the meat is at its most subtle; and when he begins to recover, let the food be thicker. It is customary for the shoulder and arm to take 40 days to heal; then one should loosen the ligature and administer baths and medicines of ointments to heal the site. And if the ligature is ugly and swollen, let it remain for a month or more.
of the elbow
The arm is made up of 2 bones, which are called the 'ulna', one of which is small and sits below the armpit; and the other is larger and sits below the little finger. Sometimes only the larger ulna breaks, or the smaller one, and sometimes both together.
When only the small ulna is broken, its restoration and healing are easy; but when only the large ulna is broken, healing is more difficult and painful than when both are broken together. If it is the small ulna that is broken alone, one should gently straighten it and set it equal.
And if it is the large ulna, one should straighten it with more force; and he should extend his arm on .1. cushion, and hold his armpit higher than the other hand, and the little fingers lower than the others, and let the patient cross their arms over their chest, and .1. cushion in front of them so that the patient does not suffer any pain. Then extend the minister's arm to the part below his hand, or to .1. the ligature, and another minister to the other above. And then let the minister set it equal according to its best form.
And if there are pieces in the fracture, put each one in its place, and if none are out of place that press the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before, on the chest and the bone.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a particular chapter; so take the cure.
And if in the beginning of the healing there are abscesses, glue a cloth of cerote made of rose oil and white wax, so that it is not too hard or too soft; and lay a cloth gently on top, until the abscesses are soothed. And then remove the cerote, and apply the ointment of flour mill powder with egg white, then put on the bandages, and let the bandage over the fracture be slightly larger and stronger than the others; and know that it should have six bandages on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or both; and tighten more over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as time goes by, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter. And let the cloths over the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread with which it is tightened be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And check the member and the ligature after a few days. And if any evil accident happens to the member, such as itching coming to the member, you should wet the member with hot water until that itching is soothed; and let the member not be pressed or made to rest. Then resume the stretching, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones loosened, and similar things, then address it.
And if you are unable to bring the nutrients to the member because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little bit, and leave it like that for a few days, until the nutrients flow, and then stretch it.
And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, then release him after 20 days or so, then he can use his arms, and his neck should be even, and he should beware of movement and exertion, and sleep on his back; and know that this broken bone will be healed in 30 or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, depending on the composition and complex nature of the virtues.
of the break in the hand
Know that at the back of the hand and at the knuckles there are few fractures, and only sprains many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or sprained, then the patient should cross his arms, and sit upright facing forward; then he should extend his affected hand onto a flat surface, and the assistant should extend the broken bones and set them straight, making sure they are well-aligned; then apply the plaster and dressing, if there is no abscess, and then put on a splint according to the size of the limb; and it should be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is on the side of the palm near the belly, make a splint out of fabric, and instruct the patient to squeeze their broken hand; then wind a long strip of cloth around it, and the splint should be made of soft wood as large as the palm of the hand, and bound tightly in place, as it should be.
And if the break is on the back of the hand, then you should put one splint above and another below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the fingers.
And if the fracture comes to one of us in the hand, whether it is the palm, he puts it equal, as it should be; and he presses it with the palm, and if you see, put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and do not move it; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the index or one of the others, he makes it equal, and binds it with the healthy finger that is next; or you bind them all together, holding them steady, or you put a splint on, as in the palm; and take care in the restoration and in the preparation of hot abscess, and heal what comes, as I have said.
of the broken thigh
The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see it well when it turns forward and backward; and its restoration is that one binds one ligature above the fracture, and another below. And the patient lies on his back, then he extends each ligature to his part equally; and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one of the ligatures should be towards the armpit and the other below the fracture; and if it is near the knee, then the ligament should be by the side of the knee, and the extension should go down, so that the bone mirror is equal to its two hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then apply the plaster, and the ligature, unless an abscess comes out.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down, then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in such a way. You should wrap around the fracture with 1 or 2 layers of a strong bandage, and trim off the excess, then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in such a way. You should wind a long strip of cloth between the thigh and leg by the side of the knee, so that the ends of the cloth come together at the top; then return to the leg and thigh with the bandage, then put splints on the bone of the leg; then press down on the area around the fracture with 3 or 4 turns of the bandage; and as you go higher up from the fracture, lessen the tightness; then grasp the 2 ends of the cloth that you have wound between the thigh and leg, and tighten the 3 splints that are on top, then return to the bottom at the end of the cloth, so that it does not move from its place; then leave it as it is, unless an abscess or swelling comes, or something similar.
And if it happens that there is a piece of bone sticking out, it should be cut away if possible; and if not, then the area should be split open, and the wound treated as we have said many times before, until it heals.
And sometimes the thigh is broken like when they put a stake in it, as in the shoulder and arm; all the same, with this restoration made, the patient does not improve.
And you should know that the thigh is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the different complexions.
of the back of the knee
You should know that there is little breaking in the back of the knee, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a split, or one hole, and it happens to everyone, with or without pain, and it feels good to everyone.
And the restoration is that one puts straight what is crooked at its joints, as much as it can be moved; then apply the plaster, and put on a round bandage if necessary, and bind it up as it should be; then follow all the directions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions; and for each accident, do what is appropriate until the patient is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is properly called the "tibia", and the other is called the "fibula"; and all kinds of fractures occur in it as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the procedures are the same.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns completely inside out.
And if the small bones are broken, return above.
And if the large bone is broken, great pain is felt and it can be seen well; then go below. Therefore, administer extension, and make it even, and bind the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly and there are several pieces, the extension should be smaller and gentler; and adjust according to your skill.
And when you have finished your work, take two splints of wood that match the leg from one side to the other, and make them as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wrap two bands above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this time the leg should not decline to the right or left, and thus it is well; and some administer a board as long as the leg, and it is made of wood, and they put the leg on it to prevent movement, and properly adjust that in the fracture where there is injury; and move the leg every day to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; then cure until it is healed.
of bone fractures of the foot
There is no fracture at the ankle, but sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and in both feet, and there are only bruises with various dispositions.
And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot, and you see the bones sticking out above each other, then put the foot on the ground as if it wanted to walk, and then put your own foot on top of it, where the bones are raised; then press down on it until they return to their place. Then apply the ointment and bandages, and under the sole of the foot place a small wooden board with two pieces of wood attached, then tighten the foot with a bandage, and after you have wrapped it up with cloth and other things that you need.
And after three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find that the bones are healed, whether they were broken or dislocated.
And if there are one or two broken bones, then treat them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little wider, then put under the foot that small board which I mentioned before, and tighten it in place; and if there are one or two, or more, broken bones, then place a splint on each one according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen, and tighten the board under the foot; and let the top of the board press hard against the sole of the foot.
And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, since we have spoken of them; and treat each case as it requires.
of the fracture of the bone in the wrist
When the bone of a woman's wrist is broken, make her sit with her legs stretched out, then bend her forward at the waist and hold her from behind. Then fill the vagina with cotton and insert a stone as big as an egg into it; then lift the woman up and lower her down slowly, and the stone will draw the bone back with it. When she has to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, put it back in again. Do this for seven days, and the fracture will be healed. Then take a bladder from a lamb, attach a tube to its opening, and fill the bladder with air by blowing into the tube until it is swollen inside. The bone will return to its place; then fill the vagina with cotton and leave it like that for a few days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the wrist in a man or woman is broken, treat it as we have said for the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who practice their art and understand my book. For the fracture, there are several ways to find the right path to healing; listen, then, to this teaching.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gullet and fill it with the penis; then wrap cloth around it tightly, and leave it for three days, and it will heal quickly.
from breaking with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thighbone or shoulder, that he be treated immediately according to the remedies we have described earlier.
And if the wound heals, then restart the treatment for the fracture in that very hour or that day, if no abscesses have formed.
And if deep abscesses arise, let the healing be until the tenth day, until the abscesses are settled, and do not touch them on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about an evil occurrence.
And if the broken bone is visible above the uncovered heart, then you should gently put it in place with your hands, with slight extension.
And if the extension is not apparent to you in putting it equal with your hands, then use this instrument which is made of iron and is seven or eight inches long, and its width according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, the needle must be taken by the surgeon so that he requires three or four of them for each cure of a fracture; and it should be round and somewhat thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the member during your work, and should be tapered at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called a «palainche», because the curved head of the bone should be placed under the visible top of the bone; and the bowstring is drawn once, as far as it will go, and is made equal on either side. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well take hold of the bone, then you must cut the top of the bone, so that the instrument can gain purchase.
And if you cannot pull the bone back, as we have said, use an appropriate tool, whether a knife or a probe, to your ability; then remove what is stuck in the bone with scrapings and small cuts.
And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain after, know that it is not in its natural place. Then moisten a cloth with black, strong wine, and apply it gently if it is swollen; and do not put cerotem or anything else on the wound that would cause pus and corruption to form; then administer poultices once you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and bind the bandage all around according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not constricted by the binding; and many a fool has done this, causing death or corrosion in some cases; and let the compression be softer and gentler than other bindings.
And if the wound is large or deep, and you doubt that harm may come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then do not put poultices on it; but wrap hard cloths around it tightly, and tie them. And when you see after one or two days swelling around the wound, remove what you put on it completely, and apply healing ointment to wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon and similar remedies.
And you should loosen the member twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and closed up.
And one must arrange the limbs so that the bow runs smoothly downstream.
And if they persist for many days and it cannot be welded but keeps slipping back down the bow, know that there are small pieces of bone causing this, so you should probe the wound with a tent and remove all the dislodged pieces causing the pain.
And if a fistula develops at the site or there is any other sign of corruption, then it should be treated according to what he says in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as with the bones of the thigh or shoulder and similar large limbs, do not touch it, for many die from this, but leave it until it becomes pustular; perhaps after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can, and if not, leave it.
brus
There often comes after the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, an ugly sight to see the deformation of the limb; and sometimes the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Take care then if the patient has diarrhea: administer astringent medicines such as aloe, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, mixed with wine, egg white, or garlic; place them on the navel in poultices, and keep them firmly in place for several days; then remove them and repeat until the swelling goes down. Alternatively, apply a piece of well-prepared plaster to the area, as plaster has the property of drawing out inflammation from the limbs; if the swelling has become hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed, cut away the surface, and draw out the excess material; or have someone else scrape away at it until it is gone, and then heal it.
When the bone fracture is healed, and the limb remains weak and fragile, this can happen for several reasons: it could be because it was bound too tightly and not properly aligned, or because there were too many ligatures that prevented proper circulation to the limb; or due to excessive swelling, or too much movement before healing was complete; or because there is a lack of blood in the body, which causes weakness.
And the cure is that you cause the patient to eat and make the body tender, so that blood multiplies within him; and the provider bathes him, and gives him joy and relaxation; then put pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts the great heat, and often sprinkles it with lukewarm water, until the heat penetrates the limb; and he returns to his natural shape.
the limb crooked after health
When the limbs are crooked after healing, and the broken bones are open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless, it does not lose its natural function: therefore do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb completely anew; many fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm results, and sometimes death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and torments are fresh, they should be sprinkled with lukewarm water, or herbs that soften, such as marshmallow leaves, and roots, and meadow-sweet, and similar medicines that soften; and you make a soothing ointment, such as well-prepared diaquilon, and you take the mucilage of marshmallow, and cook it with sheep tallow or sisimint oil, and make an ointment for it; or you take fat figs, and grind them with colon dung, and similar medicines that soften.
And sometimes the dislocation is opened by rubbing continuously and extensively with wet hands. And movement should be encouraged in the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosities are hardened like stone, and it is necessary to open them with an iron instrument, then they must be cut into gently with a subtle incision, and put cotton and study into the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.Et de cest dislocation il y a grand douleur et grant lesion por coi il faille estude et science.
And of this dislocation there is great pain and great injury, therefore it requires study and knowledge. When dislocation comes to someone, they must be reset without delay.Et si li membres est desaloiez, il covient le remestre a son leu;
For if one delays, the place swells and, by chance, if one tries to reset it in place; therefore one should not move it when it is swollen, for this often brings on spasms and other pains.
Nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient bleed, then let him rest until the abscesses drain; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the healing comes to its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations of the head up to the feet.
of the jaws
Then the jaws become dislocated, and both dislocations occur in two ways: they are slightly displaced from their place and softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging down towards the feet, and saliva flows from the mouth so that it cannot be held closed, nor can the tongue be wrapped around words.
When the dislocation is small, it will return to its proper place through various dispositions.
And if it is complete and accomplished, you must reset it quickly without hesitation.Car s’il est desaloiee de son leu, et que tu le remettas entierement en son leu, si est grant dolor ad la remoinnance,
And the minister should hold the head of the patient, and put one of his hands at the root of the dislocation in the jaw inside the mouth, if it is a two-part dislocation; and let the other hand be free to apply pressure evenly. And instruct the patient to soften their jaws and move them in all directions.
And she looks at it evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if the reset is painful, especially when both mandibles are together, then treat them with hot water and oil until they are reset lightly; do not touch or move the jaw, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well with softening, then place on moistened bandages made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft strings.Et quant li boca est clot, si le met sus drapelz froids, si les lie legierement de molz liiens; et s’il est necessaire, si soit le mout liier d’un liien.
and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor try to open his mouth, but take light food until the pain is gone and the mandibles are healed.
and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not bother to open his mouth to eat and drink as long as the jaw is well bound and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be reset within an hour and are not converted to their place, then fever and usual sickness come, and perhaps stomach problems, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is deadly; and many die from it within eight days.
of the fork
The forceps cannot dislodge it from within the chest and the abdomen; it is sometimes dislodged by force, and one can feel it well.
And for the restoration, if the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the spot firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply the plaster and bandage, and bind it tight.
And the dislocation that is towards the shoulder cannot be dislodged; if it can be dislodged, then it should be reset to its place as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage, and bind it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
And likewise, the shoulder blade is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
of shoulder dislocation
You know that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: one is at the part of the shoulder blade below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and by chance it dislocates above, and this happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates below towards the shoulder blade, especially in those who are thin; but in those who are plump, it dislocates slowly, and goes back in slowly.
And by chance, some men experience a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they believe it is dislocated because of this.
Then you must test it to make sure, and then begin the treatment.
And you will know there is a dislocation when it is lower down towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them. And you will find in the head of the shoulder a pit, and under the armpit the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose or move in any way.
And also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will see it clearly when you touch it.
and this type of dislocation is not difficult to correct when it is new, or if the child is sick.
And the method is for the assistant to lift the sick hand up, then place your knees under the shoulder, and pull the joint firmly upwards in its place; and the assistant lifts the hand and stretches it up, then places it down again; this will correct it quickly.
And if it does not work as we have said within a few days, then the sick person should be bathed in warm water, and ointment that softens and soothes should be applied, such as a decoction of aniseed, fenugreek, and horehound in water, and he should be bandaged.
Then the sick person should be laid on his back, and a layer of equal wool, neither too soft nor too hard, should be placed under the shoulder joint, and the assistant should place his heel on the wool and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and pull the hand;
and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it does not move down; the shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that he dislocates it according to this manner:
and you should have a man present who is larger than the patient; he should stand straight against his chest and push his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upward so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the arm of the patient downward toward the belly. And if the patient is too light, they can hold something heavy with their hand, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And one can also dislocate it in another way: one should push a long stake into the ground, so that the head is at the same height as a palm, and not too large or too small; then it should be placed underneath the patient, but with a soft cloth on top, and the patient should be standing upright; then the hand should be extended downward on the other side slowly, and the joint will return to its place gradually.
and if it does not want to return due to all these things that we have said, then perform this cure: take a brand of two yards long and four fingers wide, with a bent tip to pierce deeply under the shoulder blade, according to this form:
then tie it onto the tip of the shoulder with soft cloth so that the shoulder does not bleeds the patient; then place it under the armpit of the patient; and extend his arm above the shoulder, and tie the shoulder to the arm, and the arm to the head of the hand; then place the arm on a small log, and extend the hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in place, in whatever way it may be, you must place under the armpit a woolen ball equal in size, then apply the prepared ointment of mill-powder, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the armpit gradually, and tie the string over the ointment, and hold the hand to his neck, and let the hand remain like this.
And it is necessary that he eats little, as long as the members are comfortable, for he will heal more quickly; and then eat more after .v. or .vii. days, and move him; and if he is stiff and not softened, then he is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has accumulated, or for any other reason, then you must administer cauterization at three openings, as it is described in the chapter on cauterization.
And if you do all this and it still dislocates after 7 days, and the joint cannot hold, and he cannot lift his arm upward, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is torn or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fully healed in its place.
Dislocations that are towards the bottom, and in the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing and stretching with hands, and one administers to another; and treat it until it is healed.Li dislocation qui sont devers lou col, si doit on amener li col vers sou corps, et li membres vers le col, et li arces vers li membres, et li membres vers les arces, et li col vers les mameles; et si fait qu’il soit confortez.
And if after healing the limb becomes lame and stiff with movement, then the patient should take many baths until the lameness is relieved and it returns to its former condition.
about dislocation of the shoulder
You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated by fingers, and it returns with fingers; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reset, for one can see and feel it well, and it dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the sick shoulder with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is misaligned, and the arm cannot bend or touch its shoulder at all.
And you should reset it as soon as abscesses form, for if abscesses form, then it will be painful to reset; and by chance it may not be able to be completely reset, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and sometimes death ensues.
And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands bent according to the joint, around, above and below, and push the joint towards his armpit together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and pulls from the root of the palm, the joint which has become dislocated.
And if it will not return to its place, then apply strong extension; and there must be two ministers who extend the arm, and two who hold down the hand, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side while you have wrapped a long double cloth around it;
and when the doctor examines a joint in his hand, he applies oil to loosen the joint, then bends it back into place so that it heals.
and when it is in place, he applies a dry plaster with egg white, and holds the joint firmly, and binds the arm to the collar of the patient, and leaves it for several days, then he releases it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, he removes the bandage and leaves it; and if you see that the joint is not healing well, he re-applies the plaster and the bandage, and leaves it for several days, until it is firmly in place; then he releases it.Et se li malaides a grant dolor en la jointe, si met sus une pomade que iloigne le calor et le doler, et puis le laisse.
And if the patient has great pain in the joint, he applies a ointment that draws out heat and pain, and then leaves it.And if he feels stiffness after the return of the joint, and it moves, he bathes and rubs it well, and presses until it is eased; he puts a snow pack of fatty mutton on the joint, then leaves it for one day and one night, then removes it, and has him enter the bath.Et se li malaides sent dolor en la jointe, si le baigne et frote bellement, et met sus la jointe une naige de mouton grasse et un peigne, et oigne la naige avec aubun d’uef, et remue li peigne tant qu’ele est en la naige, puis l’enleve; And when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put on the bandage again, and then enter the bath; and do this 1 or 2 times, until he is healed; and if you see, put on cow manure moistened with butter, and press it on; he will return to his normal state.
dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand is healed, and the return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place gently, in the same hour that it was dislocated, so that the joint swells or an abscess forms.
And the method of returning it is that you place the hand of the patient on a table, and extend the hand, and you examine and put it back in place, so that he places his palm on the surface of the joint, and pulls it until it returns to its place.
Nevertheless, you should check that it is in the correct position; then place the patient's back against a table for extension and bending. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's back against the table and have the assistant place his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it goes back into place now, that is good.
If not, then straiten it with soothing plasters, warm abscesses, and leave it thus without re-bending.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after a few days, then let the joint remain crooked;
and does not harm the patient unless the hand is weakened and cannot extract anything at all: then you know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other remedy except to cauterize below the wound, and by chance nothing else works.
And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then extract and let it be for five days, then loosen and leave it as is.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then moisten with warm water, and rub it until it is healed.Et s’il a longuement demouré en l’estrain, si doit on li mettre la plastre sus le chiés et sus li col, car il est leus de l’un et de l’auter, si qu’il ne se puet bien demourer en l’estrain.
of the dislocation of the two hands
Sometimes they are dislocated on each side of the hand, sometimes at the back of the palm or the front;
then you must pull on the finger and push the joint back into place as far as it will go, then hold the head of the finger still and bend it towards the side where it is dislocated;
and let it rest for one day and then put it back in place the next day; and tie it up as we have said, and loosen it each day, and move it, and bind it up again at night; and do this often, until it is healed,
and do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is dislocated elsewhere.
from a dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
When the shoulder blade or collarbone is dislocated, there is no cure, for death comes quickly with this malady.
And the signs are that the bowels move without voluntary effort, nor can they be held back, and many times a limb becomes paralyzed, either both legs or one leg or an arm.
And many times the sciatic nerve mutates into four parts; that which mutates at the back is called "gilbositez":
If it has come from childhood, there is no cure or healing for it.
And that which comes from falling or blows, or similar things, the ancients related great remedies with many words, but it did not have much benefit.
But I have abbreviated it according to my intention and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gout that comes in the foot before, no one is healed;
and also that which comes straight in .ij. sides, and cannot be cured unless it is the one that comes on the back, as I said;
and that the disease be spread over his face in one place evenly, and he has a strain underneath him, so that he does not blink;
then insert .i. brand into the head firmly in the ground, and .i. other at the feet, and tie a string underneath the sores of the disease, and .i. other at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two attendants know the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the .ij. flames;
and let them be well tied, the firebrand as we have said, and the patient place his palms on his spine, until he comes around.
And if it does not come around by this treatment, take a board of 3 yards long, and lie down on the side, with the patient on his side, and push the end of the board under the spine, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and the attendants put their feet on the other end of the board, and press hard, until he comes around; and if you see, do it at the joint which turns to the hand.
And you insert two embers at the top of the ailment of a large arm, and towards the feet another two, and between each ember, above and below, a palm's width of space;
and in each ember there is a hole through which the thread passes, and the embers are firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between each two embers there is an ember turning, over which the threads turn, and in each turning ember there are two small embers a palm's width long, for the thread to turn around;
and then tie the thread which is among the embers to the turning ember towards the head, and the other thread to the other turning ember towards the feet, and each of the ministers turns their turning ember all along the thread, and the master places the spine evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, put on a drying plaster with egg white, and then the poultices, and then the bandage of a tablet three fingers long, so that the color of the swelling and the healthy part of the spine match, then tie it with a thread, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle medicine until they are healed;
and if nothing comes of the health in the end, then one should administer softening and soothing remedies, with the star that we mentioned earlier; and sometimes they administer a piece of lead,
and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower vertebrae of the back, and one believes it to be a dislocation; and it is the bone that is exposed, so one must not have any presumption about it: for it might bring about death.
of hip dislocations
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come about as dislocations, and not as in other joints; and the joint of the hip is healed according to four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and mostly inside, and less healed in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer and the diseased knee appears more, and the diseased person cannot bend their knee towards the fire. and the place which is nearby is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes from the inside out, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of him to whom it comes from the outside in, are that his leg is well according to their appearance; nevertheless, he cannot bend his knee without pain, and if one makes him walk, he cannot go forward, and he holds back his urine, and the veins swell, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
And the signs of one who has it in the back are that he cannot bend his knee or double up, and that leg is more crooked than the other; and the groin is relaxed, and the head of the thigh bone is below the ribs.
The treatment for this kind of dislocation is that you examine whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, and there is no treatment for it; and he must not be presumptuous.
And for one in whom the dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four kinds of dislocation, you should hurry to return the joint to its place, and stretch it in and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return to its place, and no other treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this way, you should prepare a very strong bandage, and stretch the leg hard with two hands, or with one hand tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he pushes his hands under his buttocks, then tightens a leather strap above the thigh; and someone else holds his head with a strap;
and they pull up and down all at once so that the patient is lifted off the ground for a moment and then held suspended.
This method of extension is common in four ways, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, you should apply a poultice to his appearance. When the dislocation is in the shoulder blade, you should have the patient lie on his healthy side, then put the strap over the root of the thigh, and the part below the armpit, then pull the strap up towards the armpit and across the chest;
then have another assistant hold his arms, and embrace the large part of the thigh affected, and stretch it forcefully outwards: he will then return to his place; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then you should tie both feet of the patient together with a strong leather thong above the heels and above the knees, and have the affected leg stretched out two fingers more than the other;
then let him be hung from the end of a pole, about two arms' length above the ground; then instruct one assistant to embrace the head of the thigh, and have another assistant hanging with the patient, who embraces the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
And when the dislocation is outward, then let the patient lie down as we have said in the case of sciatica, and tighten one bandage on the affected leg, and another on the foot;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
then put .2 coals, one on the head and one at the feet, then insert one coal between the buttocks in the patient's anus; and have wet cloth around so it does not burn the patient, then extend each limb away from him, and the helper holds steady at his hand with the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good. If not, put him on a table and press him as we have said in the dislocation of the elbow, and lie with the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the leg slowly, and according to what I have said; and the helper puts his weight on the painful shoulder, then presses with the other hand, and pulls downward toward the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the shoulder, then one should not extend the patient downward nor lift him up from the ground, but he must be as though his hip were dislocated outward, just as we have said about lying on the two hips. and should lie on his face, with the leg extended as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint on the table;
and it should be at a point when the patient extends his legs, and they should be even; then draw close the thighs, apply the ointment, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
and let him rest for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it and apply the ointment again; and if you see that they are even, then bind it again as before and leave it for 3 days; then loosen it and let him walk comfortably until the limbs are healed.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to know, inside and outside, and behind; and does not dislocate in front.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, you know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet.
then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee gently; and another assistant stretches his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he slightly bends his leg at the thigh;
and apply the plaster, and straighten the leg at the thigh, and tie them together firmly for three or four days, then loosen it; and do not let the patient walk until the limb is healed.
And if the limb is not healing, administer strong stretching as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and bent forward towards the part where it is dislocated:
the movements should be gentle, and one should gently straighten the joint with their hands when it is only dislocated.
And when it is completely dislocated, one should make the patient sit up straight, and hold them firmly by the leg above the ankle;
then wash your feet with your right hand, then your left .ii. times, then dry them upwards, and pull up the feet well upwards;
and do this .ii. times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the feet; if it works, that is good; if not, then repeat the action, for it will work;
and if it cannot return in this way, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert a wooden peg firmly into the ground between his thighs, and tie him with cloth so that he cannot move;
then one minister squeezes the thigh, and another extends the foot with his hand or with a cord, holding it against the ankle of the foot; then stretch each bandage evenly, and the swaddling cloth should be between the buttocks of the patient to hold the patient still when they are being stretched.
then put the mirrors evenly on the dislocation at their hands, and other bandages tie the healthy leg to the bottom, and the dislocation will return slowly.
And when it is at the right point, put the plaster and bandages on top, and stretch it firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and be careful of the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the bonds are not too tight.
then leave it for 1 or 2 days, and if the bandages loosen, stretch them again; then undo them on the third or fourth day, and they will go to the patient through four days. and if it goes beyond this point, there is no certainty that it will not relapse.
And if a boil comes, you must calm it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of the armpits
When the armpits are dislocated, they must be stretched without effort, and this is a minor issue.
And if the dislocation is in the neck or foot, then you should make the patient lie on his back on a flat bed or table, and put your foot on that which sticks out of these joints, then press with your foot firmly until it pops back into place.
And when it is aligned and there is nothing sticking out, then put a board under the sole of the foot, then stretch it firmly and leave it for three days, then release it; and let him rest until he is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are compassionate, merciful, and slow to anger;
and at the beginning of things, apply a hot poultice to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see hope, reset the member to its place immediately, so that the hot abscesses heal;
and when the member is in place, administer hot poultices to soothe the abscess and treat the wound with drying ointments;
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones displaced, then set the bones and do as we have said for simple injuries.
and beware of going down the path of fear, as I have said, for it will lead you astray according to your creator, and for the sake of your soul and your body. Amen.
