O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine with its whole fulfillment, and I have brought it to an end by means of its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with you, which is part of the work by hand, that is to say, "surgery".
And because the work by hand is well-known and spread throughout all regions, it is extremely difficult to find a master who can teach it fully, and there is no delay in learning it from the hands of a master except for the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved. And because this leads to error and vanity, and the intentions are closed, and the science is distant.
Or I believe that I can add to this life with the order of this doctor according to the way of exposure and statement and abridgment; and come together with the forms of the tools of cauterization, and other instruments of the work with the setting in order of the statement and preparation of it, as is fitting.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected. And it is necessary for him who deals with this to mount up in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and connections and separations of nerves, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of the joints, and the movement and rest of the veins, and the place of their issue.
And because, as Hippocrates says, the hand is not without its use, and its work is great, and especially in the art of hands.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that if anyone is unfamiliar with the things mentioned above, he should be sure not to make any mistakes or deceive people; so that I have often seen many of those who meddle in this science and abandon both their knowledge and experience.
For I have seen a foolish man who cut an abscess on the scrofula or throat of a woman, and he also cut the arteries in the throat; so much blood came out that the woman died between his hands.
And I have seen another foolish man who fought with a spear against a young man of the water, and the spear was large; so he took a piece of the bladder with him, and he died in three days.
And I have also seen a man who was called to wrestle, and I saw the disposition of the patient and the size of the spear; and if he were to be tackled, he would surely die.
And see another wonder that took place in cure of the Duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break he had a wound; and the wise doctor extracted the break from on top of the wound as it was very healing, and did not leave any scar in the wound, and left it like this. I.e. completely healed; and commanded that he do not remove it at all; and delayed until the leg was completely healed, and his toes came to perdition.
I was called to go to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I had dislocated it, he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But all the ways that corruption came were confirmed in or member, and I could not cure it; and the corruption did not cease to go from one member to another until all the members were lost.
And see another wonder that took place in cure of an abscess that had become chronic and then became inflamed from the evil of his domain.
For le chancre, when it is infected with melancholy humor, it must be touched with iron if not in its proper place so that all that is corrupted may be removed.
And because, dear son, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into 1.2 divisions: namely, where there is danger in many conditions; and I will show you in each of these in this book where there is fear and danger.
For so that you may keep yourself safe, so that the foolish man cannot speak ill of you.
Take your weapons in confidence, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be healed; and remove your weapons from him who makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can go from this world to the other of glory.
Galien warns against this advice: "Do not take on the care of a bad illness, lest you are called a foolish doctor."
I have devised this treatise from .iij. chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medications, and the subsequent chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; also, forms of instruments, iron tools for cauterization, and everything necessary in this work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and sucking up blood and extracting arrows, and similar things; this chapter is also ordered and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it orders the use of a lever until it is tight, and the shape of tools.
Thus we remember the work; therefore I will tell you the quality of aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest word and subtlest science and the most subtle responses; and many wise men would speak on this, and agree with it; and I am short of words, for I shorten the length.
I say that fire aid universally to all complexes where there is matter; namely, hot-blooded and dry-blooded complexes.
In hot and dry complexions together with material, some agreed and said that cautery is a great aid; and others said the opposite: that cautery does not help in illnesses that arise from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and must not be cured with heat by heat, nor by dryness by dryness; and he who says that cautery does great aid to hot and dry illness that comes in corsi of men. For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have never found this by experiment.
And all ways, do not interfere but those who have tried it by long use of the caustic, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and remedies and space of time; we have no fear of other complexions, however, for cold and moist diseases. And all the more miraculously will it agree and be in harmony with the caustic.
And know, children, that a fire caustic mixed together is more efficacious in cures, and of greater goodness than an acrid medicinal caustic.
For fire is simple, and comes not forth but to the member which is cool, and does no harm to another member so little.
The burning medicines come from one member to another by way of distance, and bring disease of great healing to the member; and sometimes it makes the patient ill.
Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not burn except in excess.
And I have found this by experience and by the length of service and study that I have devoted to this art, and it is based on the truth of things; and I apologize for the length of my speech, for I do not want to deprive you of the secret of fire, and the quality of the work, as the philosopher teaches in his proof: accept it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that these cauterizations should be made at certain times, and be performed while praying.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the potential harm caused by a disease comes about with the aid of cauterization; and most importantly, cauterization is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot be delayed until the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And do not think, son, as some people believe; because the disease that is cured by cauterization does not come back; and it is served in this way; but it is not the same as what they think, because cauterization is a type of medicine that changes the appearance of the body, dries up the humors that cause pain, and is more effective than medicine in terms of quick relief, and for its virtue and nobility.
And it is possible that the disease will not return according to the appearance of the disease and its location and virtue; and all excesses are gathered in it through the acquisition of meat and similar things; unless cauterization is administered in the place where there is little excess and moisture, as with fire cauterization for pain and similar things, and if that pain does not return, it will not. But it may come about.
And many people do not understand why the remedies are called medical derivations, and this is true; but they do not believe that the remedies are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are wrong, and the remedies are medical derivations because when we administered ways of treatment in no disease and they did not work, then we administer the remedy, and it works. Now then, understand that remedies are medical derivations, not because of the intention of the foolish fools.
The ancients said that remedies made of gold instrument are more effective than those made of iron, and they only mentioned the quality of gold and its high value; They said that the tools of the remedy do not cause pustules, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that in some people it does; and gold remedies are more effective than iron, as they said.
And wherever you heat gold instruments, you do not know when they are heated by the color of gold, and they soon cool down; and if you heat them too much; then put them on fire; and so there is enough hesitation.
And for this we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or you should read this chapter about the head and neck just in case you need to find something easily.
And for this we use olive oil cautery.
For this we use olive oil cautery on the head, and in the case of a disease called "soda", and due to various humors that descend from the head through the hair, and through the ears, and for many dreams and pains of the teeth and throat, and especially for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, and apoplexie, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the sick person should be purged by a resolutive medicine that cleanses the throat and chest. II.III., according to what the virtues and the ease and the habit of the sick person can endure; and then do again the throat of the sick person.
And then make him sit with his hands between yours, and put your hands on his neck; after that put the root of your palm on the root of his neck between his two eyes; and let your two fingers come together, if he bleeds from his mouth then heat the cautery which is called 'oliver', from which comes this form:
And place it on the ink mark, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little while turning it; then release your hand completely, and watch for the bone to appear, and if you don't see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I told you; after that take 1.1 of silk, and put cotton inside it, and put it on the mark, and leave it for 1.3 days; after that put wet cotton in wax; and leave it till it is hot enough to burn the bone; after that cure the wound with a medicine called 'tetrafarmasson' until it is healed.
And say the ancient one, that when the wound opens longer, it purges more; and for this reason let us make it open a little.
And none of these said that one must so loosen the cautery that part of the bone is burned, and then resect what is burned from the bone, and be healed.
And another said that one must so loosen the cautery upon it, and push hard enough that humor is released from the bone as much as a woman would put in her fume so that what is within the body comes out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one must heal and strengthen.
And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem good to me in all cases, except in some men where there is a chance of fear; and I think that I should leave it looser; for the shoulder joint is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness with other members; and even when the shoulder joint of the sick man is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterizing seems to me more safe and milder, so I use it in a way that saves and heals.
from the chief pain
When in all the head there is a chronic pain that lasts long, then it is necessary to use yeris and pills which are called "cochie", and head purging and oils and poultices; and if one does the cautery that we have said above, and it does not work.
Take care that the head of the patient is of a strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then apply the fire cautery slightly as we have said above.
After applying the fire cautery to each corner of the head up to the bone, as we have said above, and applying the  "vasselz" cautery where one puts ventouses, and adjust your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels much more intense pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the corners be made thinner than those with which one cauterizes the hairiness of the head, and this is the form:
For the cautery of the head: When in one part of the head there is sudden pain, and it extends to the oil, and the headache is cleared by medicines that are destructive, and other cures have been made as I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: then make cauterization according to .ij. ways, that is to say, with water medicine and fire.
When the headache is caused by a cold drink, and you remove the peel and cut it in .i. pieces as many times as there are ways of cauterizing, and then apply the temple or where the pain is with a hot cloth so that it can be re-applied to the skin; and when it is reapplied let it lie and tighten well and leave it like this for 10 hours; and then remove it and treat with garlic, leaving the wound like this for 1 or 2 days; and then put cotton in butter until it dries.
After the treatment with ointment until it is well; and if you see that this is not working, then do what I have written or another treatment of burning medicines.
The fire cautery if done according to this method: Heat the cauterizer in this way:
And is called "close" because the chief is made in the form of a clo or he has .i. little of curvetting, and in the middle to a small appearance; and put on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little slightly, until half the weight of the cure is burned; and let go your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is distant, and runs abundance of blood.
After put cotton in the form of string, and put on the place for .iij. days; then I dip the cotton in oil, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at all points, and keep away from capping the artery in this headache which is not yet old.
of headache
When you treat headache as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cautery before mentioned in medicine and of iron does not suit it, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery that is called  "cultellare" until it is white; and so sign this on the painful place a line half an inch long, and hold your hand once, and turn it so that you do not cap the artery and do not come to the jaw; and guard against twitching which happens when one chews, and the neck does not move except for twitching and spasms of pain in the artery when it is capped, or capping causes great fear and especially to those who do not know it, and who are students and experienced; and leave the work halfway; but I will tell you how to stop pain when the artery is capped, and I will show you where it happens in this book.
And if you see that the fire cautery does not help the disease and the patient suffers, cauterize him again with the head as well as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the extract of the artery with the cautery that has 17 knives; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from cold
When pain in the ears comes from cold, and one has applied the soothing medicines and other remedies that we have said in the section on treatment, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", of which form:
After applying the "poins" cautery all around the painful ear, or around both ears where the pain is present, and then moving away from the root of the ear a little bit; and place 10 points around each ear; after that, treat the area until it is healed.
of the mouth torture
of the mouth torture
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l'une en la racine de l'oreille, et l'autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l'ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui aperte saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l'oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi loin com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c'est li forme dou cautere:
And is the appearance of the scalpel that we have set forth above, but it is slightly thinner and the blade should be slightly thicker; after curing the wound as I have said before, until it is healthy.
Here is the translation of the text:
For old farts
Here is the translation of the text:
Here is the translation of the text:
of the cold of the cold the head of the patient, then wash it and everything that we have said above; after that, treat the head of the sick person, then make cauterization on each horn, and 1 behind and 1 III in the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the sickness is serious, do 1 IV cauterization on the spine of the back; and let it be until the fire on the horn of the hour is extinguished, and lift your hand; after treating it until it is well, and the cauterizations that are called "oliving" that we have said above.
of epilepsy
of epilepsy For the epileptic person, only use fire cauterization if they are flematic, and it is necessary to first wash the brain with years and other cures that we have said in the division when the sickness is great and painful of pulse medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the fire, make him gargle and chew bone meat often; after that, place his head in the middle, and make .i. a cautery as we have said before, and .i. a cautery on his neck, and on each horn; and if the patient is outside and suffering, make cauterizations as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the bones, on the spine of the back and neck, and make the cauterization olive according to the way I have said.
If the patient is a child, make him .i. a subtle cautery according to this method:
When, due to melancholy, there are excessive or腐腐 moisture and thick fluid, then make the fire cautery as we have said to the one who has paralysis:
And if, due to melancholy, there is declining excess of melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him to drink something by which his brain is purified, according to what it is said before in the division.
After taking the head of the sick person; then make 1.i. a tortoiseshell well made, also as 1.i. a circle, put it on the head; and let the sick person sit cross-legged, and be held firmly from all sides; then present the liniment, and add to it honey from old bees; and heat the fire gently, so that he may be able to tolerate it; then empty the circle through the head, and let it cool down; and do this to the sick person each week once with other good governance, until he is well.
Or if you wish to cauterize him by making many punctures all over the body. This method of cauterization dries up the brain when it is moist; and then cotton soaked in oil, in honey, and in lard is put on.
of the eyes When awoke comes first as eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the sick person purifying water for the head, and guarding against moisture, and making him sweat or bathe many times while fast.
After he has ordered to raise his head, and made a cauterization on the head, and made 18 cauterizations on the temples if they have fallen out of place from their roots together, or if one of them has fallen out of place then make it in one; and cover all the cauterization with veins and arteries that are above the curb, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against the evaporation of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop him by trying what you can.
And I will teach you how to stop the bleeding in the extraction of arteries and in incising, how to cauterize; and never make a cauterization or wound above the two bones at the back.
the two courses of tears
For when the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or delez the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one can see that it is cold and humid superfluities, then he makes the cauterization that I have said at the beginning of the awl descending to the eyes: 1 cauterization on the head, and 18 cauterizations on the temples, and 18 cauterizations where they hatere or cut off the bones; and if it has been necessary, then he makes a small cauterization all over.
the eyes of tears within the hairs
When you have done as we said in the division of the chapter, and it does not help, then do him three times the medicine of bitter almonds; after that he takes off the head, and makes a cautery in the middle of the olive oil cautery; and makes three cauteries on the three torments, a little soothed the hair; and guard against the artery that you do not cover it. And this is the form of the cautery which is called 'clavilis':
When the paper of the oil is softened with disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery which is called 'olive' is:
And if you see that way.iii. cauterizes on the .ii. sore so long as the hair is; and do not let go of the hand except that as much as the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I said.
do hair that point oil None of this has happened that the hair of the oiled is converted to the pardern, and grasps the oil, and does one cauterize according to 2 ways: namely fire, or burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are long and even, then put the patient in your bed; sign on the paper of the hairs a figure that is also like the furrow of the palm, and is the beginning of the sign to pull out the hairs; then put cotton wet in wax and musk root on the oil, and heat up the fire by which this form is made:
After cauterize on the figure that you have signed little by little several times, so that the cure is burned at the place; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper recede, and the hairs stand up to the point where the oil is; then let your hand down, and leave it like this for .iij. days, then put cotton wet in butter as much as the heating is completed; after the cure of ointment as long as he is healthy.
And if after these come the hairs, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on this same middle level, as you did first; and if the hairs have fallen, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and is even, and does not touch the hair with oil.
The medical cautery of fire is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make on parchment the form of the palm leaf; then take French soap and hot water, each one ½., and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool down, then in spreading out on the form that you have made like the palm leaf, put on the paper of the hairs; and if the disease is in only 1 oil alone, then operate in 1 also, and if in both, then in each one; and place cotton wet in wax and musk root on the oil; and heat up the fire by which this form is made: When the patient feels the bitter taste of the medicine, he should press ½. times, for he feels the bitter taste as well as from fire. If you have done this for a long time, take the medicine by your tooth. When the cauterization is finished, raise the tooth, and if you see the paper raised also as it was raised by a fire or an incision; and if so, then it is well. But if not, then put medicine on the place again where the medicine has not worked, as long as your hairs are long and even, and your nails cut short; then put cotton wetted in oil on the wound for a little while until the pain goes away, after which heal the wound that is called "dyphenis" and others, until it is well.
And if you have to take care of your tooth well by a great deal so that it does not move at all from the medicine in the nails. And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then begin again with the medicine on that place which is softened with the paper properly, just as you have done before; after the cure until it is well; and this is the form of the fuel of the mirror:
And know that men's teeth are different in size and shape, and according to what it is for you; and do not answer the right way for those whose job is this craft.
about the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
When you treat a fistula as we have explained in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his/her head in your lap; and hold the hair between your hands in such a way that it does not move or fall; then dip cotton wicks in wine or persimmon juice onto oil; heat the cauterizer; and apply it to the hair at the base of the scalp, as if forming a v-shape with the wick: either by viewing, i.e., moving the wick from one side to the other, or by holding it stationary, like an Tent; but nevertheless, the one that is applied to the back of the head must move.
After pressing the fistula is open, and treat the porosity, and dry it; and if it is closed, then operate, and force the opening; after that, place the cauterizer in a hot form, and keep your hand on the cauterizer at the part above the oil, so that your hands do not go wild; and place the cauterizer in the oil grease, and corrupt it.
If you come to cauterize up to the bone, it would be good. If not, then begin cauterizing again, and if you have more need of it, leave it .iiij. days; after that, put cotton soaked in oil on the wound, and dry out the healing with as much caution as possible, and within .xl. days after it is healed, put medicine made from corrosive water until the bone is uncovered; and treat according to what came about in your chapter.
There is also one way to cauterize a fistula that no ancient writer mentioned. When you have a fistula, stop the flow of pus and then put in the opening .i. thin wire of gold so that it takes on the shape: and make the quantity of one 3/4 of a pound of mercury; and hold your hand firmly, so that the molten mercury does not run away to its oil; and if you put cotton soaked in oil in a container or pot: the mercury, if it is placed at the opening of the fistula, and left there for a long time, and then taken out with care, will cure very maravillously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have just described, then it is good. If not, then inject a small amount of mercury into the nostril, and bring the fistula to the root of the nose according to what comes about in your own case.
of the crevices in the lips Mouth of times have been crevices on the lips that are called "hair", and most commonly on the lips of children.
When you treat these crevices with the remedy we have spoken of in the divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then heat
And place it firmly in those crevices as long as it comes out clean; after the cure, apply the salve of cerotion as long as he is healthy.
of the abscess of the throat
When the abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula or at the roots of the teeth, after it has become pus and swollen and turned into a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not help: then you must have 1.i. fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after you plug or perforate the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes up at the root; and do so once or twice, after the cure as we have said, until it is healthy; and if it is cured in this way, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the root and cut out the bone corrumpt, according to what you will find it in his chapter.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and that does not help, then put the head of the disease in your healthy mouth; after heat the cautery so that its form will come out as described here after putting a chain on the tooth; and place the cautery hotly inside, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after release your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; after fill the mouth of the patient with salive, and let it sit for an hour or more.
And in this way the teeth that were moving are held fast, and the gums are softened and restrained, and the moisture is dried up and corrupted.
of the teeth pain
When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is coldness or sight, and the medicine remedies are not effective, then there is a need for cauterization according to two ways: and fire cautery and butter cautery.
Butter cautery if it is such that you squeeze butter from a cow's udder, and the tip in a copper or golden knife; after take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, and moisten it with butter, and put it on the aching tooth carefully so that it cools down; and do this often until the virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and the cotton are moistened with butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put on 1/4 copper or gold, heat it so that the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
The fire cautery should be used if such is the case that you squeeze a piece of iron or bronze, and make it large so that the fire does not enter the mouth of the sick person; afterwards heat the cauterizer, so that its form will come after this, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled down; do this often, for the pain will be more severe the next day or the day after. And it is convenient that the sick person fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cauterizer, and then wipe it off quickly; and this is the form of the cauterizer:
For when the sores are of pus and cold dampness, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the scalpel that comes after this, and has 1.2 openings for the fumes to rise up from the scalpel on the other side; and place the scalpel hot on the abscess once, or 1.2 times as needed, until it comes to the font of the abscess; and leave it in this state 1.2 days; and place cotton wet with butter on top until the burning is over; then treat the wound with ointments and poultices as long as it is healed.
When the moisture prevails over the throat and most importantly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be voided first by giải thuốc nhuận tràng; after which he shall make fire cautery on the root of the throat, and keep you from going further down than the throat, and dare not eat but a little. After he makes .i. another fire cautery on the jointure of the neck to the head of the spine, and have him lie in such a position that we have described; and cure him at such a place as we have already said until he is well.
of the toast When all and disease of the throat are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an old disease, then he shall make ij cauteries on the root of the throat in his mouth; and another fire cautery between 2 breasts; and let him lie in such a position as we have described before.
And if you see it, make fire cautery by piercing all the cauteries that are called "poins" of which the shape is as described in front in the disease of the ears; and let them be pierced up to .xxx., or so. After he makes ij fire cauteries on the jointures according to what has been said before, and let him make li fire cauteries of iii rains according to this shape:
And for this reason the cautery is lighter, because you make it.ii. of copper.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, be gentle with the patient on his back and sides; then lift up what is inside the arm pit with your left hand; and if the joint has dislocated, heat the cautery which has .iij. nails there is the shape:
and cautery it until he pierces it up to the coast, and comes to the figure of the cauterization together .iiiij. cauteres; and for this is made cautery with the cautery who has .iij. ners, because the figure of the cauterization are sit cauteres; and are the nervs according to the subtility of a tent and it is the form of the cautery who has .iij. ners:
and never is laid on this 1 nerv for there are 6 cauterizes.
After it put on the cautery and roll with it; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
And if he is dislocated above, pour out that which is broken, then make cautery on the thick of the cautery clavicle, or many cauterizes in piercing. For the joint is closed, and it is bone of the moisture and he heals the patient.
Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
For pleurisy, they say that one should make cauterizations with roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a root of aristolochia that is long, the longest you can find, dry it, and also make it as thick and as long as your two hands; and moisten it with oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize. That is, make one cauterization between the nipple and the collarbone, and a few small cauterizations going down slightly into the part that is sore below the beard; and a few cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining behind a little; and one cauterization on the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and one between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand tightly, but rather open it widely as when you are smelling something.
And no ancient one said that any man should use a fire cauterization resembling a razor, and scrape and put it between the ribs, as long as it comes to the aposteme; and he jumps because of the pain, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is doubt and fear, and many die now, or a fistula comes which can never be healed.
Of mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse that we have said about in the division of treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways to treat with fire cautery that are all good.
From which of these three ways is one that you do make the three cauteries, or four, by following according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cautery as we have said above; and don't press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient be so fidgetty on his back.
and another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery that has two turns, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and apply the cautery to where the cut comes from the left, and let the elevation that you feel come according to the cut, according to the length of the back, and let the cautery be according to the width of the back.
After that, you pour the two turns that are hot, until you can feel the elevation on the other side, and then take the cautery, and so in there will be four. And if you want, cauterize all of it with the three turns. After the cure has been applied for a long time, and this is enough to heal the disease that we have said about before.
of dropsy
for dropsy, there is no cure except by the way that is called "asclepiades". When you treat it according to the ways we have said in the divisions, and your treatment does not benefit him, then you must do .iiij. cauterizations around the boude, and .i. on the stomach, and one on the liver, and .i. on the mouse, and .ij. behind the back on the spine, and .i. on the penis; and let the cauterization be close to the cure.
After leaving the cauterization uncovered for a long time, and not letting the cure of the sick remain after the cauterization, then healing would hurry, and both the intentions would be together with the help of God.
The shape of the cauterization for the stomach is the key that we have ahead of us; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is hereafter described.
of swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in a person who is dropsical, and they are pale with yellow skin, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the index finger; and move your hand away from the cautery without turning it. And do not enter too deeply, lest the yellow skin be burned, and the cautery be done according to this form:
After that, make 20 cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the fingernail; and let the cautery be long, one before the knee and the other behind, while the leg is raised; and leave the cauterization in place for a long time without scraping, so that the yellow skin comes off; after which cure the others as we have said.
of residence
When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues that retain and digest in the stomach and in the intestines are exhausted, it cannot be cured by any method; and you see the patient very ill and of great virtue, if so be.i. great cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken about here before or cautery of the stomach, to the cautery that circulates; and .iiij. cauteries around the navel slightly to all .i. cautery clavicle, and .ij. cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make cautery on the wrist, and 1 cautery on each finger, and 2 small cauteries on the stomach of delight, for the cure is profitable when there is good assistance.
for the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or more, and are old and are cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured if so we have said in divisions, and does not benefit, then 1.iii. cauteries on the spine of the back, that which is completely outside of the body cut it little by little in tripling, and 1. cauteries inside the anus. ii. two;
and if you think his stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooked, and we see swelling of the face, then let there be a great cauterization on the stomach, as it has been said above, and another on the liver, and one other on the mouse to all the cautery nailed; and let the cautery remain open for a long time. After care for the place until it is healthy.
of the tissue which is called "thelule"
When you work on the "thelule", if you heat the cautery which seems sharp, and then put it all blazing on the "thelule" coped; and leave it so that your hand comes into contact with the cautery at the root of the "thelule", do this once or twice, and if there is any burning of the "thelule", then cauterize each one as we have said; after the curatives of herbs profitable until they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the "alchatim", it will have more help.
of a wound poorly treated
When the patient cannot bear surgery or opening, we will tell you in his place, if there comes a disease that cannot be cured except by fire cautery.
When there is a fistula and it is swollen and dripping pus and corrupt moisture, if you make the attempt with a fine needle, and pay attention to the size of the needle that enters, and restart the fire cautery as many times as the quantity of fluid that has entered, and be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and do not make this fire except in the charnel, and think that it is not permanent; after treating the area until it is healed, and if the matter is dried out, know that the injury is completely healed; and if the matter is not dried out, know that the injury has gone three times deeper, and the bone at the bottom is corrupt. And so as one of these that we will tell you in his place.
from kidney disease When pain in the kidneys comes with a strong wind and does not respond to women, then you must make a fire cautery on both sides of the kidney using the clavicle-like cauterizer that we have just mentioned; and if we perform the cauterization in the middle, there will be 2 cauterizations in line, and it will be more effective.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and vulnerable to heat and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then perform a fire cautery in the area behind the bladder, where the hair at the base of the penis is found, and do this on both sides; and let each cautery be as long as one finger; and perform a cautery behind the back, wherever you feel the need; and let the cauteries be claw-shaped according to the shape described above.
of the testes When the testicles are cold and moist, so that they cannot produce sperm, and the flowers are corrupted and delayed in their term; and when they come, they cause great pain: therefore it is necessary to perform three fire cauteries around the testes, as we have said for the bladder, and three behind the back; and let the cauteries be claw-shaped, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moisture descends into the box of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the leg is farther away than the other when it is measured together; and the leathers are found between the departments, so that you cauterize the patient on the box of the hip at .i. a semblant cautery, and sign before the leather around the box as it turns, so that the box is inside the circle; and if it is such cauterizes as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make .iij. cauterizes of the great olive, and let the cauterizes be perfect as well; and treat it until it is well.
of the hip pain When pain comes into the hip joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of large humors with fetid pills, or other bad-looking pills.
After the fire cautery, and the manner of the cautery is according to .iij. manners: that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which one is: that you cauterize on the hip joint .iij. triangulaz cauterizes according to this form, and make it deep and large, and between each cautery leave a space the size of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-colored; never do you make a cautery in the middle on top of the head of the hip, for there are .iiij. according to this form:
And if you wish, if the cauterization at the cautery of the circle that we have just mentioned in the dislocation of the hip: but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the hip, and all the space of the joint be burned.
And this is the manner that we do in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach until the thigh or leg: and if it comes only to the thigh and leg, then you make .ij. cauterizes there where the patient says the pain is, and .i. cauterize on top of the ankle 2, at the left side a little; and let the cauterizes be scalpel-like, and let the thickness of the joint burn; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to 2 toes or near the ankle, then cauterize there where he feels the pain 1.ij. points or .iiij. at the cautery called "points".
And if he is a craftsman, let him do more; and if the pain comes from the groin toward the thigh, let him do fire cautery with a scalpel or a circular tool, and give him good care in all his cauterizations so that you do not leave him without doing them properly, burning the nerves and the large arteries, and causing great harm and contraction to the patient.
And I have seen many who did cauterize on the foot's sole, leaving it so long that the leg was all withered and the toes as well, and the toes were pierced and corrupted; after a solution of the belly which caused death.
And if the pain is in two places together, do cauterization in each one, according to this method. // And the sages said concerning the hernia cauterization, of which it is the manner, make one such hook and let it be thick at the tip as a thumb nail, or a little less, and let it be between the threads and let it be from one thread to another of the space of a nail; and let the threads be turned over on both sides, and let them also be like nails, and there are 10 such hooks made; and this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and cool down, and then put it on the box of the painful hernia, and let it be turned around on both sides; and let one cauterization be made and leave 10 days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the open wound long enough to heal.
Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its taste, and few who use it; and yet it is a good cautery that can bear it, and lay where it afflicts.
of the pain of the two
When pain comes to the back, either by touching or by impact or by too much evacuation, or by the appearance of expanded cold material, no one of these appearances is worth of remedies, unless it is that which comes from the infusion of cold material.
It is fitting that after the patient has voided the filth from his bowels or other appearances, you make him lie down on his back where the pain is, three signs of a line, and in each line 3 remedies.v. remedies or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and it is done at the remedy that is called "poins"; and if you see, do 3 remedies or 4 at the کلید remedy according to this form:
Maitres often comes this disease to small children, and the signs of onset are that they seem tight when they stand up, and they fear; and you find in the back spine at the base of the neck and its appearance that comes over the other spines.
When you see this and you have to cure him, if you cauterize with fire according to this form.
So that the fire is red-hot and equally distributed along the spine; and if you see it, cauterize with a burning fire between the lines or three, and let the points be close together. After this, cure him as we have said, and beware that you do not apply fire to gangrene which is in the nerve tissue.
of the joints
When the pain of joints comes from moisture that is spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in pieces, which the people properly call "podagra," and when it is of cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterizing in such a way: make the cautery of fire around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
When it is necessary to hold on the foot's face, do so with fire cautery for all the feet, each with iii or iv cauteries of olive-colored fire; and if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and they occur many times, each joint with iii or iv cauteries of olive-colored fire; and if you need more, do more, but don't hold your hand too long except for as long as the pain burns.
And if the pains go down to the knees and back, administer the cautery we have spoken about in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, do i or ii lines of fire; and if there is still pain in the two, do fire on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the sleeves or shoulders, cauterize each part, and govern well the sick person and give medicine. For if you govern well and you make him sweat, he will be healed with the help of God.
of the wound of the surgeon
When the rupture comes into the grooves, and the balls fall down to the joints and is a new thing, so that when you look at it to cure, it does not hurt him that day; and he uses things that leave your belly, so that the end falls from your belly; after this, let it sit on its back between your hands, and order him to wash his hair as long as the balls are repaired, and bring them to your two hands, and sign of the back of the rupture on the bone with your finger, and make a sign that is like half a circle above the heart; then heat the cautery where this form is:
as long as it is white and dry. Then bring the balls to their place; and the minister washes his hand so that he does not turn back; and carefully operate on the patient's legs, and put .i. cussin and .i. sergeant on the legs, and .i. other on the foot which washes its hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again another time until you reach the bone; and be careful that the ball does not escape when you make the cautery; lest you burn it; and lest by this the patient dies, or some other bad thing.
And know that when you come to the bone with the cautery, your efforts are in vain. And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their measure, and also of grown-ups according to their measure; after 3 days cure the place of the cautery with butter until the heat is taken away; after this cure other oils until he is healthy, and lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his bandages be relaxed for a long time, so that the ball does not escape when he goes to bed.
And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and continue it for .xl. other days; and have good rest, that he does not work too much and beware of too much drinking and eating, and too much eating and drinking; and when he has done this teaching, so is he completely healed. And I will say here after the cure of the tailor in his chapter. of the abdominal rupture
When abdominal ruptures come in others and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make a cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and let it be burned on the third curve; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the old ones say that he must be cauterized at the cautery at three angles according to this shape:
but the first sign is the top of the navel and make a line through the width above the rupture, and another from behind, and with your hand spread it out completely; but the first cauterize is lighter and moves less.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, or from a fall or injury, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medicine for it is of no use, then it should be burned with fire called "poins", and be burned according to the length of the limb, its smallness, its weakness, its virtue, and its position in relation to torments, and its pain. If it heals after the first burn, that is good; but if not, begin again on another burn, for such is the custom, so that you must perform the burns as long as the patient remains ill.
for medicine
for medicine
And if the mess is everywhere sparse; and it loses manifestly, so that you cauterize your patient with these cauterizations we have said above, that is, cauterization in his neck, and two cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one great one on the skull, and one more delicate one, and two on the shoulder blades; and two on the ribs, and two on the joints of the hands and feet, and the pits of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are behind the foot, so that you do not burn them; and never make a cauterization on the bone of the hand, or another on the bone of the stomach, or another on the liver.
And know that the more I make of a cauterization, the greater help it gives; and know that the patient does not feel the pain of the cauterization as much as healthy people do, because his body is already very corrupted. And let the cauterizations be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the shape of iron. After this, cure him with flour of times with honey and other cures until he is well.
of enfleur
Here is the translation of the text:
I cannot provide a translation for this line as it appears to be a word or phrase from another language that has no direct translation into English or is unclear.
When the disease that is called "albaras" is relieved, and the medicine does not help at all, then make a fire cautery with a very small cauterizing tool, according to the size of the flesh at the cure, until the blotch is osteified, and its color changes; then treat with flour of dates and lentils, with rosewater and plantain leaves, and wormwood and almond juice, each part separately; and mix them together, bind them with a cloth, and apply them to the affected area until it is healed.
Here is the translation of the text:
When the sore comes to start, and you stop the view, if the fire cautery at the fire cautery which seems a circle, all around the edge of the sore. And all the healers say that one should also make fire cautery in the middle of the sore; and this does not seem good to me, for I fear it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to come about any time; and a more right thing is that it be fire cautered around, at the fire cautery which is called "circle", as we said in many fire cauteries.
the sore that cannot die
When some one has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays dying or because of the surplus of blood that it makes or because of the age of the illness when it is too old, and there is little blood, or because of the heat of the illness when it is hot, and you see him hasten to die: then cauterize him around with a small fire; after that let it be so. For it will hasten to die.
And if you pierce him at all the cautery, if the fire cautery is hot of which this form is made:
And hold your hand in the middle of this disease called 'adubelate' as long as the cauterization has penetrated the cure, and make such cauterizations that the patient feels a distance from it in some way so that the course of corruption is chosen. After the treatment until he is completely healed.
the fire cure by iron
Another disease that is called 'corrodens', and is nothing but a swelling of the members, for it swells them just as fire dries up wood. If you see this disease in its early stages and can apply fire cauterization, then heat the cauterizations carefully, small and large, according to what suits the place where the disease is; after the fire cure on all sides until the corruption is completely burned away, and nothing remains of it, that whatever is corrupted does not become bone. And then leave it for  .iij. days, and put oil on the cauterized places so that the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption. After the treatment with ointments generating char, and if after .iij. days health does not come, start again the fire cauterization on what is delayed corrupted. And this swelling is never cured with water medicine treatment instead of fire cauterization; but fire cauterization is much more helpful, and I have already spoken about the treatment with water medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
of radishes that come from the ground
Mouth of times has come that the piez by natural birth a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a great fault free thing that bleeds the foot. And the cauterize of this disease so are two ways. That is to say cauterize of fire, and cauterize of hot water. Cauterize of fire if that you warm one cauterize well as is a quill of vouteul, and is made of good iron at the measure that it can porpenre the nail from all sides, and that there is subtilz margins; after it put all chaut on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it come to the end of the nail; and he leaves it so 1 2 days as it begins to move corruption; then it makes a plaster of wild mallows crushed with seil, and leaves the plaster on all night, and it pulls off the nails and will be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the wound by charring as long as it is healthy.
And if he is converted by nature the body, and many times come and in hands and em piez, then it is necessary that you bring him cauterize of hot water; and it is on a part way: take a rope of iron or steel, or a quill of vouteul, and put sus lou clou and l'althelul, that is to say porrelz verrues; and put the rope sus so that he porpreigne all around, then I put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand in turning so that the margin of the rope comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water deep path up to the root; and suffer the patient a little the mordication of the hot water an hour; then let it be, and it will be uprooted all its roots. In this way do one after another, until you have emptied all these who are in the body, then cure them of ointments which generate char.
Then cure him of trembling.
iiij. cauteres or iv. on the spine of the back, i. between each spine; and i. cauterize the feet, and i. on the stomach with olive cautery; so he will tremble, and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
the pus-filled boils
No times appear on the body due to excess moisture, or pus-filled boils, which come from corrupt matter. When these first appear, a cauterization should be performed on each head of the boil using a fine firebrand made from mirth wood, which is held in the fire, or from the root of aristeology, or a lenticular cautery. No times should the cauterizations be performed at the beginning when they first appear, following this method, and they will not grow larger, but will be broken up and healed; however, it is necessary that these be done after the evacuation of blood.
When an artery is severed Maitres times the great tumult of blood from the artery that is split in the wound coming to the skin, or the incision of the abscess, or the fire cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very bad thing to be smelled.
And in any case when it has come to one, then you hasten to put your second finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it so much that your blood is calmed by your hand, and no drop comes; then take fire with olive oil, small or large as many as there are, until they are all red; then take a needle, or a long or short one according to the wound and its place, and hold the cautery on this vein where you hold your second finger, and keep the cautery on it until the blood is stopped.
And if by chance your second finger burns when you hold it on the vein, and the cautery goes out, then take quickly another cautery that is on fire.
And do not cease to make one after the other as long as the blood is stopped; and be careful that you do not burn your second finger on the vein, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when the artery is cut short, it cannot be well stopped unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction if it has not yet been treated, or by tightly winding a thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to stop blood; and bind it and stretch it carefully.
Who will administer a strict restraint of tarps or burning things upon, or other similar things, unless it is of use, do not seek it.
And if this happens to anyone and he has neither mirred nor presented medicine, then put your little finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly stretch it over the wound and over the vein; and do not move him, but keep him moist with cold water often until the sun is frozen and thickens and becomes tight; and make incisions in front of those to whom cauterization and medicine are necessary.
Here we have said in the first chapter all diseases for which fire cauterization, burning medicine, and the like are necessary; and I have placed this chapter at the beginning, and will go on from here by this middle way for those who seek lighter remedies than those who strive.
And thus as I begin this, it is necessary, oh man, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of the cauteries, and therefore it is necessary to use more caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to take any foolish actions. For many people come for treatment in this way: if they do so with their disease in such a way that it easily ends in death because of the mischief that comes from their illness and its great evil; then one should be afraid of them. And of those who give you their advice and say: "Wait, I am about to die"; and the disease is difficult. It is not necessary that you grant consent to those who come to you with this manner; but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not open without careful thought from those of whom you are certain, and from whom you could have acquired such things; and use prophecy and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be converted; and if he helps you to obtain a good reputation, glory, and a lasting memory, then he will help you.
This is a complex and intricate text that requires careful analysis and interpretation. Here is my best attempt at translating it line-by-line while preserving the original meaning as much as possible:
Here is my translation:
Here is my translation:
Here is my translation:
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen die quickly; and because of this I think it is better to relax the work of this chapter in partial treatments.
And I saw one child where the shoulder was plain with water, and each day the head grew bigger until it could no longer be sustained; and because of so much moisture it seemed that he would die, and this moisture was so gathered around the bone on his syphac, between the collarbone and the bone; and the work is so difficult because the moisture is gathered between the collarbone and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you split open the head with a wide split; and let it be as far away from us as 10 feet, while the moisture runs. And see here the shape of the sputum:
If the moisture is deeper and the abscesses are larger, then make two cuts in a cross shape according to this form:
And if the moisture is gathered around the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head opened on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not respond to you: then you should make three cuts in a certain way:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. After extracting the rags and powders, put in wine and oil, and leave it so for five days; then release it, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head be extracted evenly, and feed the patient dry meat of little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you consider the opening of the abscess, and the alignment of the point; for it is never before; it is never behind; it is never to the right; and it is never to the left.
So cut where the abscess opens, and the alignment of the point; for you have the power to do so; and beware that you do not cover the artery; and bring forth blood, so that the patient may die from the eruption of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
In regard to treatment, there are several options:
When a person has a disease that is called "catarrah" in the nose or eyes, and the illness is old, and the treatment of medicine does not benefit him, then the second cure is to cauterize with what they cover the .ij. arteries.
Therefore, when you have covered the sight, let the patient raise his head; after rubbing the place with an ashy cloth until the arteries appear, then extract the patient's neck from all the cloth; then look where the vein runs, and the two sides are next to the ears, and they are open; then sign the sides with a sharp knife, and cut each side with a gouge made of 2 parts. As long as the cut comes up to the bone, and that is done on both sides by the wide part of the head.
And if you see, pour out the gouge over the artery and cauterize it from above, cutting it also as two sides from a 2-part gouge.
And when the vein is cauterized, let it continue to flow upwards without stopping.
And if the artery does not open at the feel, then you must measure the quantity of space of .ij. dos, and then sign with your hand and cut just to the bone; and that which is necessary to put blood out, it is 1.v.c/, and perhaps a little more or less. according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone not to spread pain, if the cope that the abscesses cover do not come out, then drain the wound and bind it, and the cure of the wound until it is healed.
Here comes the first line:
When the ancient emaciation comes, and the catarrh obtained, because of the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old feverishness and similar things, and is medicated by methods of medicine and all that does not benefit it, then we drain the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
And the way of extracting them is that the patient makes the hair grow in his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is a little more or less repelled than in some men who are too cold; and if it is repelled, then the patient's collar should be removed from any drapelz, then rub the place with any harsh drap, and raise the place of warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatemile where this is the form:
Then scorch the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then turn it over as many times as there are fingers on each hand; and if the artery is thin, then cut it off with the point of the hook according to the quantity of the 20 fingers. For if it is not cut off, there will be no saving of all things.
Then turn the blood from the 20 fingers until there are 3; and if the artery is large, then bind it with 2 double strong threads of silk, so that porosity does not come before the sudoration of the wound, and go away running from blood; then cut off the surplus between the 2 threads at the same time, and then, if you see, cauterize with the fire of the cautery up to the bone as soon as the fingers are cut; and this is the work of the cauterizing, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
For the cautery is an aid to end moisture: for what is it that there is more of an aid for moisture? Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill up the place with well-made tents; and when you take them off, let there be medicines of dry things that make them come to birth, and of tents, as much as they are healthy; and if without a cort of the artery so long as you operate, if you employ the leach of vitriol, or extract it by your hand that the sin be stained; and if you have not this present, if you put on the leach your finger so long as the sin continues, and is extracted as it should be; and that which is sore and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the base of this hook-shaped cautery of 20 parts, but let the cutting be well made so that it lasts longer in heat. For when the instrument is too weak, then it holds less heat. And it should have between the .ij. tools a .i. an adequate amount of space, and then when you have cut through the .ij. leus, and you rub hot over it until it comes to the bone, and seal the vein in the .ij. leus; and they are separated between the .ij. joints because this cautery is not bound on all sides; and this is the shape of the cautery:
tears
For when the tears of the eyes come from the veins that are above the head of fire, and it does not benefit from medicine that is done, and you see the face of the sick person turn black, and feel like ice; and if they are too weak and moist so that the hair of the paper falls, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is a need for this cure.
And they called the ancient "cure for contusion", and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease in his hair or forehead, then cut him .iii. slits on the forehead evenly according to its length; and let one of the slits also be as two together all along the forehead up to the nose, and the other two as two on either side behind the ears, and keep from cutting the arteries which are behind the ears; and remove your hand from the jaw's continuation, and let each wound have the quantity of three fingers at its tip.
from the incision which is on the temple up to the second incision; and peel off all the keratin that is between the two slits up to the bone, then do the same for the other side up to the second incision, and then remove this sponge completely.
if you dip in the first slit the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and soft on the other side, and this form is: And measure the length of the cut towards the horse's back, and the length of the bone, and the thickness until it reaches a medium width. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the hairs until the incision is continuous until the place where it opens from the back, and then do the same in the medium width until the other end; and then extract the blood equally, and express the place for the blood taken; and then put a tent of old cotton into each cut, and put drapes soaked in wine and oil and garlic, and take care that the abscesses do not come; and on the third day release the tie, and introduce a great amount of water plant, and then treat with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds until it is healed.
to continue
For when there is a constant catarrh with habitude, and you see the hairs thin and fall out, and dimming of vision, and burnt papers; and the hair turns white, and at the head it hurts very much, and the patient sneezes; therefore know that these matters and this catarrh do not come from one vein only, but from many; and such a cure as this is, so is this.
And so command the patient to re-position his forehead, then make a deep cut along the brow, and another across the broad. . . And begin from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, and incise as far as the bone; and keep your hands away from the temples that move when you yawn; and when the bone is exposed, clean all the blood with a sponge, and then wrap it between the . . . lips of the cut and place cotton wicks and linen strips on top; then lay damp cloths soaked in wine and oil over it, and keep the wound warm; and when the bone is exposed, if char comes to be born, then treat it with things that dry it out, which cause chara.
In this manner: take 1/2 pound of flower of wheat, and 3/4 pound of kohl, and make an ointment; and apply it to the wounds in order to prevent chara from forming everywhere.
of the sticking-up of the ears
All those who have ears are of the four things: or grain, or beast, or stone of little value, or similar thing as iron; or seed, as peas, beans, and potatoes; or flowing things as water and easily moving and similar things.
When it chokes in the ear, stone or another kind of thing that does not fit well into the ear, do not put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, pour a little violet oil or seed oil; then let it be extracted; and what is done is to jerk violently, and the nostrils stop when the jerking comes, and place pieces of linen or wool inside the ear; and turn the ear upside down. Many times this cure brings relief; and if it does not bring relief, then extract it with a subtle pin, from which this form comes:
If it comes out with the pin, it is good; if not, then extract it with a small, double-edged blade; and if it does not come out with that, make a metal ring and squeeze the head of the ring or the opening of the ear very hard, so that it cannot enter with the ring; then try again, for many times it comes out in this way as we have said; and if it does not come out in any way, then take glutinous substance where they are, and put some cotton inside; then press the glutinous substance on the stone or whatever it is, and try again. If it does not come out with any of these things that we have said, then you must cut the ear in such a way that the warm blood comes out, and spasms; and the way to cut it is so that you make the first incision at the base of the head of the shoulder, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then put the head of the shoulder between your hands and turn the ear upside down, and make a small cut in the root of the ear with fat or oil depending; and let the cut be like the moon, as long as you can feel the stone, then cut it carefully, and suck it gently into your mouth; and the cure until it is healed. And if it is corn that has grown, and it swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer .i. spitamentum tenue subtil selon cette forme :
And if it is corn that has grown, and it swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer  .i. spitamentum tenue subtil selon cette forme : et amenistre incision de celui grain . Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pièces ; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtils et au succier , si com nos avons dit, si que li extractions soit aligié .
So it is necessary that the patient use sneezing with condiments at the beginning of the illness, and dry out the ear with old cotton. And it should be placed on the middle part where the fluid is; if it is not, take maintes pierres according to the length of your finger in a light way, and heat them a little by the fire; and put one into the patient’s ear, and sneeze upon it from the other side, and make another with another stone on top of the ear; and do not cease to make the stone in the stone until all the fluid is gone, and thus it should be; and if you see, take 1 jonc, and bottle one of the ears in the ear, and the other chief take from the fire as long as the more dou jonc is burned; then make another with other jons until all the fluid is gone, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the best, if it is a small worm, as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large worm that can be felt, administer extraction with pinceaux; and this is the lighter thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them, as we said in the division and where to treat distillation, and if the cure does not benefit, it is necessary that you look at the ear towards the sun; if there are no worms, take a fine pin and if they do not appear, take the form.
And be tight below and wide above. And pour the subtlest chief into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck the form completely; do this again and again until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, so pierce between the cotton with a pin as I said in the stone; and if they do not come out strongly as we have said, administer distillations which the old ones have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where to treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, this is the form as you see:
And be tight below and wide above. And use a small, sharp tool to open a hole for distillation; and for pressing the distillation in, there is an instrument of brass, very well made, for sucking, and if you see one, take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice, and what you have of your medicines in the cain, and let the cain be in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or evaporated from the ear; and smell the patient's breath, and let the distillation be very hot on the fire, so that it is distilled in the ear, and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the ringing in the ears
No children are born who do not have any piercing in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by the ringing in a wound or a chafing in the ear, and this ringing comes sometimes completely into the ear, so that it cannot be seen; and it never happens that there is only one piercing, and the hearing goes away, and the sight is well.
That which comes completely, so that it cannot be seen, is a great cure for many disorders, and in this case you should put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the work has done all this sputum of which there is this form:
And so it will be in front and behind all plain, if it does not break the ear; if the operation is a chafing or a corn in the ear, if it holds the pinches subtlety, and cleans it lightly, as long as that chafing is all bone.
Et s'il est opilé dans l'oreille, prends .i. un rasoir fin léger et chauffe-le un peu au feu, puis met-le sur le cor de l'oreille. Si tu sens l'opilation dont le patient sent une grêlure à l'ouïe, perce légèrement, et garde que tu ne creves pas les nerfs de l'oreille ; puis mets dans l'oreille une tente selon la largeur du perforé, et l'enduis de suie égyptienne.
If it is opiled in the ear, take a.i. a fine light razor and heat it slightly on the fire, then put it on the cork of the ear. If you feel the opilation which the patient feels a grating to hear, pierce lightly, and be careful not to cut the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and dampen it with Egyptian suet. Do this for as long as the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, and powder it with vitriolic broiling; and if you see the ear running, cover it so that you pull out the tent and move another tent moistened with rosin which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is lifted; then heal it as long as it is healthy.
If the discharge comes from the ear, dip a sponge and rag in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments which heal the ear discharge that are or are made with distillations.
of the paper
Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
"And if not peeled, then the fire cautery with the lenticular cautery, and the cautery after incision valour moves; and many times return, for nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and never return."
"from the grewsle"
"Many times come in papers things that seem gresle in form and dureness, and for this is called 'grandine', and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper on top and bottom; the ovraiges are these: take care if the grandine mutates from one part to another, and it is a light thing to know; cut the wide, then scorch each legily, then take it with tweezers, and cover. You do not need to pierce the paper, for this does no harm to the patient; and if it splits, so mend it with thread, and cure as long as it is healthy; and if it is small, do not use force, for the oignons will soon restore it and cause chafing."
And if the earache goes down into the ear towards the part above, then turn the paper over, and the earache is at two pinches, and the paper is pressed on both sides; and if the paper is moved by incising, it does no harm; and when the earache is cut off, let the oil of salt water live there, and cure the place that causes it as long as the patient remains healthy.
of the fat from the hairs
Exinach is a fat that is produced in paper webs, and it happens more often in children than in others, and it hurts their eyes; it makes them cry by morning, and they cannot see the light of the sun because their tears go to their eyes; and because of this they lie down on their faces, sleep, and their papers are wet where the exinach comes out and covers their eyelashes with oil. And when you squeeze the place between your fingers and feel the exinach coming out.
And the way to use it so that the patient puts his head in your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and set up a tent like a circle according to the quantity of exinach from each part, and then put it on; and press with your fingers from both sides, so that the exinach is gathered in the middle; and cut with the blade into the moisture, making a split no bigger than a vein is made for opening it; and then clean the skin completely until you come to the exirnach; and in several dispositions the exirnach comes out of the split, according to the shape of a piece of fat that is white.
Take then an entire piece of sackcloth between your two hands at the back, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as it grows sparse; and be careful not to move in the tear, lest you come all the way to the spine, lest you splatter it.
And if the extraction does not cause pain in the tearing, then a little more lightly tear it as much as it appears; then remove it as we have said, then moisten the cloth in water and place it in its place, and extract from the bones.
And if such men crush silk and place it on top to corrupt this moisture that is delayed. Then treat it until it is healthy. And if it comes to the base of the aposteme, then the treatment with oil tempering until it is healthy.
For the hairs of paper
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
"Place the head of the sick person in your lap, then hold the paper of the oil in your left hand; if it bends, it is good; but if not, pour an arrow on all one thread above; and let the hair that grows there be straightened out, and bring the thread up to all the paper, and turn it with the razor; then tear off the paper from the part that has bent, straightening out the hair, counting all the blisters with the thread, from the great ones down to the small ones; then pull out the thread, and wrap the paper in a little cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper a figure of an eye, as if it were the fist of a mirth; and it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised to all."
"And if the part that needs it has a great quantity of paper according to what the paper is softened; then make on all the blisters above the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the great blister down to the small one; and let it be an incision near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then pour the oil into one of the two angles of the corner, then scorch it entirely; then join the two lips together with a thread of very fine wool, and rinse the blood, and let the excess of the threads hang on the two sides for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, because the paper relaxes at the touch of the wound and its gathering, but the stitch is wet (as the old people say), and it is work without fear;"
and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a mold that is as well as the leaf of myrrh, as we have told, to .iiiij. times, desevrez according to the form which is here:
then take who rises on small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you do not have the ability to hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, then take an needle or he has .i. thread, and the bottled in the figure; and bottle another thread of them great wound, and the second thread of them little, and assemble between your two threads equally; then lift up your hand equally, and lift up all the leather on which you have signed, as we have told, then assemble the 2 lips of the wound by sutures, and heal it until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, so appease it with cerot and similar ointments soothing;
and there is no time that the hair of the paper has been converted: so it is necessary to use that which we have said about incision; but the suture in one and the other place is more artificial.
Here is the translation of the text:
"If it delays, if the bandage is tight, then treat it as long as it is healthy; and when the wound is healed, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the 2 dogs that you shall make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:"
"The ovraiges are such that you squeeze a needle finely, and pour 1 thread of silk fine and细丝; then join the chiefs and tie them together gently, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order in the chase 1 other thread of silk briefly, and tie the chiefs with this thread; then put the patient's chief on your own Chief; and let the sun shine so that the ovraige is subtle and small, then bottle the needle into all the chase near the hair root ajusted, and make it pierce through the paper hastily as you pull it up; then draw out the hair until it reaches the chase, and pour in the chase that hair, whether 1 or 2 or more; then remove your hand until the hairs come out of all the chase with the natural hair."
And if it is chased, treat it and the hairs do not come with it, so you will pull the chase out to all the thread that you have ordered, as long as the chase comes from the pit on top and you see it by the vision of oil; then, if you pull the chase and the thread, and lock in there and leave it there .ij. days or .iij., until the hair is hard in its place and the fur grows up; and if the hairs are small, then accompany with it i long hair from nature, and raise it along with that which you leave, as long as it is stretched out and then let it lie down.
of the oil
When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the porriture comes in oil, there are of ii ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from a cautery, and from similar things.
And the method of treatment in this is that you open that wound, and separate the lips of it, and put linen cloth inside, and lie there as long as it is well; and you must not use in its cure any things that dry and restrain. For if you do so, the disease will return worse than before; but if you use things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the water of rose or bitter ale and linseed are cooked, and olive oil is melted in no oil, and I wrap a tent, and I cure it from that.
And the treasures of your cure, if you take care that it does not harden according to the shape that it had before; and the remedies that we have said are only effective against this disease if it returns according to the shape that it had before.
of the oil which comes out
This disease, which is known as "axacrati", is natural and accidental. The accidental causes arise from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things; and the path of the ovraige is such that you place a double-edged needle, making one edge face right up, so that it pierces 17 degrees of the left lamina, then continues to pierce all 17 degrees of the char, then goes up in a single line to the top of the needle, and finally stops at a single point.
And the shape of the paper returns according to what is appropriate for it; if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, turn the paper over, and make 17 cuts or scores on the inside of the paper; and let the chaps of the 17 cuts or scores be at the 17 angles of the incision that you have copied, and let one angle be such that when they are assembled, the shape is like that of a letter with a non-sloped "g" (i.e., a round "G"); then put on the char, according to the quantity that its edges are turned out from the paper, from that which follows the paper, and then join the 17 sides, and sew them with another thread; then treat this disease with soft medicines, and tenting, until it is well.
And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, you should make a plain split between the hairs of the paper, and according to what is written above; then remove it between the 19th and 20th leathers of a tent, as I said; and one must perform the work according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the master remedies must be equipped at all times how to bring back the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is appropriate for the work and instruments in multiple preparations.
to remove from the paper
When this soudure has come about in such a way that the paper above is souded with oil, and cannot move or perform its natural work, then it is necessary that you put the tip of a razor between the paper and the oil, and lift it up; and spread it with the thin liquid, which should not be too sharp or too rough, so that the oil does not burn the patient with the too sharp liquid; and let your incision, from which you remove what is assembled, be light, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and all that is assembled must be washed in bitter salt water and soft water and vinegar; then put between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and place on the oil wool wetted with an abundance of egg white; and after three days use of the collar and the things which are souded thus long as it be sane.
of the unglues of oil
Saiches that the nail is according to .ij. manners: it is nervous and seems to last a day hard syfac, and another which is not at all nervous, but seems to be white congealed moisture, that when one touches iron and cares for pinceures, there can be no man; and both these appearances begin to spread towards the great eye, and grow small and small until it covers the whole vision and light and movement of the oil.
And the way of incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then he opens the eyes; and lift up the paper to your hand, then double the nail at small doubled, and raise it up; then take a needle, and I put 1.poil of horse, or cow, or of bull, and 1.strong thread; and double the needle’s point a little and stick it into the nail, and pierce all the nail with the needle, and tie the nail to a thread and raise it up, and peel off from all the nail the skin which remains after the incisions, so that by incision does not come the neck of the tears usually; and never is the nail to be raised completely, and on the thread, as we have said; then peel off all the skin that comes out, so that there is its form:
And keep so that the spatumile does not touch the charnel cloth and tear it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision pour in oil a little sewed, and of the colier made of alum, and leaves it until another day; then cure him of whatever he needs until he is healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the nails cannot enter, this image of the nail with medicine is often cured; and it comes like I have told in the division, and if you cover it, then do this oil from the disease, and take the spittle lightened according to this form:
And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it is not shrinking at all and the root is pressing down, then distill from your mouth into oil made of lime and red ochre and finely ground, and stop the oil until the next day; then begin again with this method, as long as it is completely healed.
If there is nothing against the oil, then dip the finger in it like an apostem, then lap it with milk, and first cure the apostem that is healthy, then begin again as before, as long as it is healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eye hurts in the oil due to great harm, then suspend it with a chain, and dip one part and not all at once, so that tears do not come; then distill into oil of red ochre which is made of lime.
of the horse which was born on the apple tree
of the horse which was born on the apple tree
And when the incision is complete and all the hair has been removed, then pour the oil of sesame or you have distilled red wine and similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton cloth over the oil with care to keep it from spilling; for if he delays at all, and the sun rises on him, and you doubt about cauterizing, then leave the oil and treat the wound with healing medicines; then return to your work until it is healed, and in this way the hair will grow back.
But in any case, it is necessary that you adapt the cure to each oil according to nature; and according to accident, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that the member is suffering from that work.
the hair
the hair are red and are covered with oil, and take care of the work and weaken the oil every day. It is therefore necessary that you look at the head first: instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then suspend the hair from all sides according to your wisdom, and make the strands double according to this form:
And let there be two strands of hair per degree in three courses according to this form:
then carefully double the subtle hair, and wash the blood after another hour, as long as you see the removed hair from the oil; and keep the oil from being burned at the tips of the spatulums, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you don't burn the hair; and when you have finished, carefully distil into the oil green and red essence to corrupt what is delayed
And if you cannot hold all this together in that hour, then make a paste on the oil of soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and is assured by the heat, then start again according to this way which is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of power:
of the fistula of the oil
the fistula of the oil: and if you cure it with fire and medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then cut through the tendon on the aposteme, leaving it where it must die, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see corruption and blackness, then resound it with all the instrument where it is the form; and is called "aspre chief", and be made of fire in a chief, and be pointed as a lime, as it is in the present form:
And set upon the bone's place that is rotten, then turn it between your two hands, and press with your hand a little as you know that corruption is released; and do not do this again, then put back the place of medicinals that dry up.
If the bone is solid and the heart is healthy, and the bone of the bow is solid and remains so for a while, and does not renew or swell up, and no bad accident happens to it, you know that it is well; if not, then except for bringing the fistula to light at the nipple according to this form: and is that you uncover from the bone the second time by iron, and by medicines that dry up, and when he is uncovered thus take him away. i.i.f. forth according to this form, and let his iron be at three angles, and his furrow be flattened out jusc'as far as you see it:
Then set upon the bone's deliquesce place, and move your hand away from the oil .i. a little, then turn all the forest again until it pierces the bone and feels the pain of the patient through his nose because he holds his hand on his nipple; and then put back the place of medicinals that dry up, as I have taught you, and when the heart is hot and hardens the leus, so goes the matter to the nose; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the oil's issue
When the hairs are fully grown in all parts, and there is no stirring or rustling thereof, if thou layest the patient down, then hast thou done well; but if thou dost not lay him down, but puttest on him a bandage, so that he feeleth it not, then hast thou done ill; for by this means the hair will grow long and even.
For the removal of a torn web
For the removal of a torn web veiled over the wound, then open it, and comes like paper, as if a grain of resin, and is visible to see; therefore you cover it with a cloth, then take a needle there where it has broken at the root of that part until the top, then stick another needle in this part where the thread doubles from the armier; then make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position; then tie one end of the thread to the other, and draw it tight, then remove the needle and put oil there wet with unguent; and leaves it as long as the thread pulls on the web veiled, then treat the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed; and never restrict the wound with a circle of cloth from any part until it is healed.
And if the hairs are of good appearance, if he pierces it with a very fine needle that comes perfectly from the oil, and he draws off the moist white pus and washes the hairs, and he dries them up in a short time; then he draws them out until they are healed.
of the bow of oil
This appears to be a treatment for an unknown condition, possibly related to oil or aqeuous solutions. It involves applying heat and using a fine needle to pierce the skin, drawing off any pus or excess fluid, and washing with oil. The text also mentions the appearance of the affected area and how to position the patient for treatment.
of the oil
Our eyes see the appearance of needles in the division, and what is suitable for piercing; if it is done according to health. It is necessary that you place the patient between your hands crosswise, away from the light of the sun, and bind the healthy oil tightly and firmly; then set the paper of the oil on your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if the eyes are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument which is called 'almagda', or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right; then set the tip of the instrument on the crown by its thickness on a ray in that clear oil to the part of the smallest tear, and then pour out the instrument which is called 'almagda' well, and turn your hand around so that it pierces into the clear oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the path of almagda be at the perfect measure of the space that is from the plumule up to the end of the darkness; and this is the crown of oil. Then you will see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the horn-like cloth, and then set the instrument up to where the needle is, and then express one path after another. Now the needle comes out, so you can see the patient and the instrument in his oil.
After a short rest, and then the needle comes up the second path, set it firmly with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not rise, remove almagda lightly by turning your hand back and forth; and then put in a little string of gem oil, and leave that oil inside. Then set aside the stopped oil or another dry one soaked in oil and lots of perfume, and bind with healthy oil. We, and those who are of our time, let us put on quickly with abundant perfume.
And if almagda cannot enter the oil because of its hardness, for there are some men who have too thick hairs, it is necessary that you squeeze the instrument which is called 'alberit', from which this form comes:
And so now cut the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep with the scalpel, but make it [the wound] open subtilely, then pour in alum as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient the sleeping coming forward, since he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be careful of all movement, and press light meats, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to its disposition until three days; then remove it in that very dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then bind it again until the seventh day; and it is necessary that you do this during the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you prepare this, for he will go up quickly.
And so now cut the abscess carefully, and do not go too deep with the scalpel, but make it open subtilely, then pour in alum as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient the sleeping coming forward, since he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be careful of all movement, and press light meats, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to its disposition until three days; then remove it in that very dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then bind it again until the seventh day; and it is necessary that you do this during the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you prepare this, for he will go up quickly.
And so now cut the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep with the scalpel, but make it open subtilely, then pour in alum as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient the sleeping coming forward, since he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be careful of all movement, and press light meats, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to its disposition until three days; then remove it in that very dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then bind it again until the seventh day; and it is necessary that you do this during the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you prepare this, for he will go up quickly.
And these are the appearances of the shapes of gold, so that he who does not know them sees them; and they are of pure brass:
And let the chief of these medium subtilities be, and the behind in three angles acute.
of the square on the neck
And no one of these characters appears or is a square on the neck; there are no scorpions at the mouth of it; and if there is any such character that has a fox's color, and if there is a character with good color: In this character, which is good, and not encumbered, let the patient sit between your hands toward the sun; and open his nostrils, and place the needle on the characters, and cut them hard; then take what you please from that which you have placed on the sputum of the subtle agut on one side, until you know that this character is all bone.
And if there remains nothing that cannot be covered, if the opening is everything but the instruments of subtlety are light, so that nothing stays; and if without you rise up or an abscess, then the cure is such as it should be; and if these are evil abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them until the sap is dried up and all the pus is drained, then pour in or pour out easily and quickly or wine.
If there remains nothing that cannot be covered, if the opening is everything but the instruments of subtlety are light, so that nothing stays; and if without you rise up or an abscess, then the cure is such as it should be; and if these are evil abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them until the sap is dried up and all the pus is drained, then pour in or pour out easily and quickly or wine. If there remains nothing that cannot be covered, if the opening is everything but the instruments of subtlety are light, so that nothing stays; and if without you rise up or an abscess, then the cure is such as it should be; and if these are evil abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them until the sap is dried up and all the pus is drained, then pour in or pour out easily and quickly or wine. If there remains nothing that cannot be covered, if the opening is everything but the instruments of subtlety are light, so that nothing stays; and if without you rise up or an abscess, then the cure is such as it should be; and if these are evil abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them until the sap is dried up and all the pus is drained, then pour in or pour out easily and quickly or wine.
And let it be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, like a tube, and conduct it also; and if you see, then make a close tube, and let the instrument be plain for purging the head; and hold 1 hand to the head to keep it while the oil or any liquid is heated.
of the shoulder from the neck
Might there be a disease at the top of the neck that is called "telul," and grows and becomes great enough to be seen with the eye; and because of this, you should chop it at the beginning, and then burn the bone completely, and then apply the fire cautery or medicine; and if one delays to chop it until it is great, if it is hard, of a strange color, poor in feeling: but do not touch it with iron for it is an infected abscess, for when you chop it once, much harm comes to the patient; and this abscess is touched gently, not with a strange color, and you see that one can completely chop it, if one empties and stops it without fear, and cure it with dry and restraining things.
when the neck is chopped and cured
When solutions of continuation come in one of these ovraige cartilages, it profits little, rather than in some men. It therefore comes that when one has a wound in any part, he should look at it carefully; and then bind it up with 2 fingers, then cure it as long as it remains healthy; and if the fingers are separated on either side, you should skin all the parts of their flesh as long as they heal, then join the 2 fingers together again, and tighten them, and powder them with dragon's blood powder, and incense broied; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of a strong kind or another plaster that always sticks, and leave it there until it cracks, then cure it with ointment as long as it remains healthy.
The way to sew up the wound so that you gather the solution: or with needles, as we have said in sewing up the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
abscesses on the lips
The way to sew up the wound so that you gather the solution: or with needles, as we have said in sewing up the lips; or with thread, as I have told you.
The way to sew up the wound so that you gather the solution: or with needles, as we have said in sewing up the lips; or with thread, as I have told you.
Maitres often naissent on the gums charred, that the old ones call "albulus"; if it is convenient that you hold them with tweezers, and the cope at its root, and let run the bow or the blood; then put over the place vitriolic broied, or other restraining and desiccative powders; and if this char returns after the incision, and often happens, if the cope the second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after cauterization; and these are the forms of the tools to cope.
of the remedies
Of the remedies for toothache: None are assembled in the head of the teeth, between the gums, that are ugly and sharp; and none are black and yellow and rotten, until the corruption comes to the gum, and are the teeth stinky; if it is convenient that you sit the sick person between your hands, and his teeth be in your hand, and pluck out the teeth or the caries that appear, as long as he does not stay; and so do black and green, and yellow and other colors, until they are clean; and if one that is to be pulled comes up again at the second day and third, as long as you have them all out; and know that a tooth has need of various shapes of instruments to be pulled out, according to what the operation demonstrates, because the rasor from which one pulls the teeth has other shapes than those from which one pulls between the teeth; and these shapes and others be with you prepared.
It is convenient when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay pulling it as long as you can, because this should not be done at all; for it is a high-priced substance until there is no excuse to pull it. So then when the patient is constricted by the treatment, it is necessary that you be sure of the tooth that hurts. Many times the pain leaves the patient, and he thinks it is a sound tooth, and he has it treated; and yet the pain does not go away until the tooth has been removed, for we have already tried this on these elders; and when you are certain of the tooth that hurts, so that you cut around the tooth with a very sharp scissor at first and then again, until it is well loosened, then tighten the scissors firmly; and let the patient's jaw be in your holy place between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After removing the tooth properly without breaking it, and if it does not fit, then take any of these instruments and put it in from each side slightly, and move it as you did first. And if the space is narrow and filled with bones, then make a cut in the gums gently to pull out the tooth. And it is necessary to work carefully around the gums when pulling out the tooth.
And do well to avoid breaking it, and if a part remains, and return it to the patient by the root's badness of the first pains. And be careful that you do not do this as the ignorant elder does, who, by his haste and boldness, often breaks the carriage, and does not manage at all what we have described; but brings about any pain of the great disease by the roots that he holds back, or by the carriage that he breaks, as we have often wanted to; and when the tooth is pulled, if you wash the hole with wine or asparagus and salt; and they run away without stopping until the pain comes again, which often happens, if you employ the hole of vitriol; and if this does not work, then cauterize.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
And let them be of strong limbs so that they do not bend when pulled, and let them be well made of iron, and let them have teeth to hold fast.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains moist when pulled, then put cotton and oil on the place where it hurts; and let them be made inside like a file, and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out of all these tongs, then you must uncover the whole bar until the root, and put the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say palache, from which this form is taken:
And be far and thick so that it does not break, and the root jumps out through this, it is good; if not, then help with all the tools, from which the forms come later:
And if one helps with this instrument which has .ij. rays, from which this form is taken:
and other iron tools that are before in the rationale of the dens, and of this instrument which seems a great tongs, whose form is:
And be this instrument so that it cannot break, and know that most of the instruments from within are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the master of wisdom will try by himself his instrument, according to what his work and the disease show him, because there are many diseases where the elder does not teach an instrument for the diversity of them; and if it does not break the carriage or the other bones, or he rides, then look for the instruments that you need, which I told you, and help with the gestures, so here is the form: And be strong and well able to hold the bone, that it does not escape but can hold it and remove it; and then return him to his place with suitable medicines for this person, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, so the resection of all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to nature's form, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, if it seems that the root is after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and cannot be sewn or filed: then cut off; and if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is here, which resembles a small pick, and made of iron:
And wrap the cap and put your hands hard on the tooth, and for what you do not move the others, and if it appears that you can file it, so take a file of this form:
and it is also like the lime with which we make needles; and in the same way the tooth pokes and pokes lightly with the hand every day so that it does not move until it has broken; then at the end, to all razors, and its edge is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, it is necessary to sharpen the hardness as much as possible so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the tooth moves away from its socket
When the tooth moves away from its socket, either by percussion or by chewing, and the patient cannot press on it without causing pain, and you have treated it with restringent medicines, but it still hurts; if you can restrain it with a golden thread, because silver thread becomes green and rotten, but gold thread never moves; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice any pain on one side, then take the thread and double it between the iij. teeth on that side, and put the nails there, if there are more than iij. teeth, until you have successfully stopped the pain on the other side; then restart the treatment until you reach the part where you have started, and hold the hand gently and carefully, until it does not move at all; and if it relaxes, or the thread comes loose, fasten it again with another thread; if it stays put, it will remain so for a long time, and it is the form of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the iij. healthy teeth and the iij. missing ones, as you see:
and when the tooth chieves, if it returns to its place, again and again, as we have said; and no one who is not skilled and suffering should meddle with it, and never make the shape of a tooth out of ossian wood, and put it back in its place where it has fallen short, and fasten it as we have said, and leave it there for a long time.
of copper the link of the tongue
There is no time when the link of the tongue comes from nature, so don't wait; or by accident of a seared wound; and the ovations are such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and hold his head in your hand, and bring the tongue out; then take the large nerves at the base, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its attachment, and if it is hard or soft, and this is due to a sudden wound, then put the hook on the basis and take the large nerve; and be careful that the cut does not become too perfect, so that the artery remains. And when you have done this, raise the level of rose water and thus, or cold water, and then put the linen on the tongue for a while; and wash each night, so that the link cannot close. And if the blood comes out, then treat it with the lente-root which is good for that; then cure him with other remedies until he is well,
and if you see a dark or hard color, so that the sick person does not smell it, nor touch it, for it is a cancer; and if it declines towards blenchor, and there is moisture, then pour the hook, and make a fine knife out of glass, and cut on either side; and if he comes to you without delay, put him on vitriole broith so long as he is stained, and then return to your ovations until you have taken everything away; then raise the level of ash and silty water, and cure with other remedies until he is well.
of the glands in the throat
No one should put his finger in the mouth, which is called "godath", and call it by its proper name. When you heal them, as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, be careful: if it is an abscess of little size and red color, don't touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, don't touch it with iron either for the pain of the blood; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will take it away, or it would break by itself; and if it is a white color, and the root is thin, then prepare the instrument to cover, but first look at whether the abscess is hot and calmed down. Then make the patient sit in the sun, and his joints be healthy, and he opens his mouth and puts his fingers between his hands, and presses the tongue with all the instrument, so it is shaped; and it should be of silver or fine gold like our knives:
When you press the tongue on all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the scalpel and put it in the amandra, and lift it up higher than you can; and do not tie anything with it, then cover the instrument, so it is shaped, which looks like a force; but nevertheless the head is curved, and one side is above the other, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron from this or that:
And if you do not have this instrument, then cover it with pliers, so it is shaped:
And so cut from one side and the other; and when you have cut one of the mandrake roots, if you cut the other according to the same method, and after the incision gargle the sick with hot water, and sharp and easily, and they run away from blood if it comes, if you gargle the sick with water, or extracts of pomegranates, or leaves of mirth, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then he will cure as long as he is well; and never come in the throat other apostemes than the .ij. mandrake roots, if they are cut exactly like the .ij. mandrake roots.
And so I cut a woman from one side and the other; there was an aphoretic root in her throat, that is to say, a small aphoretic root; and I closed all of her throat very tightly, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage which had been stopped up, nor could she drink or eat, and she would have died if she had stayed like this for one day or two; and the aphoretic root was so high that it had been raised 1.2 times by the two passages where it was growing. So I waited a while, and put my finger in one of the passages, then took it out again, and took a large piece of bowels; then I put my finger in the other passage, and pressed her tongue; then I took the root, and cut some of it off, and only let a little blood; and thus the passage was opened up in the woman's throat, and she began to drink water and wine, and did not stop cutting the aphoretic root for a long time; and the aphoretic root grew again, and filled the place which I had emptied out, so that it became very large; then I cauterized it inside her throat: thus it stopped growing; and I left those parts behind me, and there was only God to thank afterwards.
of wine
When the pain returns from the wound, and it is running and far away, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called "uve". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the aposteme chaus are quieted, and they are thin, then you should cut them; and those who are round and gathered, and are not far away; and they are bloody or a reddish color or black, then you should avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger with this disease. So, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, that its blenchor and its longesce, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument which we have mentioned above; then put the oncine into the uve, and turn it over, and cover it with .i.ij instruments that I have said in the incision of the .i.ij mandrels. And you should not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; because if you do, it hurts the voice and the word; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the .i.ij mandrels, and cure until it is healed. And if the patient has a fear about covering, then you should use an instrument for cauterizing him with a fear. And the way of cauterization is sharp water. And it is that the patient puts his head on your healthy side, and then presses his tongue to the instrument which we have mentioned, where there is cauterization with sharp water, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and in using this instrument's handle, from which this form comes:
And put your hand on a lock where one puts the medicine, as with a spoon, and place the instrument on all the medicine on the uve; and let the patient lie on his side, so that he spits and the medicine runs from his mouth into it, if it does not go down the throat and the wound; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it onto the uve for half an hour, until you see it heal and the medicine's bites be quieted; and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument on all the cotton in the chain above, until the cotton is dry on the uve; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and after 3 or 5 days, if you see fit, rinse out the cauterized place with aquae frigida, and cure by gargling until it is healed.
This cure is safer than the incision, or the cauterization only; if it is cured by smoking in this way, take calamus and ysope and oreganum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and put all of them or any of them into a 1-liter pot, and put it there easily, and let it boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and dip the instrument in the pot as follows: And of silver or of gold, and be one of the shoulders crushed in the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises through the vein until the vein is dead; after it begins again often, as the vein dries, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the arrival of the abscess, for many things come there; and do not make this but at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a vein and put a hook into the head of the shoulder so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot; because the hook does not cause the vapor to weigh on the mouth, and this is good treatment together with salvation.
Many times it rises to the throat bone or spine of fish, or nothing; so it is necessary that you take what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun on all the instrument, so that you see the thing; and that which does not open to you and is put back in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that his food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if this thing comes out by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or .i. a slice of dry bread; and put a thread on it, and then swallow it; and when it comes to its place, if it swallows, and then draw hard; and if she does not come hard from what we have said, take a plunger according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and raise the head so that the tongue is elevated; and guard that you do not touch the epiglotte, that it does not come down to it or push the bone in; and move it so that the patient swallows the instrument, so that he vomits or spits out the thing; if she swallows her, or she spits her out completely.
of the blood from the throat
No time is medicine for the blood, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not benefit, then look at the throat of the patient towards the sun, then press it with the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the blood, send it to all small nails, or small tweezers that are worth to him. And if he is not worth, take a wet dog's tail, and pour it into the patient's throat, then pour the water of the tail hot, and do this often. And if the patient is very thirsty every day. Then take a full bowl of cold water, and open the mouth, and let him drink, and move his hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, so spit it.
And if it does not spit as we have said, then subdue the patient with ash of tansy, at the instrument that I have told you in the smoke of the oven; do this many times, for she will not gargle. And the way of the smoke is that you press a pot or he has charcoal vis, and let the smoke come out through a hole in the middle, and in that hole place the head of the instrument; then pour your smoke, and let the patient put the head of the tube in his mouth, and close his mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes to the blood; and the blood will now come, and if it does not come, then restart the smoking by many times; and make the patient thirsty, and drink salty and bitter things, and do not drink water; and then the doctor's work is that she comes out through this government.
And the shape of the instrument should be that you can see the blood, if it is, as when you can see the blood, similar to small tweezers for getting into the throat; and has a shape like a syringe, and has a尖端, so that what he takes, he cannot let go; and see this form:
the chapters about abscesses
The chapters on abscesses, according to what is remembered here and there in this book, and are diverse in perforation and in cutting; and they are in .ij. ways, the one being of its own kind, and that which is due to moisture. The second way is because of the joints where they are located. For the abscess at the top of the head is different from that of the base, and the abscess of the charnined leg is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if an abscess is not to be pierced at all, as long as the bow is dead according to its completion; and if it is of such that it must be pierced when it is crut, and does not die according to its completion, as with an abscess that is in a delicz joint; for when an abscess comes from a delicz joint, and one leaves it until it is rotten within, by chance the ligature and nerve of the joint are corrupted, for this is the cause of contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is of the main limb, and you delay the perforation as long as it is dead, it will harm the main limb; or if it is of the base, if you pierce it so that it dies before digestion is complete, and it comes to be along a fistula, and cannot heal in great terms.
And you must know the time for the perforation of the abscess that is dead according to its completion, which is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the decrease of the pain and redness, and the cooling down and sharpensings of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you must know that you should make sit the perforation where it is most dependent on the abscess, and at its root; and let the perforation be of the long of the cors, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves, and in all the limbs equal to one another where there is no pleurogie.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
"Those who do not have hair, such as superficial abscesses, should be pierced clearly; and when the abscess is large, and it has a thick wall, and you pierce it, if you do not take out all of the wall in that hour, but take out some of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then take out nothing more; do this many times with care, until the wall is all gone; especially if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a woman, or small children, or old people with weak vital forces. For the expectoration does not sometimes come out with the discharge of the wall, so that by chance the patient dies, and you do not know it."
And if the blood runs down from the wound, bring cold water and easily, and wet i.e. a towel, and place it on the running blood by many times. And if the blood runs persistently, bring governance and cure, and the powders that I have said to hand in this book, and if it is or ten of fire, and the leus where the abscesses are are very nervous, let you know that you put on your tents and drapes wet with wine and oil warm; and if it is in estoit, and the leus are charnelous, let you know that you put on drapes wet with water and oil, or with wine and oil cold, until three days, as we have said; and then unstick the abscess and dry and cure, as it should, until he is healed.
And this concerns the universal understanding in the treatment of abscesses: or I have told you how one should go before treating abscesses, and here is the paste.
of sorrows
Here is the translation of the text:
"And the size of the abscesses and the length of time they are left untreated depends on how much moisture they contain. If an abscess contains little moisture, it will be easier to break open; if there is no moisture, as in one I opened at the top of an old woman's head, I found the abscess as hard as a large stone, rough and blistered, and could not break it open; and had I tried to do so, I would have made the wound as deep as a stone. In other cases of abscesses that develop near the ears or at the base of the skull, leave them uncovered for as long as possible until they discharge their pus; then treat them as needed."
"For scrofula (a type of skin disease):"
Maitres often cut an abscess at the throat and drain it, and place angels [i.e., metal tubes] in them, and none of them come to another part of the body, and they rot, and are joined together with each other. And each scrofula is properly inside its rib; as the new and the abscess at the back of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. Some contain moisture, and some are wicked [i.e., bad] so that they do not wish to obey health. Therefore whenever you see one in good condition on the chest, and its color is like that of the flesh, and it does not move from either side, nor is it attached to the neck or the artery or the conduit, and it is not deeply placed; then you must cut it from above, and skin it from each part, and the twenty lips [i.e., teeth] of the mouth to the chin, if you need them, as we have said in the abscess at the back of the head; and do it slowly and carefully, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor is it deeply placed so that the hand escapes, and do not look too far ahead, lest you cut something that you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put vinegar in the wound, or some powders that stop the flow of blood, and tighten the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begin to rot. And when the pus has gathered, if there are any small scrofula [i.e., lumps] at the root of the scrofula, then cut them off and skin them. And if there is a large scrofula at the root of the scrofula, it does not matter that you cut that scrofula in its root, but tie it with a strong double knot, and let it hang by it, without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then bandage it.
And if you cut all the scrofula, then you must gather the twenty lips  [i.e., teeth] of the wound and sew them together now, without delay because of the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you sew the root of it, and squeeze it hard, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulae that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens; and pierce it in this way, depending on what we have said before, then apply leech  [i.e., leeches] with bloodletting and similar things, so that it does not corrode the one that is delayed by corruption; and when the wound has been well washed, then dress it with ointment while it is healthy.
of squint
The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is written in their words.
For those who have squint, it is necessary that the slicing of the throat which is called "epiglotte" be removed; and there should be no aid from anyone, for all the veins and the membrane of the disease are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth or in the throat or in .ij. mandres. When the disease is in the channel of the membrane, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte so that the suffocation which comes from strangulation does not occur.
It is necessary therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we do so with a knife of two and a half inches wide or with a small one-inch split at the back between the two halves or according to the measure of the split in the flesh, not in the cartilage.
and if they are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no chisel, and the vessel is long
And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to all its length, then split the meat as far as it comes to the chin; and avoid the vessels of blood, for there will be none, and then cut the flesh according to what we have said.
and is demonstrated by the section of the blood vessel that jumps out by the place that has been broken, and by the absence of voice.
and leave the wound open a piece.
And when the hour has passed where one doubts strangulation, gather the .ij. lips of the wound from both sides, and the whole joint under the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote growth, as long as it is healthy.
Albuicasim says that one should not do this as long as the throat is completely stifled, and the patient is deemed to be dying, and the disease spreads. Then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through the wound, and thus is preserved from death; and
and for this, the elder instructed to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in iii days or in iiji. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a damsel took a knife, and put it in her throat, and went to the pomerance.
and I was called by the healer, and I found her also dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood flowing from it; and I knew that she had not cut a vein but rather that the flow came from her throat, and the blood flowed out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed it as best I could;
and the girl was red in the face, and returned to her usual state;
for I fear there is no hope of recovery from the surgery on the epiglottis.
of the large throat
is called "gorge hernia", and is a large hernia in a pale color, and is very common in women;
and are according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or naturally there is no injury.
And this accident happens according to .i. manneres, of which one is similar to fat for us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from us from the artery; and it has fear, and does not come to operate fire only in that which is small, and prove and search in all the intermediary: if you find it also as .i. nut grass, and cannot in any way, if the cap, if it does so to us, and treat all of his cap, if there is none: and search well, and heal if necessary, until it is completely healthy.
Here is the translation of the text:
There are many ways to treat it, all of which I will describe.
And so I will explain the differences between them.
I say that issue is hot and fiery, until the bubbling has passed, and is complete; then rest the fever and the heat.
With the new medicine there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains one part of the medicine which is its own skin and starts like a pea and becomes large.
and are according to their appearance, or fat, or moist, and their colors are as I said in the division.
When you come to the cure of the new medicine, you should test and question first all the instrument that is called "entraimissoire", according to what its shape will be or the paste which follows.
And the way of questioning the abscesses is that you squeeze or more moist water that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel that the instrument has entered the core, then it is according to the size of the abscess.
Then remove the instrument for inserting, and take care not to break it.
If there is a lot of moisture, what color it is, if it does so as I said in the chapter on abscesses;
and if there is no moisture after the instrument has been inserted, know that it is greasy, so do so in a cross shape and grasp it with pincers, and gently scorch each side, and beware of the cot where it lies;
and if you cannot pull it out whole, pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if I do not stay, he returns to us many times;
and if it takes a little while, and does not trouble you, then employ the wound with some corrosive water, extract the wound, and put on something soothing to the abscess, and treat with other treatments until it is healed;
and if we are very hungry, then count the three fingers of the wound, and treat with this;
and if the wound is opposite or on the other side, then hurry and employ the place of vitriol, and let it lie there for .ij. or .iij. days, until the wound oozes blood, and then come back to the copper;
See here the forms of the intruding instruments, and they are of 3 ways: great and little and small; and there are 3 quarters which are called "albaret", and 1 which is called "breb", and there are 3 ways: great, middle, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula.
And they are also like the needles used for piercing amulets, and they are of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are white are more proven in piercing black pitch to encircle the burrows of fistula.
And they are of 3 ways: great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the breach.
The forms of the intruding instruments are of various sizes, so that you can see here: great, middle, and small; and if there are intruding instruments which have 3 quarters of 3 ways each;
and if they have .ii. corbes, and also are of .ii. kinds; and if they have .i. corbe, and one corbe only, and are of .ii. kinds; and all these are necessary in their places.
The head of these dogs are sharp, and some do not cut better than from one side, and thus they skin the nose, so that it cannot cut the vein or the nerve.
And of these introducers are the needles inserted in many, so that the patient does not lose sight of them at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of 3 kinds: great, small, and middle, as you see;
and don't use more than one fire but in a place charred, like legs, arms, breasts, shoulders, and similar places;
and do not make any other instrument small, resembling scorcies of fists, according to this form, so that it does not burn with fire:
and do not place it in any place that heals with a little bloodletting from veins and arteries, and do not do so according to this great form:
and do not inflame the breasts of certain men when they are getting corrupted, until they seem like breasts of a woman;
and grow slowly and remain, who are to be cured in this way, if it is necessary according to this form of the chapter of this line up to: f.g.: Then skin the fat, and apply medicine to the wound in laying down cloth, then join together the 19 lips of the wound with sutures, and cure it until it is healed;
and let him suck the milk of the skin, and be moistened by its greatness so as to resemble women, if you do it in 19 ribs from above, with 19 similar cleavages; of which one is held to the other at the end of the one and of the other, so that the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, from this line up to the line g.; Then skin the meat that is between the 19th and 20th lips, and remove the fat, and I will instruct you on what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healthy.
and if it is not healthy, or the incision has not been made entirely, so that the patient does not rest, or for the evacuation of blood, then you should fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment. and leave it until the meat and remaining fat have cured, and then treat it until it is healthy.
the Achilles tendons
The sores that come from abscesses are handled in the same way as hard scrofula or nodules, and there is moisture in them.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line B to line G: And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are empty, if you employ cotton wool and leave it there for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment from now on until they are healed.
And if the abscess resembles sores, then treat it in the same way as we have described for treating sores, and if the wound is a bowel, then apply the cautery as we have described before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery ruptures and the skin is tightened over it, then there are often abscesses and also it comes to the escaped vein and the abscess.
and if one opens it carefully when it is for the artery, then the abscesses are long enough. and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel pain; and when it is for the vein, if it feels like pulling apart; and when it is for the muscle, if it feels like stretching.
and it is madness to cut off this appendix, and most of all when it is dislocated at the armpit and at the jaw and at other joints, and it is very large. So then the treatment with iron must be avoided, and that of the one at the top also, and in the one who is swollen with an artery, cut through the skin from above;
So then the treatment with iron must be avoided, and that of the one at the top also, and in the one who is swollen with an artery, cut through the skin from above; then work on the waist as a single piece, and carefully separate the artery from the veins, until it is completely uncovered;
then pull out one needle, and make it pierce all the way to the other side, and stretch out the artery on a double thread of 2 threads, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the 2 arteries that are in the temples;
and then mark the spot that is between the 17th and 18th ties of an intruder as long as there is a tie there, and unbind the abscess.
then administer the remedy that causes bowels to move, as long as the bond continues; and then treat with oil coming from what is causing it, as long as it is healthy;
and if the abscess is located at the base of the neck, so that you hold it by the skin, as far down as you can from the abscess; And then pour the ink so that it does not go out of place where you hold it in your hand, and let it pierce, and there is a thread of two, so that you pull it from the other side. And then bind the abscess, as I told you, or with one thread of the two threads to both heads;
And if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, then take another needle with all the ink and pierce it to the incision of the first needle, and pull out the threads in four lengths;
And then cut off the excess ink, and cut off the surplus of the knot, and leave what remains tied;
Then wrap it with a damp cloth made of wine and oil, then administer the cures of tent and ointment until he is well.
of abscesses from the nose
Also, when coming from the artery and the vein, they come to the nostrils when they are ruptured, or by too much work, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulders and arms and in all their joints, and it is the same color as the color of the heart, and it is in many states without pain;
and when they are held in place, if the patient feels pain, and it is not fully fixed to the spine, but let go of the cure;
and is muteless on all sides, and does not go forward or backward, neither up nor down, and the one who is in the joints will not come together with iron: it may happen that there is a contraction;
and those who are at the head or at the front, make the skin to the spatulate. If the apostemes are small, if it has one nail, and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, then the suspensory holds it in place, and the scorching, then the bone is assembled with stitches to heal until it is healed.
large mouths hanging down No time aviens in bellies and not elsewhere the lulu, and is a disease that is called "fungus" by appearance of mushrooms, and is the subtle root, and the big tree; and there are small and many big ones;
and I saw .i. home who had .ij. bellies that were more similar to mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were cut short, and ran together moist.
I weighed them and found one to be 16.7 ounces, and the other 14.3 ounces; for in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones,
If you take the large spatulum, and are in your presence, then fire cautery comes; for often there is too much movement of blood when sawing, and it escapes without you noticing, so hurry up and cauterize.
And if you see the patient expecting and afraid of the iron incision, then take a well-made piece of string, and bind the artel with it as we have said, and leave it for 2 days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to tie the string to the artel as long as it copes with the artel, and try through it; and if the roots are thick, so cauterize him himself for the belly, but you can well cauterize half of it,
Then cauterize him so that he does not recover; then cure the wound and be sure to not cover the pus which is of green color and poor odor and of milk-like taste.
For this is an infected abscess, and I will come to the cure of the scrofula hereafter.
when the boil has broken out
if the appearance of the boil comes out with a fire cautery or a cut of syphillus, and it is on the belly and there are some boils, as would be in other wounds, or of blood that cuts off veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness;
and if it is due to a rupture of the syrupy matter and an exit from the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the blood, and this is a light matter without pain, and with various openings. And if it is due to an exit of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when you press it to its two sides so that it turns over and returns again, and perhaps so that it gets stuck, and increases more at the entrance to the bath and because of great effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without being constrained; and if it is due to blood, then open according to these signs: the large and hard abscesses, and are inserted in accordance with a quantity.
and if it is due to wind, then it is in the back of the throat, and the work if you look at its appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or wind. If you must leave the wound untreated. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you before about the chapistrel for the artere and vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or loins, it is necessary that you command the patient to wet his loins and lie down completely; then signal all around the loins. then order him to walk slowly between your hands; then go into the room where you have signaled; Then is half of the aposteme placed above all the great hook.
Then spread out half of the aposteme across the thread, and with your index finger, touch the intestine; If you find it caught on the thread, and if it comes loose, then touch the intestine at the edge of the abdomen;
and if you find the boil, if it takes hold of the hair, and cut off the surplus.
and if the artery becomes blocked or damaged, if you cry out loudly, then return to your work and take .ii. needles, and thread them with .ii. fibers, and thread the .ii. needles around what you have pierced so that you made it;
then strain the abscess in .iiii lines above the needles, and if you see, cut off the needles, and leave it there until it putrefies, and dig a hole for it; or you cut it when it is soft and putrid, then treat it with the remedy that suits it, and shampoo the abscess as we have said;
or you cut it when it is soft and putrid, then treat it with the remedy that suits it, and shampoo the abscess as we have said; And draw out the blood where you see moisture, then treat the wound of what it touches, and seal it.
the sore
We have spoken in the division of the similarities of the sore, and we will tell how it should be operated on by medicines, and how it should be cured with iron; and we say that the sore is inherited in the marrow, and great care must be taken in its cure, and the old man said that when a sore is in the leg or can be cut as a sore that is in the breast, in the pot, and in similar places, it must all be cut off when it is in trouble; and when it is big and old, it should not be approached except to cut it, for I have never known anyone to be cured of it; nor has anyone ever been cured of it before me.
And the duties, when it is in a position to be cut, as we have said, are that you do not purge any time the black bile; then make it healthy if it has manifested repletion, then afaited the bile  i.e., good place for doing the duty; then throw your hair or sore, and the bone from all parts, and the joint from all parts leaving nothing; and let the blood run freely, and squeeze hard at your hand or at anything, and if it comes against the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood is stopped; then cure it with other cures until it is healthy.
On gout On gout Take the patient by the hand and press the spine towards the lowest part of the back, then use a spatum with two points: cut it into two parts and always make sure it is not so deep that it reaches the intestine when inserted, and does not cause bleeding.
Then look to see if the gout is running into the intestines: you must cut it with two points on the back of the hand, right next to the knuckle; and if the gout is due to liver disease, cut it on the left side of the fist; and if it's due to mucus, cut it on the right, and do not allow the excess to run into the weak leuch; then regarde si li malaides a la main qui l’a fait venir, et il ne doit mie giter de son poing, pour que la main ne bouge pas, et il est desirable qu’il porte une cotte de mailles: et quant tu fais ta fendure, ne regarde point vers le bas li malaide, car il pourrait se lever, et si tu le vois levier, tu devras le reposer, et s’il est trop leve, tu le feras abaisser, et si li Malaide a la main qui l’a fait venir, il est bon qu’il porte une cotte de mailles;
And then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pour it out, and lift your hand to all the spatium between the skin and the syphac too as when peeling by a thumb or thumb; and then pierce the syphac until the spatium comes up to the wet outlet, and this is the outlet of the water, and then press it firmly, and pour out this instrument by which this form is: And seems like an silver cane fine, and is of lead or archual light, and has in the part of a small hole; and where it costs on one side, a small hole; and 2 holes on the other side, and 1 hole on the other; and the head is cut as a feather, and this is the form of the incision that the writers use to cut a feather:
On the top is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the water, then pour out now on the instrument; empty half or a third, because if you empty more than it is necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he shakes his head, or he approaches death;
but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the malaide mean, and his poulz; then try the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now by the keur who stops the hole that is on the syphac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this way; then restart the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering this, and try a little water:
Do not make any fire for a day, and keep away from drinking until there is no delay but a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave out some water, so that the cure of the grave or the sand is hot, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and becomes black from drinking; and the cure of drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extraction of water, as I have said before.
the stopping of the urination No child is born with a small foreskin or a foreskin that is not in its place. If it ever comes to pass that he does not pierce it all: then take a very thin piece of skin from the scrotum according to this form: then bind and hold it in place for three or four days, and whenever it wants to urinate, remove the binding so that he can urinate, and then put it back on; and perhaps he will not notice anything, because the urine that comes out is not enough to open his skin. The foreskin should be small, if the skin of the scrotum is very thin according to this form: bind and hold it in place for three or four days, and whenever he wants to urinate, remove the binding so that he can urinate, and then put it back on; and perhaps he will not notice anything, because the urine that comes out is not enough to open his skin.
And the way of the operation is that the patient lies down on his back; then the head of the penis and the scrotum are turned so that they are as flat as a feather; so that if it pricks in the middle, like it should; and you must guard against the flow of blood, which comes often, and if it comes, stop the bleeding from him who stops the flow of blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
the blisters of the penis Many times come blisters in the penis, and it is an appearance of a ugly thing; and there are bad and good ones; so that you should squeeze them with one finger, and cut them and clean them all, then put cotton wet with Egyptian ointment on them; then cure them with diafinicon until they are healed. And if the blister is malignant, of green color and pus, then you should apply fire to it. When you have cut it, and if the blister is in the middle of the penis, and there is part inside the skin and part outside, then you should take the blister that is inside first; and when it has hardened, then cure it from outside. For when you cure it together, unless it is not sure that the root of the penis is not pierced, it will come black and corruption into his penis and where coion; so that you should cover all that is black and corrupted, then put honey and flour on it which is made of pomegranate skin and dates, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et s'il est accablé par la fièvre, alors administrer le cautère lunaire selon cette forme: Les cautères ainsi associés aident aux .i. dispositions ensemble: c'est-à-dire au moment de l'apparition de la fièvre et de la corruption; et si le prépuce de la verge est corrompu et retranché, alors il convient que vous fassiez couler ou faire couler du plomb de la verge dans un canal, et que vous fassiez pisser le patient entre les jambes; et quand le pelage s'élève sur la tête de la verge qui arrive à ceux qui n'ont jamais été circoncis, ou il est pour une plaie ou pour un abcès, alors il convient donc que vous l'échauffiez avec un instrument en cheveu, aussi longtemps que les liens soient desserrés et que le prépuce de la verge soit libéré de tous côtés;
Et si c'est une affaire grave à discuter, alors il convient que vous l'échauffiez avec un spatule en fer sur la tête de la verge et du poil; puis desserrez-le bien entre les 2 et mettez une fine toile de lin mouillée dans de l'eau froide, qu'il n'y ait plus de chaleur.
De la circoncision
Circumcision is not a cure for continued ill health if other wounds are present; however, when we perform this operation on infants and children, it is necessary to do so with great skill, and in the most lighthearted way possible, in order to save them.
I say that the ancient ones did not teach circumcision on their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only this one acquired by experience.
For I have seen the most master and wise men who made circumcision among the Jews, and the strong, and all novel things; so that it is necessary to do this because there are three threads, and by chance if one of them breaks, the other two will hold.
Or it may come out upside down, and the pain is double, and there is no assurance of the cleaning of the member from the nail; and by accident the nail may break, and ruin the work, and many times it happens that there is no need for cleaning and I want this.
Of the mouth-washing that is made to all the thread of the I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut as much above as below.
For when you press your hand, cut it evenly at all angles; but the thread should be well twisted around the hide; and the method of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he hears it, that you do not tie the thread tightly around the staff, and then put it to sleep in all kinds of ways that you can. Then place the thread straight between your hands and stretch the forces between your hands or toes so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then hold your hand to the staff and blow or blow on it, and twist it upwards as long as the head of the staff is in position; then well wash away the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the string of a double thread, then tie another at 1/2 length, and join them together, then loosen the knot carefully and turn the head of the staff.
Then place the thread straight between your hands and stretch the forces between your hands or toes so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then hold your hand to the staff and blow or blow on it, and twist it upwards as long as the head of the staff is in position; then well wash away the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the string of a double thread, then tie another at 1/2 length, and join them together, then loosen the knot carefully and turn the head of the staff. Then let the blood flow a little and a little, for it is the muedres; and put powder on it and over the powder a drapelet of a good dye made of burned oil of roses confited with oil of roses and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and the healer of another healer as long as he is healthy.
The form of the force for cleansing is as follows: the two shoulders be soft and tender, and the same for the shoulders, and also as large as those on both sides are even.
The error of cleansing is when the cure within flees through incision; so it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail, so that the leech makes an abscess; and make it even, and if you cannot hold it to your fingernail, then hold it with pliers, and then make it.
And if it passes three days, and that which is sore at the root of the penis is inflamed, if you leave it until the leech has made an abscess, and scorched it lightly; if you can move it, and guard against the part of the penis, it will not harm you.
Cure therefore the leech of things that are sore wound of powder, which we have said in the treatment of leeches and powder, and if it goes too far up, and he goes to the top, he will not harm; cure him therefore, as we have said, until he is well.
To retain urine
For the retention of urine: for the operation of a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or similar things, which we have spoken of in the division;
and if the urine is not relieved, and you see the retention for the stone which is at the neck or base of the bladder, so that the patient lies on his back; and let him raise his knees to the sky, and extend his stomach from the top of his back, and restrain the patient so that he can stay in this position as long as possible; and then, the neck of the bladder is forced towards the stone at the top, so that the urine is relieved.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, so that you must use the extraction tool called a 'syringe', which is the shape of: and let it be made of fine light silver, like the feathers of an owl; and let the tube be half a palm long, and fine at the end.
And the method for urination is that you take .i. a double thread, and bind to the head .i. a little ball of wool or cotton, and bottle the head of the thread into the syringe; and wipe the surplus of the wool and bottle up to the head of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit down, and he will raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and water.
Then lightly bottle the syringe into the penis until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis upside down towards the bougie; then bottle the syringe before jusc'a the bladder, and let the patient urinate until he arrives at the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order but for whatever you lead or she goes wrong; then take all the thread out of the wool ball and the ball, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it, and make the urine run.
and start over with the syringe until the bladder is empty and the patient is seated.
For diseases of the bladder:
When leprosy or fever comes to the bladder, or pus is gathered there, and you see that it distils water and medicine, so do all the instrument that is called "klepsydra", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it has 2.1/4 parts, 1/2 from one side and 1/4 from the other, so that you see; and let the hair grow by which the medicine runs so that it stops well in the root without addition, if one can draw out the moisture, and squeeze when necessary.
And when you see that your medicines go into the bladder, put the chief of the thermometer in the moisture, and draw it while drawing; if you draw the moisture into the thermometer, and then squeeze it strongly again; it will enter the moisture again, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
And this is the form of the subtle clepsydra in which one clepsydra's the bladder: if it is thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;
And it is of silver or brass, and the shoulder is higher up; and desoz to the ear or the larynx; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture on which you wish to clisterize the bladder, then tie it between the 16 bladders formed of a good double thread, and heat that moisture on the fire; then bottle the head dou clistere in the bladder, and strain your hand over the bladder to all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
of stones,
and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder often occurs in children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtility; and if it is opened, then wash the patient's genitals, and clean them many times, and then rub them; and on many of these jumps the foundations are lost; and the healing of children until they are .iiij. years old is light, and it is heavy for the elderly, and it is light for those between juvenile and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
And when we come to the cure, if one first purifies the patient by enema, in order to extract all the matter that is in the bowels. For it often encumbers one to seek the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and move him uprightly and gently downward, so that the stone descends to the very bottom of the bladder, and never goes up from its place; then let him sit between your hands, and his legs be desoiled, so that the bladder is all turned downward; then examine and feel it from behind.
Then feel the stone in space, and quickly cut it off from the bladder. And if you do not feel it on touching all around, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand; if the patient is old, or if he is young and complete, then let him sit upright; then pour it into its fundament, and examine the stone, and when you feel it at your palm, then feel for the neck of the bladder; then press upon it with your palm, and pour it out from behind.
And command the minister to press the bladder in his hand, and he orders that he extends to his right hand the testicles up, and with his left hand oste the skin which is under the testicles on the part where they make the size; then i pour spatumile copant, from which it is formed:
And make a space between what is between the testicles and the fundament, not in the middle but at the cost of the left side; and let it be right on the stone, and your two be together or against the fundament, and let the size go across so that it is wide at the end, and tight inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big;
In case the press should be where it is or against the fundament, that she go without work; and know that there is a part of stone where there are angles and margins: this is good to come out; and if it has part that is flat, similar to a glint, and round, whose issue is light.
For if it has a part where there are angles and margins, make the size larger; and if it does not go out, so that you extract on the chisels which are also like a file at the top, to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you pour out of it sottil corbeau au chief; and if you cannot grasp it in this way, so enlarge the .i. poc lou pertus, and if it is cut, so extract with vitriol:
and if there is more than one stone, first bottle the largest to the collar of the bladder, then chop it over, then cut it hard, and the small ones after if there are more. And if she is very large, so let her be, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out all at once because his bladder cannot hold it; but nevertheless you should try to extract it, or pull it out with pliers, piece by piece.
and when you have finished your work, apply hot ointment and aloe and dragon's blood and bind it, and put over it .i. cloth wet with oil and wine, or with oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the abscess; then tie up the patient tightly around his neck until the third day.
And when you untie him, if he rises well with oil and water, then cure the wound with dillapicon ointment and basilicon ointment until he is healed.
And if hot abscesses come into the wound and corrosions of blood in the bladder, and is retained urine that comes out in a certain way so it doesn't run with the urine: then pour this into the wound, and extract that stone, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and pour it.
then raise the wound with water and sand and rope, and aid it in all ways that you know how to do, until it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the hours that you cure it, you bind the legs, and gather the remedies on the place.
If the stone is small, and it is stuck in the bladder, and cannot pass; if you cut it as I have said above, you will free it from the size. I have already done this thus.
Take .i. piece of iron according to this form and be nailed at .iij. angles on .i. splinter:
then take 1.i. thread and tie it round the root of the stone in the bladder, so that it cannot come out; then draw the thread lightly on the root of the stone in the bladder; and turn the thread back into your hand in the bladder bit by bit, until you can break the stone; if it comes out soon, then press your hand against it; if not, then twist it round again, and so on. If it breaks, it will jump away with the urine, and the patient will be cured;
and if you cannot do so for any reason that damages it, then he.i. file the stone and another above, then make the rod towards the stone between the two lines, then remove it forcefully, and as soon as the line is removed, clean the frozen blood that is in the wound; and cure it until it is healthy.
of women
may occur that a woman is pregnant, and if it ever happens, let there be great grief, and is defended by three things: one is that per adventure the woman is virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-versed who reveals herself to the gaze, even when she is married.
And the third way is that per adventure one cannot find a woman well-versed in this craft of hands; and the fourth way is that the woman's stone is more perfectly made than the man's, since it requires making a more profound cut, and it inspires greater fear.
Et s'il est nécessaire de montrer cela à quelqu'un, il faut que tu appelles une infirmière bien savante, et ne lui fais pas d'incision, car si tu en fais, ne le regarde même pas. Je. c'est-à-dire la femme qui est subtile; et elle présente une boule bien saine dans la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui connaît une partie de cet art, et elle commande qu'elle fasse ce que tu lui commandes pour l'examen de la pierre ;
And if it is necessary to show this to someone, you must call a nurse who knows well, and do not make an incision on her, for if you do, don't even look at it. I. that is to say the woman who is subtle; and she presents a ball well in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of this art, and she orders her to do what you order for the examination of the stone; and then it is necessary to check well if this woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to put her foot or foot on the ground and try to find the stone; and if she finds it, then she should hold her foot, and she advises her to press her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, then she should hold her foot in place, and she advises her to move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder all the way to the root, until she feels it at the base of the thigh; then she should touch the stone with her finger at that spot, where it is moved, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your foot on top of the stone or away from it, and make a small hole first;
Then she should touch the stone with her finger at that spot where it is moved, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your foot on top of the stone or away from it, and make a small hole first; then bottle the blood out of the wound, if you feel the stone so large the wound is; and know that there are many types of stones: that is to say, small and large, sharp and dull, long and round, and which have rain. If you know their appearances then you will know their issue.
And if he has not gone, then put vitriol broidt to the wound, and let it sit for an hour until the wound is dry; then return to your work, until the stone is hard, and have the tools that I told you about in the extraction of stones so that they can help you with your work.
And if he has not gone, and it is an artery that is torn, then put the powder on the wound and strain it with linen and bandages, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not extract it except by chance, and then heal the wound.
And when the fever of blood has subsided, and the leg is warm again, then return to your work, until the stone is hard.
of hernial pain
Ramie water is no other than a gathered white syrup which is the source of the taste of eggs, and is called 'sifac', and never comes into the egg's shell if one believes that it is another egg; and this is the skin of the egg between the white sifac that we have mentioned; but this does not happen to be a hole.
And the generation of this ramie is so weak that it comes from the eggs, and this material is spread.
And this moisture does not come from beating on the eggs, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a declining color to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or white water, and such happens more often.
and these are the signs of this assembly, for if it is white sifac which we have mentioned, then it is long in shape, like the figure of an egg, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around it.
And if there is moisture in the cloth itself, then the abscesses are rational with part of the egg, and because of this one thinks that it is another egg.
and if the moisture is between the leather of the testicles and the white sac, then it feels warm; so that when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all of the introitus because its form is in front. So according to this, who comes after the introitus, judge who is inside.
So according to this, who comes after the introitus, judge who is inside. And when we cure it with fire, so that the patient is healed according to his power and the repletion of his body; then he lies down on his back, on something a little high, and cover him with drapes.
Then sit down on his left side, and command the minister to sit on the right, and extend the stick to one of the 20 ribs at the end of the loins.
Then take the spatula and peel the skin from among the loins to the tip of the hand until you reach a thin piece of flesh, then cut it carefully, leaving a little bit of the skin on the meat, and parboil it very slightly.
Then pierce the flesh with a large needle, and drain out all the water, then put on your gloves, and draw up the skin. And do not touch the meat with the needle, but only slice it very finely; peel off each piece separately so that you can see well to cut it properly, or the water will come back into it again.
And if the skin suits you well to your work, then return it to its place when you have finished working on the flesh; and sew together the 20 ribs of meat with one stitch, and wash it as you would the other wounds until it is healthy again.
And if you find the egg corruppt by some other disease, it is necessary that you lay the eggs that are suspended, in doubt of corruption of blood; then take the egg and remove it, and treat it as we have said.
And if the water is assembled in two parts together, knowing that there are two branches; then take the other part as you did with the first, evenly, and wash the blood, and put in the wound another wet one with oil.
and put there another wet one with wine and oil, and put on the two eggs, and cover them with double cloths, and tie it up all together according to this form:
Then take 2 cloths, and fill them with wool fabric according to this shape and sew them together in the throat of the shirt, and one of the two shoulders should preigne on the bottom until the back, and the other over the 2 arms, and the other two should be gathered in a loop around the neck;
and there is no time when this medicine of the fire caustic is in place of iron tweezers, and that you squeeze .i. the caustic scraper, and scrape the skin of the coccyx, and it is heated as we have said, so that the white cure that contains the water comes out;
if you take the caustic according to this form, and pierce it as with an awl, and scorch it with this fine fire caustic:
And take the coat in all the ways that you can, until it is completely removed; and be careful that the fire does not touch the uvula; and know that this work is safer; and move with caution to prevent the opening of a vein; and beware of the size of the caustic;
and if anything makes you uncomfortable, or an abscess or a opening of a vein or anything else, then treat what makes you uncomfortable, according to what has been said before.
And if the sick person is afraid, and does not want to wait for this work because of its ugliness, then you should make a puncture, as I told you, and it is that when you are sure by the meanings that we have said that the ramose water is there,
make the sick person sit up; then pierce the abscess in the middle of the face all the way through, and place the puncture deep into the neck; and make the hole large so that all the water runs out;
then put cotton in the hole, and tie it up, and leave it to run out the remaining water, then clean it as long as the wound heals;
and if the bleach cotton does not let the water run out in the mouth of the wound, then you should put a pen or instrument used to drain the water from drops into it, so that its shape is as follows; and widen .i. poc the wound, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after 15 days or so, and when it is gathered as before, and in such a way that the sick person's days pass.
of the penis from the anus
I know that in this chapter about the use of fire, there are many different ways to treat it, so I think it is better to leave it alone.
and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the penis.
I say then that many penises come from the corons, and most often from the coions; and this is by much case.
It is known that by too much acrid and bitter food, which expands to the bowels, or from impact.
And the color of the abscess according to the color of the flesh; and does not test for pain, and is an abscess wound;
And sometimes it is a painful and piercing abscess, and of a foxy color, and never comes from a nerve, or swelling of a vein.
When it is from a nerve, if it is hot by the position of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it is not necessary for you to touch it.
Those who are made from the swelling of a vein are known by their tendency to express themselves through the touching of both sides.
and one can well make a size on this resemblance, and on the other characters; and is that you cut the knot of the coins, then the egg in the top, and the trail is firm white milk, and deliver the suspender from all sides of the egg.
If the egg is already hard with these new feathers, then it is necessary that you take the egg, and the cup.
and if it is still alive in the shell, or in this one which is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all of those held, and the cup rolls.
And if the birth of the feather is behind, then it is necessary that you cop it all, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your wounds are finished, take the wool of sheep wet with oil and wine, then the cure for others as long as they are healthy.
of the prostate from the urethra
This is an old French text describing a medical procedure: and the patient will be less painful when he goes;
and the cure for this disease is very good if it is treated with caution as described above;
and in any case we will tell you the work of it, according to what the old people did.
It is necessary that you make the patient lie down on .i. a soft bed, then pour the poultice into his mouth between his teeth. for all the vessel that are near to the penis, and wet them with water, and spread them out flatly;
then dip the sponge into the tray of water, cutting it into a wide trim, so that the vessels are uncovered, until they are completely soaked;
and then peel off each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples;
then take an needle where it has .i. double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come, and quickly tie it to the other end; then cut off the ends correctly, according to the length of the body, and extract the corrupted moisture;
then treat the wound as you do with other wounds or wound the bowels so that no vessel is left unhealed;
For by this there comes no evil, and all the vessels come forth alive, if it is necessary to draw out the seeds from all the vessels. So that the eyes do not lose their vision through the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
of the rupture of the syrup of the rupture of the syrup
and this wound is where the medicine, or its extension, comes from these 17 causes: or by percussion, or by jump, or by braying, or by lifting a grievous burden, and by similar things;
and the signs when it is an extension of the medicine, if it happens that it comes little by little, for a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the apoplexy is even until almost perfect, so that the medicine hurries the intestine.
And the signs are when it is a section of the medicine, that it brings sudden sharp pain, and the apoplexy appears different, showing itself on the skin early, and this is for the issue of the intestine and the body away from the medicine.
And let there be no separation of the small intestine with the colon, for it is held back and causes great pain to the patient, even when pressed.
For in these cures by fire, lest he should be scorched.
And the manner of this work is that you command the patient to keep the intestine in his hand inside the wound, if he can go back in; then let him put his neck between your hands and gently lift up the breasts;
Then take off the skin from above, and scrape all the hair from the long hair. Then pour in the liquid inside the waistcoat according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that he can easily come out.
Then scrape off the skin from the chest, making sure that the white skin is exposed all around;
Then pour in the liquid inside the waistcoat with your index finger, in the middle where the skin is white, and between the two sides of white skin that are exposed;
and remove what is behind the thumb, and place the second hand on top of the first between the thumb and forefinger; and with the little finger of the left hand, push forward the nail of the thumb toward the palm; and instruct the assistant to extend the thumb upward and out of the way of the joint behind it;
and ask your two assistants if they feel any hard or white matter wrapped around the intestine; and if you find nothing, cut it open.
then take a needle or thread made of fine wire, and cut it open at the back where the skin is; then sew it up with the thread after the entrails have been removed; then tie off the ends of the thread, so that there are three threads left; and then join one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie them together with a strong ligature of .ij parts; and wrap the heads of the fils, and connect them with a ligature of 0.9 parts, so that no vessels that supply them can enter in, and thus prevent an abscess from coming up; and then tie the second ligature with a length of string that is two times as long as the first ligature, and after these two ligatures leave the strength of one of them;
and then the other one according to the roundness that the ewer carries; and then cut in the part which is desoz the cuir des coions, until it is smooth, and the bow, as we have said above;
Then prepare the wool with oil, and put it on the wound, and add the thread that we have said. And never is cauterized with white of egg that we have said, after the incision, from doubt of decay of blood.
For this often happens, and leaves the thread in place while it is chewing; and if it delays at chewing, so let it be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it chews.
Then heal the wound with other cures, until it is completely healthy.
of hernia carnous
In this recipe I have never seen anyone try to make a cure for hernias with fire.
And the old one said that it is made thus: as you join the threads of a scarf, so tie the straps, lightly at first, on the outside after cutting them very short;
then sew it together, and heal the injury of him who suffers, as we have said, until he is healthy.
No one time comes rupture in the intestines, as we have said, and open their holes; and do not let any of the intestines go to the cliques, and if there is some, it is little, and repairs every hour;
and whenever he stays too much in this place, if he suspects the wound or syphilis, until the intestines come out;
and what happens because of the extension of syphilis that is in the intestines, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and opened their holes and opened;
and the cure if it is by cautery, as we have said before; and there is no cure with fire in this way:
and it is that the patient lies still on his back between your hands, then measure the width with two fingers according to the quantity of .ii.
and then remove the skin which is above the flesh, and then take the thread and put it on the place visible of the skin;
and then press it perfectly to the belly, then measure the .ij. inches which are above the skin on top of the thread, and measure the two together;
and then remove the top thread, and do not cover the skin or extend any other thing, as I have told you in the cure of the bile of the intestines;
and then heal by the healing of wounds. And when you cover the thread, if the wound is clean and healed as long as it is healthy.
The healing is constricted, and has no sign in the rupture, and the cauterization is moist in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the leather of the joints
Many times the leather of the joints is softened in certain men, because the bones that are within them are softened and can be seen; and it is a craft, when one curates him, to make the skin that is softened come out on the natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips at a stitch, and sewed the superfluity of the skin that is softened to .iij. or .iiij. stitches firmly; then cover between the stitches, and cure it as the other wounds, until it is healthy, and tie the thread.
To cauterize with fire
I see that cauterization is mentioned in our law, and for this reason I would like to say nothing about it in this book; and there are only two methods: one is that the fire should be used to respond when asked, and to heal using fire; and the other, because we have often had to use cauterization on certain animals to help us, such as sheep, goats, and others. Therefore, I say that cauterization can be done in 2 ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one where we use attraction, we should sit the animal in hot water until the skin is softened and relaxed; then grab it with your hand, until it is healed and you no longer feel it. From the size of the cut: you should burn the animal, and tie the leather from the coals to your left hand, then put on the suspender, and cut each ear at 1 inch, when you have well scarred them; and leave no little bit of skin and fine hair which is under the saddles. And this method of cauterization is milder than the one done by attraction, because by attraction something may remain from the cuts, so that the animal wants to luxuriate, then heal the wound as soon as it is healed.
of hermaphrodites
Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
of the poison
Here is the translation of the text:
Here is the translation of the text:
Here is the translation of the text:
of hemorrhoids
Here is the translation of the text into English:
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Maitre physician, let the patient know that he should let his hair grow long and even, and if it pricks at its base, keep it still so that it does not move until it has grown.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
Here is the translation of the provided text:
If he is seized by natural force in the head and the woman gives birth with great pain, and his virtue is weak, so that she sits on a saddle or women hold her; and she rises from oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then pours the milk between her two little breasts, of which this is the shape: If he is seized by natural force in the head and the woman gives birth with great pain, and his virtue is weak, so that she sits on a saddle or women hold her; and she rises from oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then pours the milk between her two little breasts, of which this is the shape: and splits the second, and ties up his nail until the moisture that is in it comes out; and catches the woman's belly as the baby comes out, and if he does not come out, then it is necessary to massage the woman with fenugreek oil and olive oil; then make her lie down and shake her, and keep her mouth and nose covered for an hour: then now the baby comes. And if his hands go forward and back, then it is necessary that you move them slightly at a time; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on .i. seat, and lift up her feet; then remove the seat from the ground, and tie her, so that she does not fall when standing; and if his hands cannot enter, and the baby dies, then he ties his hands to the knife that has been placed in front, and pulls out the baby, and makes it even.
of the baby's birth on its feet When the baby comes on its feet, if it is necessary to raise it up: and then turn slowly, as long as they are even;
Then stretch it out, little by little.
As long as the hair is not too long, if it pricks at its base, it must be stretched and made to vibrate with fire. If it does not grow, may God help you.
And if it does not heal as we have said, if the wound heals little by little until it is in the natural shape. For then he is light.
And if it does not heal as we have said, if one takes musk of tares, and oil of sainfoin, and gum melted, and grinds all in a mortar; and puts on the wound of the woman and covers it with this ointment, then make it sit in hot water until it is well cooked.
and when it has been soaked long enough, it is made into a paste with myrrh, and it is put on, and left for an hour; then make it sit in a seat, then shake and hold its mouth and nose, and pinch its belly lightly, for the poison will now come out. from the child's birth between its knees When the child arrives in this form, so I put the ball in her hands little by little.
the exit of the child who comes from the wide one a hand during it comes to engaging to bring back the hand: if you can't bring it back, if the woman gets up and goes:
s’elle ne peut aller, si la fais gesir sur .i.. lit, et le déboute les jambes forment ;
then put the muscle in place that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, if you set her on a  .i.. seat, then study to bring the hand back; and shape the child according to natural form, and make it swing, and command that it swing until the baby is born.
of the baby's delivery from his neck, and he had spread his hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back It is necessary that the doctor grip his hand, then slowly turn it over and over, and gently pull it.
and when it is even, if he puts on the natural musk oil of aloes and oil, as we have said, then he orders that she move slowly.
and when you have done this, if the face sit on .I. seat, and he orders that she bend; and the face shakes. by this method for the second part of the treatise
by this method for the second part of the treatise When it comes to doing this for the whole of the second part of the treatise, if the moisture in your finger is gone.
and if he presses it onto his face and his neck, so that the stick does not hold, let him die;
then put the child inside, as you have done it correctly, and instruct the woman not to weep even once:
of the twins Says that twins are often born, and only once in a while; and this is not an unusual thing, and it did not happen. Two are an unusual thing, and they do not live, if not named
Here is the translation of the provided text:
and never come naturally like us all, as we have said.
And if it is grieved, and the treatment as we have said, and be the subtle doctor, and do quickly and easily what she does; and do so as it deserves for salvation. of many children
of many children so many times are formed in the mother's womb. i.e. or .ij. or .iij. or .iiij. or .v. or .vj. or .vij., or more often up to 15., and are all formed in the form of a child by the measure of the wise glorious,
and let him know that the bailif knows all this, for by chance similar things happen to him; so do as what is suitable for those who are in need of it.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman whose child has died in her womb or stomach, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to use your hands; if it is appropriate that you know whether her woman is of sound health, and has no accident or fear of death;
if it is appropriate that the woman be supported on her back, and her legs be raised upward,
and the minister the scabies of .ij. parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated with descent of the child;
then rub the mouth of the woman with oils moistened with ale and fenugreek and linseed seed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these muscadines; then pour into the mouth of the woman lightly, then take .i. drop where she pours the wine that is suitable for this,
and take care if it is well-dressed so that it descends on his head; If he inserts thorns into his eyes or into his throat or into his mouth or into his palate or shaves off his beard or cuts near his ribs,
and if it falls on its feet, he inserts or pricks and hurts the sides;
and it is convenient that he hold the thorn in his right hand, and place the cup between his two left hands, and lightly hold the cup with his left hand, and insert the thorn in any of the places we have mentioned, until it is empty;
and then find another one, or the tier so you need, that the extractions are even;
and then stretch them evenly by moving one way and the other, so that they come out, and are held in place by teeth, as is shown here:
And if one part stops, so grease his two feet with oil, and push it in that part, and pull the other part;
and if one point stops, so put this oncine or higher up, and make it as much as it comes out all at once.
And if one hand comes before the other, and cannot be brought back by the tightness, then you must wrap it in a sheet, until it is completely dry;
Then apply the ointment to the joint of the foot or ankle, and in the other hand, do the same for the other leg;
And if the child is large and is stuck in the birth canal, or has an acute angle, If it is necessary for you to press the thorny spittle between your two, and make the head and extract the needle. Or you rub it with the instrument which is called "almond", of which the form comes with the instruments or paste which follows this one;
And so likewise I make it grow naturally by means of the instrument which is called "almond"; and in this way it grows into a great natural head; and then pull out the bones with nails,
and if the head of the shoulder is cut off and forced out, so that it is split, until the moisture which is outside has gone.
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces with a knife.
and if it is swollen in the abdomen or the sides, so that you pierce it until the moisture flows out.
and if it is stuck in its place, then it should be removed gently, and the treatment of the wound should be light.
And if it is stuck in the belly or breast, if you think that you will take it out with .i. a cloth wrapped around your hand; and making the belly or breast, as much as the moisture which is there;
and if the other member has been broken, and the head stays in place, so that the hand of the patient is completely freed from the ring, and pulls it out to the mouth of the ring; then pour in . i. a cup of water, and let it rest.
and if the mouth is constricted by heat that has come to it, so that it does not work properly then provide wet and greasy things; and provide plasters, and cut into acidic, moistening, and soothing substances.
And if it has fallen on its chest, and you can make it level, bring what we have said about the live child.
and if one does not have power, then let the man be taken apart piece by piece, and leave nothing of the second.
And when you have done this, bring what we have said about the legs that come out in the mare;
and if they come out with blood, so let it be placed in water restricting them, and bring other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose womb had taken the life of one child, then consults another on that body, and denies death to the others. After a long time, the apoplexy in the brain burst, and began to cause great disease.
I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I could not stop the wound from bleeding.
I put on an ointment of strong attraction, and inserted a bone, and after a few days another. I marveled much, for there is no bone in his belly.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I want to heal the wound, and with two hands I will put on the plaster, as long as the woman is in better shape; and wait for the woman to get well soon, and it was already a little bow at the joint;
and I have recorded this chapter for the sake of that which, when the master tries an odd thing, he may know how to help.
to bring back the dislocated shoulder to its place
Here comes the form of the pressor, where we put the books; and at two turns to the two shoulders of the two legs. Nevertheless, the horns should be thinner than the restrector, and made of ebony or boxwood; and they should have a curved shape.
and let his mouth be as big as two hands across, and his cheekbones as wide as a palm. and the three pieces of the skin be sewed together from one end to the other, a length of a palm and a half or a little more.
and these two pieces are inserted into the mouth of the mare to open it when the two horns are turned.
Another form, its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made from ebony or boxwood according to the shape of the nails; and let there be two joints, as you see, of a palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you open the leg with all the instrument, so that the woman sits on one bed, the feet during and the legs open, then bottle the two joints together in the leg, and hold the head of the instrument between her knees; then open your hand with all the instrument, as you did with the tweezers evenly, according to the quantity that you opened the mouth of the leg, until the ball moves;
All these instruments are mounted upside down, and varied in number according to the work; and when you have prepared them, so much the faster is the operation, and so much the higher are the tools for their quantity.
If you do not mount the instrument well in advance, because there is no excuse for its necessity.
When the second is ready for delivery, you must instruct the patient to retain her hair and then make her sneeze by pressing on her nose and mouth. and if she sneezes, that is good.
If not, if it is possible, and make a hole or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, so as chamomile, mint, fennel, camomile, camilac and centaury;
all of these herbs, or any of them, are cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put a tube or cover from the pot, and the other head into the mouth of the wound,
and let the steam come out into the wound; then make it cough, as we have said. If so, take the second immediately. And if it remains after this treatment and is not healed, order the doctor to soak his left hand in oil of sesame or in a musk of altitude, and then let it dry out in nature,
and wants the second; and when she has found it, if she pinches it and extends it little by little correctly, so that the nail does not come off in extraction; but then it must be moved lightly from side to side, and then pull it; and it will come out and loosen itself.
And if the nail of the finger is bent or broken, we have said the cure for wringing, and for smoke from herbs;
and if it is not from all those things we have said, then take care that you do not follow the trail.
but it is necessary that he who is in the mouth of the mare, you bind him to the cunt of the woman, then cauterize with ointment of four-fold power;
if it is not well done and then reset, and will come again with force; but nevertheless, when it is well done, if it is not done with care, then the odour of porridge will go up to the stomach and head, and darken the patient.
So it is necessary that you make smoke that can be done to it: no one of the ancients has tried smoking with dandelion and dried figs.
The form of the instrument, let one fume the woman at the retention of flowers and of the second if is this:
And it is to see like to a dog, and one puts the head thin in the nature, and the shoulders wide by fire;
and let the fumigations on the coals, and the tan until it is wasted, and restart another one.
to pierce the fundament
Many children are born who have not yet received the foundation of the jaw, but it is broken with a subtle medicine. If it is necessary that he who has been broken should break the jaw of him who has not yet been broken, and not break his own jaw with the sputum that comes from him, and fasten the bandage so that he does not touch it;
then put another moist cloth on it with wine and oil, then treat it with ointment until it is well.
And if you doubt that it will not recover, then put a piece of string around his hand, and let it hang down, and when the child walks, let him move his hand, so that the bone does not stick to the skin.
And there is no sudden shock of a wound or abscess; if it is necessary to cover this sudden shock: if it is to be cured, as we said in the case of the cane of plunking.
of the fistula from the foundation fistulas that come from the root are a disease, and grow worse than those that come from the root in the space of the .ij. parts, or
if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodation is old, if it opens, and with cold water or a weak brew, or
and they do not become such fisticules; and they are understood by whom it is or defecation or windiness when the patient has defecation, and by chance in jump one side.
And if they are fisticules that pierce only up to the bladder, and only halfway up the shaft; and reach up to the intersection of the thigh, and up to the nose.
And thus we understand a persisting fisticule at the fundament, and not persisting: And it is that you stick your little finger or foundation, and stick a fine needle of silver or iron in the fisticule when there is no tortuosity.
And if there is tortuosity, if I put a thin piece of string or .i. horsehair between your teeth so that you can feel the string or hair at the back of your throat;
and if you don't feel it, and there is no pain or difficulty in swallowing, as we have said: that it does not pierce you; if you hurry to heal it.
And if the fistula is persisting up to the bladder or urinary conduit, and if the urine can't be held back with medicine.
If it is cut just to the join of the cunt, then he must hold it coming up to his loins. If there is no twisting or the pain does not come from within, but rather it has already been bent forward, and there is no medicine or sudden relief by feeling;
and in these persistent fissures there is no cure but toil, and the vain ambition of foolish men who interfere with them.
In that which is neither persistent nor ancient, there is hope for health through fire, as I have experienced, and
and so the patient lies down between your hands on his back; and he lowers his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs bent towards his belly; then pour water on an ash pile, or mud if there is curvature, as long as you can tell where the pile comes from.
so that the patient's heart is felt at the base of the spine, and if that is difficult, then you put your little finger on it.
then know that the ash has caught the fire; and whether it is uncovered or not, you feel between your thumb and finger, so you know if it is persistent. If not treated, they will never heal.
One should treat these in a particular way, but it is difficult to do so well; however, it can be done well with care;
and the aid that one gives, if one heats the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it is said above; and the bottle is filled hot in the fistula, as far as it comes out smoothly from the base; and make this iij times or iii, until you know that these hairs are burned, which seem to a feather of an owl;
and then the doctor of tent-cloth immerses it, until that which is soaked comes out, and then the doctor of ointment immerses it while wringing it out, and binding it together.
If this is so, it is good. If not, then it cannot be made well;
and if it is placed between, and does not pierce until the top which is at the foundation, and between your two palms place a thick covering of tar or syrup, and you see the fistula to that which is under the covering from the palm's tip; if the cover of the encumbrance of the fistula, and seals before the tent, and then treat after, until it comes to the top of the tent;
and will be delivered the trial, and grief; then cursed are those birds-of-prey that seem a feather of an owl, and none remains without.
And if the sun does not go out, and a wound between you and the work, if the fire cautery or medicine ague.
For the fire cautery assembles .ij. bone things: namely, the burning of those dislocated joints, and the bleeding of blood and drying of moisture;
and then the healing of wet wounds or dry sores, as long as the bones are hot, and those dislocated joints are burned in the fire;
and then heal the wound with the medicine of dry spices.
For once healed, it is well and never returns worse.
And if a fistula comes up to the very foundation, and is separated from the heart, it will burst at that place, and inquire about that.
If you feel the pain, and go in. iij. is the medicine or charm or balm, where it is ready to pierce, if there is only a way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the iii. ways:
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
and do not over-heat too much, that you do not cover up the foundation which holds the base, and let the dislocations come by natural means; then treat it, as we have said;
then treat it, as we have said; In case it is healthy again, or you remove the covering and clean it completely from the base, or with a tool pointed; and then my faith, this good tree that is in the wound, as much as you can.
and then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part further from the fundament: for that is a lighter thing for the patient.
And no way are there fistulas according to this manner: and it is when you plug the tent in the fistula, and she is or costit doulx cur of lez lu cuir desous, if one takes a tent pierced at the top according to this form: And I put in one end of the wire, and pour it into the tent through all the wire at the hole until it comes to the top.
If it is persistent in the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the wire from that hole, so that you pour your two from that foundation;
and tie the end of the wire to the head, and join the 12 ends together, and pull them apart, and leave it 1 hour or 12 hours;
and do not restrain it once, until the wire connects these strings that are between two, and they chafe;
Then heal the wound as long as it is swollen and inflamed.
If there is no fistula, then pierce it in all ways that you can, unless it is too completely closed.
For it does not suffice to make a ligature if it is completely closed, and then heal it, as we have said, until it is healthy.
The shape of the spike that you make for the fistula if it is acute, and then you cut; and on the other hand no, for this you do not cut what you should not cut, as you see here:
are according to the following manner: they are within the fundament, also as grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and cut them off in place. and if they are one or more, and are away from the fundament and at the top of the fundament; but those that are away have little moisture.
and then again when a little water or blood, and has the color of the flesh.
and then again when a little water or blood, and has the color of the flesh. Order the patient to sweat by going to chambers, until the foundations go out, and the seed begins; If you hurry, and hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots;
and if they cannot hold them with their moisture, take them by the drape (a cloth), or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather; and cut off at both ends, then grind them, and powder over some hot powders that are in the place of cautery. or fire cautery as said above, or with the paste of cautery, then cure it with other cures until he is well;
and if the foundation cannot come out, then cauterize the patient with a sharp and bitter caustic to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can come out freely;
and if the patient has pain, and his hair comes out easily from the foundation, then the cure is light; and are pressed with the nail or tweezers and chopped, then heal them as we have said, until they are well, and fear the incision with iron.
If it is necessary that you bring the stitch in this way: take a twisted thread and put it into an awl, and then wind the thread over and below the awl, and pierce the awl from the other side, and return the 1.i. 2. threads of the thread through the awl, and if it is wide; and pulls the thread tight, then winds the thread, takes out the awl, and does the same to all of them, leaving 1. to stop the blood from flowing;
then put on the foundation 1. cloth soaked in oil or wax, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave it until they have finished crying, and when they are calm, if the wounds are treated with ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
and then thoroughly dry it at the end or foundation For often the drying of the end in the intestines, and by nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
If you scrape the top of a spur or your nail up to the nail bed, which does not let it get wet; and then heal him as much as he is sound,
and if he cannot be made sound, then start the shaving more roughly than before, until he heals all over, and is burned; and then heal him as much as he is sound,
and then heal him as much as he is sound, Froge nots of fire comandid on a patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they are grown.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
For the cure is such that you take a straw from an owl's feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and put that straw on the wound, until the purple circle around the wound is completely gone. Then turn your hand to all the straw until you cover the entire wound, and put it on properly, and scrub the wound from its roots.
And if you see, make this of a dog's or iron's shape according to this form, and be subtle and run on top:
do not pierce, lest it may hurt them both, and must press: And if you see, cauterize the pain, as it is before or with fire of cautery.
of the form of the clister No one makes the clister of silver or bronze, or of melted gold or pewter; and no one makes these small or large tools according to these shapes they are brought for.
These are small.
The shape of the small and large enema is over wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
and I have a break or the belly is tied, so that you see it, and the anus is pierced inside; and on one side there is an opening of iij inches, and on the other there is one.
and the belly or Om place the medicines in a bladder of best beer or parchment, and pierce all around the smaller openings,
and place between each hole that there is of space, then pour into these holes a strong thread of twisted rope in ten or twelve times, and wrap around the abdomen so as to form a sheepskin; and when the medicine is inside, if the instrument has a strong thread in front of it, then cauterize; and this form is that of a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the cauterization with oil or olive oil, or a similar substance, then pour it lightly;
then spread the minister between his two hands together, until it is completely dry, then remove the cauterization, and place the patient's legs against the wall,
and if he sleeps a whole night, there is more help.
And if you cauterize him with the disease of the belly's decay, and the medicine comes out quickly, continue it until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or abscess, so be the cautery as subtle as for a child;
and this is the form of the subtile cautery where the skin is held in place:
of wounds
We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will tell you about the treatment of hands and medicines according to fulfillment.
I say that wounds are various according to what they are, and according to the places where they are made, and how they are made.
The things that cause wounds are by the fall of a stone, or the size of an spear or a dagger, or a lance or a staff or a sword, or similar things;
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds, because the memory comes in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, if it is from falling off a cliff or similar things, and the skin is torn in many places, and the wound is large, and you doubt a little the aposteme: if it comes to heal the cephalic midsommer if it is not poc of blood from the wound, and let the healing be on the opposite side of the wounded part;
and prevent the patient from drinking wine and eating large meats.
And if he cannot urinate, or if his meat is reduced and does not drink wine or eat cheese,
and apply to the wound, if it is an abscess, cotton dipped in oil and applied coldly, or in wine that constricts.
and if it is not an abscess, if it is fresh blood on the wound, and it does not move with air, powder, which I will mention a little later.
and if it burns him, put it on some herbs, until he is well.
And if the wound is large, like from a sword or similar, and the lips do not come together tightly, then sew them together, like I said for wounds on the belly, by the seam.
For if the wound is open to the bone and it bleeds profusely, then patch it; but then heal the wound with medicine, and replace the skin with hard leather. and instruct the patient to eat large meats, like roast beef and bread, as well as birds, and similar things.
And if you find a boil, and it does not hurt the bone, then cut off the puss, and then treat it.
And if it has an artery in the wound or vein, which without suturing, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, let it be like a thread. And if that does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then a light cure is given: and that you put this powder which hardens so that the fire moves it.
And the method of this powder is this: take Frankincense one part; dragon's blood 16 parts; live coals 13 parts, and the powder finely. and apply the wound, and hold it firm, until it has completely healed and is joined together with all its blood;
and then bind it well, and let it be without a bandage if it swells; for you do not take off the medicine until it is healed.
And never make a fire with only live coals, but if you have only Frankincense and dragon's blood, let the fire not move the wound.
And if it has been burned, it moves the wound, most certainly it would be if there was not one of this powder.
but put on some herbs that are digestible, or balls of barley flour made with water and honey, until it no longer has fever; then he should treat him with other remedies as long as he is healthy.
And if the fracture of an bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with gentle pincers;
and I will tell you hereafter about the breaks of the head.
of the wound of the neck
The wound comes from the throat and is simple; there is no difference between it and that of the head, but the artery is cut at the throat.
If it is the neck, if there is no other device but to leave the cure alone, and do not put anything that restricts it, for it hurts the neck and makes it retreat; and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the extension of the blood goes with the brain, which is the most high member;
but be the medicine hot, if as hot water washed down with rose oil, and mixed with oil too, and also washed in hot water, and other stones of mine according to this way, and wet with oils.
And if the wound is large, so the cost and bind it with bandages, then the cure until he is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and he is full ofbowels, then pierce him or lower him.
And if the artery has been cut and blood runs, if he faints and falls, and if you cauterize him, your craft is needed.
And if his voice from the throat has been cut, or he chokes, and his direction is guarded, so that the meat goes in. and if the cut to the curb on the chin of the throat, and does not touch the throat but sets it according to its natural shape; and then wait for the time required, and leave it for a few days, and then treat with oil of cloves as long as he is healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then seek out and if there are pieces of bone, and the treatment is too painful for you, and these that you cannot bear, leave it until the wound putridity; and be careful and obedient to the doctor's orders;
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I have said. And if it has bones and there is a fistula, then treat it with the ointment as I have said in this chapter.
of the wound from a lance or knife
If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look carefully at the wound to see if there are any signs of life in the patient: know that such wounds are often fatal.
and if it is not submerged, and it is fresh in all its blood, then I do not put the powder to it at first hour, nor bind the blood so that it does not hold completely, and return to the heart, and stop the pain. but I add a soothing remedy, and bind it three times a day;
and if you don't have ointment, put wet cotton on the wound to absorb the moisture,
and let the patient sleep on the wound .iii. days, or .iiij., or more often; if there is no spasm, nor a strange tremor of the body nor any pain; and when you see the good conditions, if you know that the wound is saved. Heal with leeches and other cures, as long as he is well;
and if it cannot be healed, and operated, then know that there is a fistula; so heal as one should.
and if the wound is from an incision with a knife or sword, and it is simple, or deep or on the back, then heal that which is before;
if it is large, of suture; and if it is small, of powder, and if it has pierced the bone, and there are pieces of it, then heal the wound, and if they have been broken, then treat them; and if they have not been broken, then let the wound fester, then extract with care;
and for other wounds on other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
for the rupture of the belly
For the rupture of the belly is great and painful and small;
of the great wound there jumps out none of the intestines, or the entanglement of the intestines, because of the intrusion of water;
and the stitch is more difficult, and there is no value to it than the little wound that it makes,
for this reason we do not put back the intestines, unless they are put back warm, for if they are not put back warm, because the intestines swell so that they feel cold, then we should not put them back,
and there is no value to it than the little wound that it makes, for this reason we do not put back the intestines, unless they are put back warm,
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to .iiij. ways:
the .ij. common seams had in the seam of the belly,
and the seam of the other wounds of the body and .ij. other private seams are common to other wounds;
and each one is more proper with the seam of the belly, and I will say one and declare:
I say that when the wound is small, and there is no matter of the intestine out, and no further matter is to be put back, this should be done in one of the two following ways: or due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from cold.
And when he has been frozen, heat him in a certain way: Moisten a sponge or .i. a cloth in lukewarm water, only wet, or you cook in lukewarm water, only wet, and dry the intestines until they are swollen.
and never does this wine causing constriction, and is much warmer than water for dispelling wind.
And when you see the swelling subside, if moisten the intestine with water or wine and boiled beans are eaten, For by this is the intestine stiffened at little things;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small hole in the wound with the instrument used to scrape the hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is to make him bleed. so that we do not chop him up unless there is a great need;
and this instrument is used to split it:
if you cut it in the corbeau and take off the skin, and see the shape:
And when the wound has enlarged, and the intestines have been pushed out, if it is reset in its natural position in its proper place, if you can do this, for it is necessary.
When the wound has enlarged, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, If it is necessary for you to make the sick person walk on their tiptoes. and place their legs higher than their head; and if she is in the part of the body called "the belly",
and so if he rips his belly, it's on one of the 18 parts if you understand that the damaged part is higher than the other;
and so it is necessary to treat what I said in large and small wounds.
For small wounds however the patient should be dressed
then place your hands .i. minister pitously so as to make all the rot go out at his hand, and bring together the lips; and this is the common way of stitching,
and this is the common way of stitching, and it is that you twist a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, And leave at the head of the wound. i.e. two spaces, and stick an needle where it is. i.e. with a good strong thread; and pierce the .iij. joints of the hide with the .iij. joints of the shoulder,
And the removal of a double thread comes through the needle from .iij. parts; then join the two ends together in front of the wound;
and then leave .iij. spaces, and put another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you have to do with the needles, until all the wound is contained;
and that the needles are small and large, for the small needles fill all the space, and the too large ones cannot enter well: for this reason, let them be moistened;
and do not put the needles too far from the back of the hide and the leather;
so that they do not open and tear the wound in front of the seam;
and then cover the head of the needles, so that they do not hurt the patient when they sleep, and I set blankets or sheets on the shoulders of the needles so they stay put. and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this method of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds, For it requires a needle or two.
The second stitch is common, and that you join the 20 shoulder blades of leather and the 20 shoulder blades of steel together with one strong thread; and when you have pierced these blades together,
and when you have pierced these blades together, then twist the thread in the manner in which one twists wool.
and space of a second between each stitch the thickness of a little less than two.
this stitch is seven inches long for the man.
and I sewed up a wound that this man had or his belly,
who was cut with a knife, and this wound was more than a palm in length, and it was of the entrails well iij. palmes in length,
and the wound was in the belly. I brought him back his intestine and it was iij. hours before it stopped.
And so the wound healed just 15 days later, and I treated it, and it was cured.
And they said that he would die, but it was a miracle;
and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in 15 years old where there are no remedies, nor any medicine; and I put on cotton wool 19 times a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until it was cured;
And I will tell you the nine proper ways of sewing:
Take the needle and dip it in the ink only as far as it reaches into the thread;
When it has pierced the thread at its tip to the right extent, as you dipped the needle in ink,
and then let it pierce from the other side into the inside only as far as it reaches to the tip,
and the understanding of this stitch is that you also sew like the pelt maker does the fur. and you leave the siac once on one side, and take it again on the other, until the stitch is completely done.
The second way to sew, which Galiens properly explained,
is if it is if it is as anyone does, who join the .ij. parts together naturally, and apply one of the chiefs to the other chief, in this manner:
fix an arrow or a head of mirabene close by, and make it pierce that which is above alone, and leave the .ij. chiefs of the syrphic; then turn the arrow, and make it pierce from the outside part all the way inside, The dislocated shoulder.
and then pierce both the upper and lower parts from the outside right up to the center, in 12 other places along the shoulder blade that are on either side of it;
and this is the method of suturing and it is most common.
Galien thus describes it, and no one testifies to the contrary,
one must sew the belly with .ij needles, or there is thread in each one;
and must one push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the way of those who sew with corroded needles;
and know that when the belly is torn, the縫合应该比腹部的其他部分更紧密。
The judgments of the wound are such as those of other wounds.
and when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the flesh has been moved. then put on the powder, and rub it in; then put char on it,
then put on the powder, and rub it in; then put char on it, and if the flesh has been moved, then put on any oil that is present, as long as the wound boils. and make the child sit up, and let the breast and the milk come together. then heal the wound as with others, until it is well;
and if you have no medicines, put on, sometimes that it begins to go down, cotton wool, and stir it.ij. times a day until it is well.
For you do not need other medicines in most cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will not connect to main limbs, if it is necessary for you to moisten another light limb with warm oil or rose oil, and place the moistened cloth between the arms and the sides;
and if he feels pain or injury to the belly, and many times it happens, if the black wine enemas are effective, and sometimes the inflammation comes just to the intestine;
and it perforates inside, and you know that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "Jeun" cannot heal if it is ruptured, and this is because of the opening of veins, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the approach to its nature of children.
And if the scar tissue jumps out of the wound, set it back as well as the intestines, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has turned brown or black, if you know the spot that is brown, so that blood does not come from there; For there are veins and arteries;
and take those who are between the links. and place the two shoulders hanging from the edge of the wound as far apart as possible to facilitate extraction when the pinches pull, and the wound bursts.
from the cut on the boil
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, if one can restore them in some houses,
for I see that some honorable men were wounded or struck by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach; and it became a fistula and there was discharge and wind;
I will employ whatever means I can to heal him, and I will not stop subtiling until he is well, and I will bind his wounds.
And when I saw him bound up, I doubted that the disease was still in his belly. and he had no ill effects, but he delayed in better conditions, and eating and drinking;
and they said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in some way: Take a large testicle, then gather the lips of the wound. and when the testicle has opened the mouth, put it on the upper .ij. lips,
and then again.i. another fever after in that way that before, until the wound is completely closed;
and cut the wound. This chief if it burns in the intestine, and does not cause any harm to the patient,
and can be tied with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such a way: take the head of this intestinal thread that is wet and cut off and then take the head of this thread. i.e. a fine twisted linen thread, then thread the needle with the thread, and cut the intestine, and wind it in the knot;
and this way of sewing frents is only good according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, most certainly when it is in one of the internal joints, there is no medicine that can cure it, unless with subtlety.
of fistula or whatever it is Says that every wound or abscess, once it has healed, is called a "fistula" universellement and most often when she is riding and throwing herself forward.
and the fistula is according to the green opinion a hard and white knot, where one does not feel pain, and it is also chewed like the feathers of an owl;
and never in a clear jump, and sometimes in a thick one; not at all times, and sometimes enough.
and I have spoken about the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no cure, is only by one of the eight causes:
that is to say, by small blood loss or fever; For his wickedness. Or cut off what is inside, and on the lips, so that it does not grow again; Or there is too much bowel; Or the blood is thin, and the material is of poor quality; Here is the translation of the text line by line: Or the medicine is not good for the cure; or because corruption is a way of pestilence; Or by reason of the property in the region is late digestion, and late health, and flees by nature; Or there are veins or osses:
and I have presented all these causes, and signs, and cures of medicines in the division.
Or it is necessary that I make known to you the cure for fistula which is made by work of hands.
That fistula may occur in all limbs of the body; for it is necessary that I make known to you the cure for fistula which is made by work of hands. Car il i a aussi fistules qui ne venont pas as voines, et as veines, et aux ners, qui ne sont point grandes. ou au syfac, or to the small intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or at the spine of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this way are of great surgery, and there is only work and ignorance.
and if there is no fistula so it does not come until I have said, and you have finished with the cure, and you can see it clearly, if take a tent of rain or iron, the fistula is straight, and I want it.
and if the fistula is twisted, seek out a subtle tent of pitch, for the pitch will bend it into curvature.
and if it bursts from the fingers, and you cannot find it well with your hands, if the poultice is applied to one of the holes,
for if moisture comes from one hole to another and moistens it, and cleanses it;
and then wash it thoroughly with your power, so that you know if there are bones or nerves, and it is completely shaved,
and ask well the patient of the pain that he feels when you press your hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you know truly the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein; or in some of the places that I have told you, if the wound is deep according to what I have said;
or in some of the places that I have told you, if the wound is deep according to what I have said; and the bone is broken and the corroded rust that is within it; and then the cure as long as she is healthy,
and if the fistula is very deep on the right side, you must cut it perfectly, as well as you can. then dip them in a medicinal potion and pour it over the top of the fistula,
then dip them in a medicinal potion and pour it over the top of the fistula, as long as the medicine eats away the excess that is held at the bottom.
and then I put ointments healing sore horse, as long as he is healthy;
if it is not healed by this, then the fire cautery as we have said,
and if his nose is corrupted by the fistula, then the scrape. If the vein or nerve in the principal members is not injured, as we have said;
and if his nose is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackening, so long as the corruption is all bone, then treat the matter with care until he is healed;
and if he is not healed, and return to his former state, know that you are not yet healed, and go no further:
If you are in doubt, and ask as long as you are at the bottom. and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is healthy, that is good. If not, know that the corruption is too complete, so you cannot come to it; If there is no other remedy except to weaken by nature;
and if there is a small bone rotten, and you can pull it out with tweezers, if the extraction is done with suitable instrument for that purpose,
and if there are several bones, if they are pulled with care so as not to break them, and leave only one;
and if moisture makes him ill, and there is no fear or doubt, if it is hot and moist and tender, and frees the bones.
And if you do not take them off within an hour, put something that causes inflammation on the wound, and leave it until the leather is rotted around the bones,
and then the bones will come more easily.
and if it's a big bone, like a leg or thigh if you only treat the corruption as far as the blackness is all bone, then restore the wound;
and if there is a great part of the bone corrupted, and comes up to the socket; if it fits and covers all the way up to the corruption, and then cures it as long as it is stuck together;
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may use this as an example and aid in your work.
He was .i. a young man of 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body.
as long as the matter came to the leg, and was gone by a large abscess, and had no cause to go away by opening;
but the mirror, because of his madness, opened so much that it went up to the abscess, and corroded away matter, and became a fistula, and I came out much more than all the bile that came from the body;
and many more I have cured within three years, and there was no skill in the art of hands
as long as I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was cured, and that which runs through the pores with great force; and his body became red with youthfulness, and had an amber-colored complexion.
I built a tent in one of these openings, and then I searched all the openings.
and I found that one came against the other on all parts of the leg.
So I hurried, and I entered into one of the openings as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted and destroyed, and it came to the corruption up to the bone inside;
I loved that which I saw of the rotten bone, and I took care that there was no other corruption than that which I had;
and I began to restore the wound with drugs that have long been used, and cannot be bound;
and then I uncovered it again, and saw the bone as before,
and I took care of the corruption that continued in the bone, and loved it, and then I held it, and began to bind the place.
but I cannot as long as I caulked an artery with my hand, and drew it out to its whole length. then I restored it with medicine; and he was healed and firmly sewn up,
and did not need to repeat the work of the fire for the weakness of the disease, which could not endure it, and out of fear of death that I had for him. For by the evacuation of blood it happened often, but he was completely healed,
For by the evacuation of blood it happened often, but he was completely healed, and gave birth in place of the bone a hard mass, and was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary to all things, nor did it affect its growth or decrease.
and extend the head, so you pull the broken bar away from the shoulder, and uncover the bar on the top where you see silk, so that the silk does not damage the bar; and heat a piece of iron or a bowl to burn out the bone so it covers the rotten socket; and it is necessary as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then discover the whole char; then heat a piece of iron or a bowl,
and then sear the one part to the other of the corruption, and be the sear sure from the long of the corruption .i. poc, if as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, so to cure the joint that is corrupted, and sear the bone where it is contained on the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the 11 joints, so there is not another injury than that of the copper;
and if the corruption is where the hand joins the wrist, or where the foot joins the leg, so this is a very painful thing, but anyway it is necessary for you to ask about this corrosion, how does it affect you? and clean thoroughly in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not affect you negatively;
and know that the incisor and the sutures to cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of the teeth; and their grossness and fineness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and for each type of operation he prepared his instrument.
and know that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this craft, and the testimony of the manner of diseases; so that you will know the instrument you need according to what is appropriate for that craft.
ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die. When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. if the patient escapes death from this by the malice of the member, which is greater, from failure of the limb.
if the patient escapes death from this by the malice of the member, which is greater, from failure of the limb. and the signs are that the limbs turn black, or that they seem to be burned by fire, and then comes the corruption of the member from member to member, and takes hold of the whole body; if you hasten the coppering,
and if it is by the stinging of certain venomous beasts, as sea scorpions and weasels and others,
For if it is by corrosion at the root of the neck, if he covers it, and does not give him room to come out until the hand.
And if it comes only up to the hand, if he covers it up to the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
And if it comes up to the arm, if he covers it up to the neck; and if it passes the neck, it is death. and do not vary the quantity of its virtue;
and so on until the corrosion comes or stops: if it comes in the first joint, then go after the other joint;
and if it comes or stops, go through all of it; and if it rises in the leg, go to the knee joint;
and if it comes over the knee, then there is no other remedy than to make the patient die.
and the way of copper or silk to wrap the limb so that you tie it up and dislocate it, and extend one minister of the two lines downstream, and another minister of the other line upstream, and you disengage the cord that is between the iij lines to i spatumile wide, as long as the bone is uncovered;
And the cloth or silk, and put from each side .i. a linen drape, so that the silk does not touch the healthy place, and brings another injury and abscess to the patient.
And if blood comes due to the injury, he should cauterize the place immediately, or you put on some powders that restrain it; then return to your medicine as long as it is completed,
Then cut off the limb with a knife, and heal it until it is well.
and I will tell you that there was once in a certain town
a man who had a blackness that seemed to be burned by fire,
and this corrosion came first in his two feet, so much so that it stained the entire foot;
and when the honor saw the corrosion, if it was coated with copper, and was healthy;
and long after he returned to me the corrosion or two of the hand, and came to me,
and I put on him reflective things after purification of the body, and cannot stop the corrosion;
and he said that I cut off his hand, and I don't, that I had hope of reflect the matter; and doubt also that if he cuts his hand, he will not die, For the virtue of the man was feeble; and he despaired completely, and returned to his land, and he struck off his hand, and was healed;
and I know of no other remedy but this, that if one needs it, one should do so.
No time comes when the abscess is in its native place, and delays for so long that it makes great assembly of bowels. and then rot and pierce, and spill the bowels, and stay the viscera as our servants; and the skin that is above is also soft like.i. silk threads untied, and do not corrode yet to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy",
but if it becomes so long that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called "fistula";
and the cure is that you heat the skin all over, and most importantly when it is thin, just as we do with cloth; and does not burn for its corruption.
And if you have noticed that the leathers are drying, and the corruption is not yet complete, and the leather is hard like a shield, so that the cure with hot water:
looks like there are large breasts, and the bow that hangs from it has a foul smell, then apply Egyptian medical ointment, which is made like this: Take oil and olive oil, and chalk, evenly, and put it to boil in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and also as thick as honey;
and then take this according to your need, and make it with water and honey, and boil it in the pot, and strain the liquid, and pour out the urine. and leave the medicine on for .ij. hours, then remove it by squeezing.
do this mutch times, till the sinews are destroyed, and the joint is broken;
and no time is cauterized with fire of ash, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you squeeze ash from a vine's wood, and pour water on top,
Then let it flow, and bind up with strips, as long as you know that the breast is well wrapped.
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither can Egyptian medicine nor ash from the burnt ashes if you use water and honey, or a little bit of lead oxide; or you use honey and wine to make it, because the honey has the property to purify and wash; and let the wine be made ready for the saint.
and when you have done this, and you have engaged that the breasts are well changed, if the cauterization of that which causes pregnancy hurts her,
and is that you squeeze plaster definitively, and do it with rose oil and wine; where you anoint with certain medicines and ointments, which I have spoken of in the chapter on ointments;
and if it is small, then the catheter cannot enter; if a little piece of iron is put in it, and an Egyptian ointment put in a tent, where the ointment is bazilic, as long as it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too wide, let it open so that the catheter can enter.
and if the hole is above or below where the catheter goes, For when the wound is completely healed, so that it doesn't cause a scar; and if you can't cover the navel as you see fit, If it appears in such a way that the bow goes to the lowest level where it is,
and if you cannot cope with it yourself as you see, If it appears in such a way that the bow goes lightly down, and does not leave anything behind of the bow: and take medicines that solidify over the breast,
and are placed on a linen drape that covers the whole breast; then wrap around the chest with a band that is wider at the top than at the bottom, and apply oil to the other drape according to the amount of the protrusion, and place it on top of the breast for support, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days.
and he who is above the breastbone, often removes to remove the cloth, and knows what corre from the cloth, whether it is poison or not, or enough, or digestible, or undigestable;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is swelling or not;
and when this medicine has been extended in such a way and you see the nature that leaps on the breach of the breast, if you know that the breasts begin to erupt, and bring them closer.
and then let it down in the morning, or in the day, and when you uncover the wound, if you change. I. other cloth, and renew the dressing.
And if milk comes out undigested after many days, knowing that the breast does not get irritated. And if subtle poison comes after a long time, so that you do not despair of health,
For health approaches. For there are people who delay healing in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
And if milk comes out undigested after many days, knowing that the breast does not get irritated.
and if it is late to breathe, and is stretched out, so put together medicines seething moisture in substance and drying in virtue, if as a remedy finally, for there is much acid, and this is the last medicine;
take a final remedy, and make it with rose oil, and dilute it with equal amount of plain wine;
then the confit and use it; and this also makes honey cooked thickened, as soon as the inflammation is over,
take mirr and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it on honey when it has come out of the fire; and then in a bowl, and let it sit by the breast, and never administer it as an antidote for long, and roots of lily of the valley, which is also like flour of times and hundredfold;
and roots of lily of the valley, which is also like flour of times and hundredfold; and in the use of simple drugs or compounds: grind them, and make a powder, and put on honey that I have said, and use it. if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure,
if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then know that corruption is complete, and causes impression in the bone, or in the hard members, or in the limbs; if the cure of the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
from the nail of the finger
is a wound that arises from a sore on the nail of the hand or in other parts such as the feet, or perhaps it arises elsewhere;
and when he is worn out and one does not pay attention to him, then he becomes a wound that causes great pain. and cut and get bow so that they root the nail, and by chance cut them all.
and comes the corrosion up to the bone, so that it comes painful stinking, and is the head of the two large ones, and is the color running.
When you cure it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, So that you take all the waste that is retained by the nail, Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail is pushing forward and pricking, and bleeding; so that you put the right treatment on the nail that stops it from pricking and bleeding; and the bottle on top, and chop this hair carefully and lightly. and put over the remaining hair burning and corrosive remedies to remove everything;
And if the corruption is in the bone, chop and trim it, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the two corrupted, then the cup of wine as mentioned above, then treat it until he is well;
and if he is wounded and drunk, and he feels great pain, then you must first heal him; then cut the nail with a sharp knife from side to side,
and guard so that the cut does not go up to the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, let something be put on that soothes.
The two joints that sometimes cause pain in some men's hands are fully carnate. and by chance he has broken or dislocated it, and never has a finger been dislocated.
and no two grow from the root of the joint, or their birth is in either of the two legs. The child born without a joint between the two legs remains immobile. and if one is born with a joint between the two legs, by chance it becomes mobile.
the width of one who is chubby so is light, in this way: taller it at its root with a wide spatulum.
Who is born in the root of the joint so is hard to cure: if you hold him down.
In who is born or should be cut at the derrièring noot, so it is that you first chop the roundness up to the bone: Then wrap the bone with a suitable cloth, then care for it until it is healthy.
The joints that come together by nature, or by the assembly of wounds, or by fire, or by similar things.
If you wrap this joint together, so that it repairs itself according to its natural form; Then place between two cloths or drapes soaked in oil and rosin, so that it does not stick together; Put between two thin pieces of wood, as long as the legs are joined together.
When a joint is heated with fire, it becomes soft; when it cools down, it hardens again.
are evil.
These vile things are large wrapped packages full of melancholy nonsense, which come in multiples from the body's members.
and there are more in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry than with others.
It therefore seems that you should never give them a purging of bile, but treat the basileus.
The cure for iron is as follows according to these two ways: one is to burn it, and the other is to draw out the black blood with a hook. and this other way is that you take the vein, and draw it all out.
The size is determined according to this method: raise the first leg with very hot water until the thick muscle is softened. Then strain the leg of the sick person from above the thigh to the part below the knee; Then cut the vein in .i. inch, or in .ii. or in .iii. inch wide,
then clean and stretch the leg firmly with your hand, from one side to the other, as much blood as the disease allows;
and then let it lie, and command that he dye his meat with blackCole;
and begin again the evacuation and the bleeding when the veins are clear, and harm the patient.
The healing method for this is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is any hair, then dip it or bathe it, and raise the leg in warm water until it turns red, and swell the veins;
and if you have no bath, heat it by the fire, and then dip the inside of the thigh from the hip to the shin, or in the part of the leg to the ankle.
then dip the skin at the bottom, and peel the vein from each side, until it is felt as smooth as possible.
and when it looks red and black, and when it enters or leaves the skin it seems like a white thread;
then dip the nail very slightly, until it is lifted from the skin, and then peel it gently;
Then make a bandage of another length of cloth over it; then scorch the skin on the wound until it appears, Then raise it up, as you did, and fix it to another hook, as you did first;
Then make a bandage of another length, or more if you need it, then scorch the skin and wrap it around the foot;
Then tie and wrap it tightly, then scorch the skin and continue wrapping it, reducing the size each time, then finish wrapping it;
and if you cannot pull it out and raise it up, then put a needle into all.i. strong double thread and tie and draw it, and put a knot, and turn your hand from one side to the other, as long as it comes out; and keep it from coming undone, for if it comes undone, if you cannot pull it out and raise it up, and it causes harm to the patient;
and when you have finished treating it, if put wet wool in wine and oil on top of the wound; and heal it until it is well.
And if it is visible it is twisted and bent together, and is not straight, as we have said, If you should open it, twist it, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
If you should open it, twist it, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron that you cover the vis with if it is twisted, and does not cut it, but covers the vein;
and it is of a large size, because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is its form:
Of the civil vein
This vein is found in the legs, in warm places where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture;
and it may also occur in other parts than the legs, and such an eruption may arise from a sore on the skin that breaks open;
if it comes from within the body, coiled up and winding around, coming between the skin and the hide;
And if the signs of the onset of this illness are that it comes to the leg a very great swelling, then the places change, and begins the disease suddenly, also like a root of a plant.
When the chest is opened, if you wrap a piece of cloth from one and a half to two inches thick around it, and then cut it off,
and leave the cloth hanging down to the leg, and every time that it is in a certain point of departure, if the wrap around the cloth, and the new one; and if it is too far away, then chop off a part of it, and wrap the rest up, and do not cover the whole thing up until it has completely come out. for if you chop it, it will get stuck in the chaff, and cause an abscess and corruption where it is, and bring about a bad illness;
for this thing, it is necessary that it be treated little by little until it reaches the heart, and nothing remains of it except the core;
and this wound does not heal when treated with long palm leaves or with thin branches; and ten strong hands came to me, of which she had one palm's length; and when you cut it, if a little raised or hollowed out, and pierce it as far down as possible.
so that everything comes out; and the material which is inside is made void, and brought to the place where the putridity occurs every day, then heal it as with abscesses.
And never use this hand for any work, and least of all when she opens in the joint of the foot, or the foot itself, and it comes out raised and bent, and where it bends; then heal it as we have said before.
The worms that are born between skin and shield
This disease is called in our land "buffalo disease" because it often affects buffaloes.
and it is a small worm that is born between skin and shield, and it goes everywhere up and down the body. and the scent is felt well from member to member, until it removes the skin where it has gone, and jumps around.
and is infected with some humors, so that they come towards it and crawl and shine and worms or grow in the belly;
and doubt arises from his ill-being, for when he goes through the body, and he rises up to the head, and comes out at the mouth, For it may enter again and destroy the oil, and this happens many times.
When you see him cured and treated, so that he can only go:
if so then you must first lie down and stretch out from a strong rope tightly,
then cut on top and tie firmly, and let it be pulled perfectly into the cart, and you don't see it, if so then apply fire cautery to it until it dies,
and the greatest harm it causes is that it corrupts the oil, if so as we have said;
and if you see the head coming near the oil, then hold the eye firmly in place; then cut it off, and throw it away.
and it is appropriate to use the patient for the preparation of solutions of medicines to remove bad odors.
and if there is meat that has become rotten.
For pain that comes from windiness. This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and it moves from one limb to another; and I saw the one that I told you about.
I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered a small swelling in the vein of her arm;
and then I saw it rise like a worm to her shoulder; as soon as possible, like fresh silver when cutting from one place to another;
the pain leaves the shoulder joint and enters the shoulder blade,
and then soon after, it spreads throughout the whole body, until it reaches the other arm;
and then she told me that her body was twisting tightly around her torso, as I saw it happen to her.
I marveled how she moved her member to another, for I have never seen this disease in such a manner. Nevertheless, I had heard that many people wanted to move their pain from one part to another. but I have never seen it, however, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that was because the woman had a narrow waist and open veins, and for this reason it appears that the wind is forced back;
and they do not appear to be in accordance with this reasoning for those who are prone to illness, and have moist bodies and reopened veins.
And when you treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, if the wind is forced back at its source, and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it in your eyes,
let the doctor who treats this disease, as with foul-smelling pills, and serapin pills, and similar things.
arrows
The arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the color of the fur or the place where they fly.
The diversity of their shape is such that some have large points, others small, some are cheveux, and others soudées. and those who have .ij. angles, and those who have langues, and those where there are pieces; and that which shakes in any member so shakes according to .ij. ways: or in a principal member cheveux,
as the brain, liver, pancreas, kidneys, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When she dies, then you see the sign of death, which I will tell you later. If you are able to extract this arrow, for death comes after many preparations; and if there is no sign of the arrow, and it is not completely extracted, then bend it, and cure the wound.
And the sign of the skull when the arrow pierces the bone, and jumps out on the skull, is when amputation, gangrene, and convulsions are in the limbs, and inflammation and swelling of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of mind, and vomiting of food. and perhaps it is absent from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and from the moist scabs there seems to come a pulse-like sound, and also like smoke;
and these signs reveal it, if you hold it in your hand, and if the arrow is not stuck in [the victim].
The sign of the arrow when it pierces or stings is that it is near the left breast, and also as if it had been driven into some hard thing, not empty. and sometimes the arrow changes course like a bird, and in short black blood, and coldness and cold sweat comes, and fainting. so that death comes quickly.
And the sign of the arrow that stings the neck is that there is no foam coming from the wound, and the throat swells, and the color of the patient changes, and he/she sighs heavily and gasps for breath.
And if the arrow enters into the shoulder-blade in the covering of the shoulder, take away the little ribs; and he gives great pain and great sighing and movement of all the member of the shoulders.
And if the arrow enters into the stomach, by chance if any meat is digesting out of the wound.
And if the arrow enters into the belly, and in the gut there is no passage by the bowel, so there is no hope for recovery or extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow enters into the bladder, and in its exit there is urination and going away, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is fatal.
The other member, if as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the aid and the spine from the back and the force and the thigh and the legs, and the limb-like are safe according to many provisions. When the arrow is in the loin or the artery, and it does not venom, for as I will tell you that it happened to me, so you should do otherwise.
It happened to a man who had an arrow in his loin or bladder in the root of his penis: I tried it, and I pulled it from another side, taking away its fat from the ear, and was healed without pain.
And throw a arrow that it hits in the fat of oil of the paper dry. and the arrow was re-aimed, and I only got to hit the tip towards the wood. and the arrow was big of an archer blue, to all I. It is light without ears; The game was healthy, and there came no bad accidents.
And throw an arrow in the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was an archer's ear:
I loved the beards, and I made them grow as long as I could, and I healed the Christians.
And I tried an arrow on a man, that it was in his leg or belly, and I thought he would die;
and then he had passed three days, so he did not change his disposition; I cut on the arrow, and I set it up, and I shot it, and there was no bad accident.
And if you want to see a man who has an arrow in his chest or back, and the wound is sewn up;
and do not keep the arrow inside him, and do not delay his natural movements; nor does it find harm in any of its natural works.
And see another man, to whom an arrow has been shot into his face, and the wound is sewn up;
and causes great suffering of pain; and many others too.
And bring an arrow to the king, who was wounded in his neck, so that the arrow remained in him. and it was a little to the left at the lower part; and the arrow was entirely inserted.
I was called to treat him after he had been wounded for three days. The wound was very narrow.
I wanted to taste the whole subtle drink, and I did not feel it. And he felt no tingling or pain in his left ear. I thought it was the tip of an arrow
I put on the leech-infested leech-oil for digestion, lest the leeches inflame it; and let me know where the arrow is.
and let me know where the arrow is. I put plaster on his hands every day, and quickly heal the wound, and delay so that the patient remains for a long time.
as long as he felt the arrow. I told him to move his hand inwards from day to day; and he told me. I put on the wound a corrosive liquid by my hands every day, as long as it was open,
and test, and feel the tip of the arrow which has settled in its place; then I tested by opening the wound with this medicine water until I clearly saw the tip of the arrow;
and well passed the terms in .iiij. months,
and then I opened up the wound with tweezers, and pulled it from one side to the other, and could not remove it;
Then I ceased not from subtility and contrivance of devices, until I had taken the same. i.e. a good pair of shears. According to what shape it will take at the end of this chapter, until I had taken it and restored the wound.
And the mirror judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and was sewed up the wound, and healed the patient entirely.
Here is the translation of the text line by line: so that you put your remedy on what I do not say, for the books cannot take everything into account;
but the wise masters compare only a few small things, and those that are present and failing, try nine operations and nine instruments for the removal of foreign things that come in this art.
I say that arrows are taken from the limbs, or they are not; but according to the following manners: if they enter by way of the hole where they enter, or by another part;
and that which leaps is arrow-head-first into the body, it is an entering arrow; but it never now remains in place.
And if it does not leap, if it leaves the bow as soon as the string is drawn back, and the flight is ready;
and if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, if it is left like this for some days, and moves every day;
and then it jumps, and if it doesn't jump, then pierce it with a small sharp thing, until the inside is opened up, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is placed in the center of the chest so that it cannot be seen, if one seeks it with all one's strength. and if you feel it, if you take it with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot do so because of the pain from the wound and because of the arrow's depth; and there is no bone or nerve or vein, and the wound is very large; and try to extract the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow so that it holds,
and try to extract the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow so that it holds, if you can pull out the bone that is lodged in .ij. parts of the muscle that you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as far as you can pull it;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as far as you can pull it; and carefully so that you don't break the arrow, but rather pull it more painfully.
And if you cannot do it once, if the joint is rotten, then cut it off, for extraction is painful. And if the pain of extraction makes you uncomfortable, then administer what we have said in our chapter about the remedy with the paste;
and be careful of the nerve and vein when incising, and do not try to extract the arrow without risk,
or hot or cold, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form they were in when the arrow came out, For this is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot do it, then follow what those who show you how to do it say.
The arrow that comes from another place, where he does not open anything of it, or the skin is swollen in a certain place, if one sees it or feels it apparently:
Cut it down as much as the nails can take hold of it, and then remove it: if it is too large now.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand around, as much as it enters into the bone and widens it, then remove it.
And if it cannot come out, let her go on trying to extract it as long as she can;
and if there is an arrow in it, then squeeze it all the way down;
and if there is a piece of wood, and you have pliers, then use the pliers; or and if the arrow tip enters into the handle of the tool; and then squeeze completely out,
and if the arrow is stuck, then it is an instrument with a point entering inside, for the extraction.
and if the arrow is touched, so that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as best you can.
and if the arrow enters or hurts the chest, abdomen, bladder, or coast, and it is close by, and you can cover it, then do so.
and keep yourself from burning a vein or nerve, and then remove it, and then cut into the wound, that is the job. and heal until she is well.
The form of the pliers used to treat arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and here is the shape:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
For the veins of the neck, common to both sexes: Of the veins where one is healed are .xxx., from which there is or head xvi.,
this is to say: .ij. batans that are after the ears, who are called the "doux herbech"; and the .ij. arteries that are in .ij. temples appearing; and .ij. veins that are in .ij. eyelids of the  .ij. eyes, who are called "aspires"; and the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the nape of the neck; and the two ligaments that are at the jaw; and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augerich"; and the two veins that are at the base of the tongue.
The veins from which one generally hears are .v. in each arm:
one is the cerebral, and it runs along the left side, and is called by lay people "vein of the head"; and the muscle is called "fast", and is composed of the cerebral and the basilic, and it is called by lay people "vein of the wrist"; and the basilic, if it is on the right side, and they call it gentle "vein from the belly", and is on the thigh. and that one which is said to open clearly above the elbow.
And the small vein is the one that is between the thumb and the index finger, and if it has three raindrops;
and in the leg and where the foot is: one is if it is outside the fold of the left thigh pocket, and the second section, which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nace", that is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg are .ii. veins below those.
and the vein that runs behind the ears, which helps with old cataracts and migraine headaches; and the quality of the vein, as I will tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the quality of the vein, as I will tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the fire on the area where the veins are; then tie the patient's neck to a pole, as long as the 27 veins appear behind the ears in 27 lews dependent from the head: Then hold them both by your side, and where you feel the pulse on your side, sign with your finger;
then take the lance, and stick it into the vein just up to the bone, then lift your hand up towards the head; and a layer of fat and well-prepared meat. The vein must be thoroughly cleaned, and blood must flow freely from it as long as you can see.
then remove and clean it thoroughly until it is healthy.
and I have spoken of the incision and cauterization in the first book.
The two arteries that are in the two temples, so worth it to be drained old-fashioned and seede, and obtalmies used, and to the chest of tears with eyes;
and the quality of the patient so is as I say: is that the patient holds his neck out, until the two veins open widely; and feel the pulse on both sides of the neck, and then sign with a hand;
Then, place your hand on the vein at the base of your little finger, and pierce it with the needle. and lift up the vein, and tie it off, just as you did in the previous five veins, and let blood flow according to your need;
Then, remove the handkerchief, and put your little finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton over it;
and then let it rest until it is healed; and we have spoken of its tying and extraction, or beginning of the book.
The pain of a headache can be as great as the pain of an old disease of the face and migraine and palpitations.
and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called a "fosseur", whose form is:
And place the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand or another object, and let out the blood slowly according to the quantity that you see; Then loosen the neck for the patient, and tie the vein as long as it is healthy and never use a large flame.
However, the fire must not be too hot; and the vein should be cut across, because the bone is near, and by chance a spark of fire might light when it is thin.
The two veins that are in the arms, and with hair, and with an ulcer, and with redness, and with oil, and with diseases of the face;
and the quality of its neck is that the patient does not dislocate his neck by twisting it with any chain, as before.
Then the medicine, and let the medicator cross through, a little of long flame, a little broad, for there is no char.
And if the flame is subtle, perhaps it will break; then make the blood run, as much as you need, and then put it on cotton, and bind it well.
The medicine of the wound from birth if it is hot and dry, and at once of fever, and of diseases of the face, such as migraine and rash that comes on the face, and even when it is old;
and the quality of health is that the patient pulls his hair, then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a long thin flame, and light it in the space between the 10th and 20th nostrils, For the vein does not open easily, and the pain will start now to run;
and do not stop too much in vain, and make it run according to your need, then let it rest one night, for it is soon healed;
and the wound of the five fingers is helped by the stretching of the linen, and by the swelling of welts, and many diseases, and hemorrhoids, and corrosions, and herpes, and ulcers;
and the quality of the wound is such that the patient's neck is stretched from one side to the other, as we have said; and if the master stands over the head of the patient, and the patient seizes one hand,
Then clean the vein with a long cut, then treat the pain gently as needed.
then repeat in the other vein, then cut it off, and pull out the veins with care, so that the patient does not choke; and leaves it until morning so that the wound is healed.
Of the healing of the limbs The tongue of the patient is injured by biting into the lip from above, and by the corruption of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and pain in the neck and throat.
And the quality of this injury is that the patient sits before you, with his neck held back as I have said. Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right and one on the left of the lip. and the color is dark, and they are surrounded by small black veins. So take both sides, and if you do not know them and are in doubt,
So take both sides, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, So take the larger of the two sides, and do likewise with the lower, since this is a middle way.
Of the two, take the tongue. Of the two, take the tongue. It helps after the treatment of the head and the strangeness in the throat, and the diseases of the eye, and the diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the healing arts is that the patient dies between your hands before the sun, and the tongue looses, and looks down in each corner a black vein.
Heal them both then, and don't become too confident, for the arteries are fragile.
The veins at the sides which one usually heals are healed according to .ij. ways:
or they pierce with a sharp knife at all .i. flame, or with a small olive blade so that it is called "aneasil". and are wide and narrow according to the width and constriction of veins. The form of the flame is thin when named damp, and is wide as you see it.
And has the skill to open the flat veins that are full of thick blood and turmoil; And this is the form of the olive flame.
and is more subtle than the point, and it is for saving the subtle veins, where there is subtle blood of lemon color.
The antidote of the basilic, which is one of those veins, so help those who are ill with a sore throat, and where the neck, and chest, and stomach;
and it is for the healer to heal gently, and to bind up the artery that is outside. And if he binds the artery, and the blood flows, if the binding is tight, as I have said; and must not be held by fire but cut off as with a knife.
And if the basilic does not open clearly, then you should cut it off and change it to another one; or if you do not want any rain on it, or if you cut the vein at the base of the arm: it opens clearly; and hold the fire to it as we have said.
And if you can distinguish the position of the shoulder, it is also necessary to extract the arm, that you touch the position as long as you know the limb. then mark the position of the neck, and then tie the arm, and cut off the vein with a knife without burning it;
and beware that you do not wound the artery when you see the neck dislocated, for it is the artery: avoid it.
And if you see draining at the top as if it were urine from a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is an artery: Haste thee now, and place thy hand upon it lengthwise, and then remove thy hand swiftly, that such a thing may not happen again.
Let the shoulder rest there, and leave it so, and do not move the patient; and be afraid, and do not move it until it is well.
And if the shoulder is not dislocated, and he goes away, and the medicine is not applied to him, if the artery opens, for the head of the shoulder is dislocated; therefore, the shoulder is dislocated.
And take a twig of fig tree, and make it, and take one half thereof, and place it above the other;
if it does not burn, it is good; if not, apply the powder that stops bleeding;
and the application of the powder does not occur in many situations due to the small size of the wound, and the power of the vein of the arm.
the vein in the middle that helps to treat the pain at the top of the head and the neck. For this reason, it is composed of the basilic and cefalic veins, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon that he warm himself by the fire which is burning, and if he over heats too much and he burns himself, and it swells and the patient is blackened, and maybe he cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any home by its subtility, then you must heal the instrument anesil; and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if there is a vein between the .ij. nerves, so let it be long.
The pain of the head is due to a draw of blood from the top, and it hurts the eyes.
and it is necessary to strike with fire the olive or the merlin, because this is the most saved of all veins, because it does not cut the nerve or artery.
However, it is necessary to choose the lighter one first, and do nothing wrong the first time, and start again; and perhaps inflating the leg with air at first, but do nothing wrong the first time, and it is not necessary to grieve. The quality of health depends on your opinion.
The first thing you must know about a healer is that healing should only be used to maintain health,
and to prevent diseases from occurring. and the healer must practice in one of the three veins that are: cerebral, facial, and basilar. and one must fasten in the beginning of pregnancy, and in autumn and winter after dining when the sign of satiation appears;
and one must fasten on the first day or third day, after .ij. hours or .iij. days of every day.
The fasting that is prescribed for illnesses has no determined time limit, but it should be done every day or some days at specific times.
and one must not fasten for children before they are 12 years old, and for women only after seven months of pregnancy. Do not seek after the old who have passed .lx. years.
And when some are sought after, in whatever way, it is necessary that he who wants to heal them should turn the entrails of a light clister. if there is a blockage of wind, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful toxins to the principal members;
do not seek after those who are too soured by meat, nor those who are greasy, as long as it is necessary, nor droopy ones.
and if he is affected by the passion of colic, vomiting, distention of the belly, many times visiting his wife, labor, watching and fasting, and all this virtue, or by something of the weapon or heart;
and then carefully adjust the humors, he becomes fat without it, through meat and drinks and medicine, if you have a reason for it;
and then enter or bathe, if nothing hurts him, to adjust carefully his fever;
and heal him from the pit of the third, as we have said;
and protect yourself from work, hunger, lust, and similar things;
be silent and jointed, and be the saint higher than he who is saned, and rub his arms .ij. times or .iij..
then stretch the ligature gently, for when it is too tight or small, it cannot run without pain;
and then rub the neck with hands, until the veins swell, and you can feel them;
Then wet the fire of a little old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein to heat it a little where he wants to cauterize. so that the vein does not freeze and fails to burn. For there are veins that run like strings for the surgeon, and some that are prone to windiness. so that when one puts fire on it, if one takes away the fire, and cannot open the vein, and is thus among those:
and if he opens a vein, if the wound is too narrow, for in such things the patient must be warned.
And if he opens the vein for the first time, it is good; but if not, then let him begin again a little bit more of that place or above the hospital, if the veins are not swollen.
And if the veins are swollen and the patient hopes, let him rest for a day or two, and do not bandage his arm. for in case he comes to a hospital; do not enter or bathe, then begin the surgery if it pleases him.
and if the break is small, or the sun so low that you doubt it will not hurt as much as you see; but in this break also I fear that the fire will be too intense.
and work it a little so that the blood comes out; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the blood coming out, do not put on any powder, but rather put a little oil on it, for it calms the pain and is soothing in this area of the body; the powder causes irritation.
and apply oil to each wound that you heal, to stop the flow of blood;
and this middle one makes a triple and bowing of the ears, when he is put on top; but if it is too large, it splits subtilely.
And if there comes an abscess that is large many times, most especially when it has not been thoroughly washed except this one time or when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and put on top a wet sponge in water and in silk a little warm, and holds it an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the escape of blood from the vein, and if it remains at rest after a few days no black or green, then do not harm him; and if you see, put on any thing of aloe or myrrh made up in juice of calamus, mistletoe, or likeness.
And many times there was an abscess and appearance in the leg of the bazaar: so put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of your hand, that is the appearance bad. So don't put on anything of what we have said, for perhaps there is no artery at the place; but patch it up firmly with plaster, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the wound.
Car if the sun is not bright, let it go out until it is red; and if you see a big lump, let it go out until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for those who are ill and have the need to extract blood, you should make the wound wider and the flames wider.
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and you should heal them often, and you must heal them diagonally, not straight; and
and this method of healing is saved from the decay of blood and the damage of nerves, and it is better than long-term healing;
And to him whose heart is in the right place, it is good to give water in grape juice; if he is heated up, so does the blood go twice or three times.
And if he is of cold complexions, if he drinks before the bath water in muscat syrup, or in honey syrup aromatized with spices, as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chilies, and fragrant syrup.
And if he swallows at the bath, after the exit of blood from the vein, it is good that he hums broth and subtle fragrant syrup.
and use of other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of vein.
And if he vomits blood from his arms, and sometimes also, if it seems good, when weakened by much vomiting, that he recover little by little, according to the quantity of his continuing virtue.
And who vomits blood from his arms after the first vomiting, and he has a strong fever, if he recovers .viij. hours after the first vomiting, or after the ninth hour.
And who vomits again on another side, if one should vomit again the next day or the third day.
For it has mouth of blood within the body that is already warm, and makes fever come; if one should draw great quantity, and widen the opening as much as a pommel. and that you treat all the symptoms of illness, and put your hand on his pulse when he is healing, so that death does not come in place of a surgeon. and this happens many times, when the healing is neglected;
and it does not come until you see the dislocation of the arm, and make the blood come out a second time, and the break is closed, that you press firmly upon it; and if it is curved, that he extends his arm gently, for this would be painful;
but leave it as long as it heals the second time; or you put at the tip of the flame, until the blood that is frozen from the vein comes out. and place on .i. piece of cloth wet with water, and press lightly.
And if the vein is bleeding, let it be and do not squeeze it, until the abscess has healed.
And if need be, drain the blood a second time, if it heals in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein under the arm is cut off from the artery at its base for the sake of preserving the arm.
And the manner of the cutting so is that the patient holds his hand in hot water until the tingling is red;
Then let it be moved gently, so that the vein appears clearly, then cut it now from across, not from the wide nor from the long;
and let the cuts be wide, and cut well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, put the hand in hot water, and leave the blood running in the water, until you have enough;
and if it is hot water, I will not re-boot my hand, for it is more in winter than in summer.
and the vein of this leg is saved from all other veins, as it does not contain an artery or a nerve.
The vein of the right hand is saved from all the diseases of the liver, and this is its method:
extract the hand, and pour hot water over it, until the vein is hidden, if you can see it. and if you cut through it all at once, you will not cause any harm.
do not cut too deeply, for the nerve is exposed all along its length.
and then put your hand in warm water, it will freeze in the wound and cannot be removed.
And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, put oil and cotton wool on the vein to seal it permanently, and do the same for each artery.
The doctor will tell you to hold your hand on the left side for the sake of the disease, and do everything as I've told you about the right.
The treatment for the pain in the foot is good for all diseases that come from the body's core, good for all diseases that come from the body's core,
And the quality of this remedy is that the disease drinks warm water and rubs the vein until it stops. and on top of the ankle joint; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go most of the rain;
so as to not hit where it is more wide rain, or at the ankle, so as not to hurt.
And if you heal it on the foot, so as to not hit the nerves that run alongside, and heal it in the same way as when you are coping; and let the flame be put out.
And if he can't get out of it, put the foot in water, and leave the vein well drained.
And if it is necessary to saunter at first, then begin again on top of that little bit, because the lees are salty. do not doubt about the nerve, if as we have said, and in this way do with the other stone equally.
The lees of the vein are to be cut at the foot, and their sauntering is to be worth the pain in the hip when it is for blood.
And the quality of this sauntering is that the patient enters or bathes, and removes it from the foot. there are three things in twisting,
For otherwise does not open the vein; and if it opens, so that the blood runs in all ways that you can, and through crossing. and wait until you cut it, for the vein is out, and it is very wet with blood.
and wait until you cut it, for the vein is out, and it is very wet with blood. And if you do not stop it, so that the blood runs or does not run from the foot of the leg, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nails.
and make the blood run so that you can see it, then let it rest on the leg, and put cotton on it and hold it in place; it is now healed.
Ventose remedies
The text describes the use of suction cups, made from horns, arin, or glass:
And this type of suction, which is without striking, has two ways: it can be used with all types of fire or without fire."
and there are five others at the sides of the neck; and the ventose goes down to the chin. and there is one above the shoulders; and one on top of the elbows; and the ventoses are at the sides of the arms; and the ventoses are at the sides of the legs. and the suction cups of the .i. feet; and the suction does not treat blood unless it is small veins that are scattered in the cart,
and therefore do not stop it if there is none; for as it is done with the vein of the leg; and it should not be stopped, nor cooled or heated in any disease that comes from excess, until the whole body is clear.
And if it is necessary to cauterize for a disease or by habit, let us do this every hour during the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle.
For there are many who, when they have to go out, feel heavy-headed.
and if it is true that they feel a pain in their face and head, and in their neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue has fled, and they thirst for blood; and if there are those who dream, and see nothing but blood and nausea and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is the middle of the month, let us order them to be breathed on after .ii. hours in the day.
The remedy of the muse to help with the grief of the head ... that comes to the hairs, and it does not come until all of the body has been evacuated;
and this ventilation is in the place of the remedy of the cerebral grief,
and this ventilation is in the place of all pain or grief; and it does not come until one who has a cold complexion takes a bath or a shower, because this causes great harm to them.
and so it is not necessary for me to order them to fast, or to have cold head diseases.
And those who recover often, if they become confused, and for this reason the suction cup should be placed a little further down due to the confusion of confusion.
The suction at the base of the neck is in place for the cure of the head and the temple, and for this reason it is effective for the extraction of stones. and to cut the channel of the prostate, and all, and to fill it up.
and it is necessary to push hard because if it holds too firmly, it will cause a rupture or an upset or a stomachache or pain.
The winds are a cause of great pain in the neck and head, causing blindness and headaches, and strangle-hold, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the area of the temple of the basilica; and you must order the surgeon that he press his hand upon it, so that he not cut the artery, and that he not cause a rupture of blood.
The winds are a cause of great sickness in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the area of the surgeon's scalpel.
The ventilation of the shoulders causes disease that comes from heat and swelling.
The ventilation of the collarbones also causes as much trouble as three veins in the arms, as it brings about blood loss from these large veins;
and orders the surgeon to not cut too deeply, as the ligaments are thin and can be easily cut, which would cause instability;
The ventouse that is on the back so it touches the foundation of the hip, and the maladies of the hips, it is good that the ventouse be big and made of leather, which has the function of well milking; and by chance, if it were thin, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
The leg ventouses if they open widely, for they attract blood from all the body, and are equivalent to the ancient pains of the hips, and of the marital relationship, and of the bladder, and make flowers; and they are in the area of the 17th and 18th joints, and the 17th and 18th knees, but they weaken the body after a long time, and bring premature death to many dispositions.
The way to put the ventouse is that you put it first empty, and suck quickly, and place it firmly, and move evenly, and do not cease to do so, until you see the red and inflamed place, and appear the pain of the blood; then lift up, and reset the ventouses, and take care in the arrangement of the bodies, for there are some who have very thin skin, and clear pores: it is good to hurt once only, and it is good to make deep wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
And if the wound is big, then it is good to hurt twice: the first time to soften the way of the blood.
And if it is very thick, then one must hit the third time; and when we want to suck out the blood little by little, then we must press hard just once.
And if we want to suck out the blood often; and if it is very thick, then one must hit fully, and the end should be that the wound be pierced suddenly,
and cover with oil those who have thick and tough skin, and who are prone to rust, so that you apply the leeches' oil, which is aperitive and solvent: if it is in the east, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of gourd seed oil;
and if it is in an apple tree, of oil from kale, or of larkspur, or of chamomile, or another similar thing.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take red oil, or balsam oil, or caraway oil, and similar things.
And if the person who needs to be treated is old and has large pores, then you should not put any oil on them.
But it is necessary to wash them after the inhalation of rosewater, or cold water, or water from a mulberry tree, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or another similar thing.
And those who have moisture, if they get up from it, or from water of mirth, and from sumac, and similar things.
And those who have great excesses get up from old wine, or from water of sow thistle, or from anet or chamomile decoction, or similar things;
and should not go to bed before taking a bath or bathing, but an hour or so after; and should not sleep after wind-sucking;
and it is necessary that he warm himself, when he needs to wind up, and when he has been winded up. And guard those who are coleric, and whose temper is too quick and inflamed. If it is necessary that he eat cold things, such as pomegranate seeds, endive, lettuce, and similar foods;
and drink cool drinks, and chew on straw, and moist meat.
And those with a cold complexions, if they drink syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and cool drinks, and chew on straw, and moist meat.
and when he is about to vomit, so he must drink more than eat.
and it is necessary to give to some people a time of three days or muscat before the ventilation, or after, to strengthen the main members; and be subtle in this, but it is only necessary that those who are warm drink it.
The vents that are placed to hurt are those that are placed on the liver, and on the kidney, and on the stomach, and on the belly, and the rain and the heel, because this member does not suffer to be hurt on the soles.
and do not make it but to attract blood from limb to limb. if we put on the breasts when it is healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as if we put ventosas on the belly and the buttocks to ease the limb;
and remove pain, when there is an operation or a stone, if by its attractive virtue it removes the operation, or moves away the stone from its place;
and in this way it acts when it is put on the liver and the pancreas when there is retained wind;
and these vacuum cups are empty for sucking so little; and never are they combined together with fire, nor any time do they wash with fresh water.
as in the disease of the pleurisy, and in such a way that the vacuum cup is filled with hot water or with water in which herbs have been boiled that are suitable for this.
The shape of the vacuum cup administered to fire is thus:
And it has .ij. inches in diameter and half a palm in length, and it has or costs about a farthing, so that it can be made for very little cost,
and of rain, so that it does not injure the patient when putting it on the member;
and have in the middle a staff of wood or iron to put a candlestick hand;
and they should be large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
For the suckers of children are different from those of old people, and thin things from fat ones.
And must one put this suction cup on the limb?
Take the candle of wax or .i. ointment, and put it under the suction cup at the root which is under the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it doesn't burn the patient;
and then put it on the limb, and these two should be on the hole that we have said, so that when one looks at it, if there is steam, and the suction cup is taken off;
and dip it in the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
For the suction cup which is made ready in the disease of pleurisy, there is neither verge nor pit, and it is only made ready when it is dry, and is placed on the limb so slightly.
and this is the form:
For the suction cups are only made ready in limbs or members where one can put suction cups because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar things. and naked them of horses, as two or three years old, and others like them;
and the quality of using it so that when you find that they are in fresh clear water without danger, take them there;
and put them into a vat of fresh water, until they are familiar with it and have nothing in their bellies; and then dip from the vein and the wound, then rub the member until it is red, and put them in the water;
and when they are clear, and happy, if it is him or where one can put a suction cup, he puts it, because this is worth much after.
if not, raise the shoulder from there, and then of water, very well, and then press it;
and if the shoulder hurts too much after raising the chest of the patient, so moisten .i. a linen cloth in cold water and put it on, as long as the pain subsides;
and if the pains multiply, so put on vitriole powder, or gall, and similar things, as long as they are relieved;
Ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de fèves pelées, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’ardent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;
And if you have more, take others without skin.
If the skinless don't want to take it, rub the fresh blood on the place or put an needle in it. and then lay them down, and soon as they feel the blood, they get up;
and when you see them crying, if you sprinkle a little powder of aloes and senna, or of ash, they will cry now.
Here begins the book on fractures
For in the art of medicine, and for the restoration of breaks and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the wise man will pour this powder of aloes on him, which he has never seen in any of the ancient books, nor read about in any letter.
and for this reason the art is lost in our land, for I never found any good one;
and know nothing about it, except from the ancient books, where I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experience, and by habit of my life;
and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have abbreviated it at the end, and clearly illustrated the shapes of the tools that are used, as I did in the preceding 19 chapters.
It is therefore appropriate that we say in this book the sum of the words and the chapters where the sage places his understanding, and delays on the truth, so that those who are tried can know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twist or break comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to save the sick person from one side and the other, if no thing prevents you completely, so as weakness of the corsage, or entrapment, or elderly.
Let him not be too thin or too fat; and mild drinks three times a day, that is to say, cold joutes (juices), horseflesh and cheverel (a type of meat), and he shall drink no wine, nor mild grass drinks, and he shall not fill himself too much with food which fills the veins with blood, until you have doubt about the warmness of the abscess, or about the spread of the matter in the limb; if the sick person returns to his former government that he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the sick person be nourished with meat which makes thick food, or has viscosity, as well as cooked wheat, and rice, and beans, and pies, and bread made from milk, and cheese, and fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For thick food retards healing and the fracture more quickly.
And know that the broken bones of old and frail people cannot heal or harden according to their nature from the lack of members, nor those that are too soft, like the bones of small children.
but do not cure, go back to the broken bone. i. large tendon that heals and joins the limb together as much as it can; and does not heal at all, and for this reason it is necessary to grow a lot of flesh, as we have said.
And know that there are various types of fractures in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from that of the foot, or of the leg; and I will tell you in this chapter all about fractures. For there is a crack that goes with the sawing, and another with sharpening, as with the cutting of a quill for writing.
For there is a crack that goes with the sawing, and another with sharpening, as with the cutting of a quill for writing. And if it is a crack with a wound, and a crack makes a small slit.
And each has its own tool for repair, and its own special device, according to what comes to mind in its place.
and the bone break is caused by a twist, and open well from the side, and pressed by the hand;
and when there is no twisting or stretching of his back, and the patient does not feel great pain unless there is some fracture;
but it may well have twists, or a split, or a small break. If you only move it by hand, but then gently hold it in place with medicine that comes later, and then firmly hold it now.
And know that the fracture that has been torn in two, and its two parts are separated, now you must make them equal in length, as well as the appendages come together.
and if the abscess is heated, let it rest for no time, until the abscess is healed. then cut it evenly at the base so that you can cut it easily and cleanly, and know that its recovery is easier than that of those where parts are cut off; then restrain it, as will be shown later.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if its extension is of .ij. parts, whether it be hand or foot, or a small member, or .ij. strings, or a string and your hand;
and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are healed, you should take care not to damage them by your work, and make sure that by your work there comes no injury or pain to the patient;
and well set together the 20 bones according to the best shapes.
And feel well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if he is set well together, and do not pull it too hard, do not press it so as those who make it come by their work, hot and contraction of the member, as we have wanted many times.
And when the member is in order, so teach well the patient that he does not move it, neither waking nor sleeping, turning or in any other way; and guard well that the member is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, not even a little, and it is necessary to put him in a position so that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, not even a little, and it is necessary to put him in a position so that he feels no pain; and be careful that he is put correctly, so that no twisting comes when he is restored;
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
I understand that the broken members are various in size and in greatness and in form.
For there are small limbs, like arms and legs and others: if it is necessary to wrap them in linen garments soft and thin.
and those who are fat, like thigh and leg: if it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and stiff linen, for the wide linings embrace all of the large member, and hold it equally from all sides, so that there is no gap;
then wrap them lightly, three or four times around the member, and tighten slightly, so that there is a small gap at the top of the wrap, then move the wrap up from the break, and loosen slightly, so that the break moves a little way;
and soften the linen slightly, little by little, until you press a large part of the member: then take one more linen and wrap it quickly around the broken area;
and return to the sore part of the fracture, and hold it slightly, not too strongly or too gently, as we said in the first hour above;
and place between the threads of linen or canvas, until it is all even, and then tie it well above .i. bandage, and then put your well-made splints on, if there is an abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or swelling, put something soothing on the abscess, and let it rest for some days;
and then straining upon your splints, and let it rest for a while, or a piece of rope, or a beam, or palm branches, and be according to this figure:
But it is necessary that the steel that one puts on the fracture is a little thicker and wider than the others.
and is also far from the member of smallness or greatness;
Then tighten on the steel with the same force that you used in the first ligature, then tie it with a thread running parallel to it, as you did in the first ligature;
Then loosen it slightly, less than before; and the thread should be thin, not too thick nor too thin, and made of linen;
For if they are thick, as I have seen in the works of the foolish, who make their ligatures with linen threads that are twisted, and this is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should be no less than two inches between each string.
And if the patient is pierced by the nails of the stones after extraction in his healthy limbs, then sew them with linen thread or a piece of woolen cloth so that he does not get bruised.
When the wound is with the rain, and the cure is broken, I will tell the cure here after.
And know that it is not good to extract stones from all the members the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not convenient to put on the clothes before after v. days or vij., or more according to the degree of pain in the aposteme hot suddenly coming;
And see here the manner of the ancient apothocaries to restore fracture, dislocation, and twist: and it is that you take flour which stays on the walls of the mill, and confound it with much egg, and put this preparation, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the apothecary restoring the fracture to many dispositions, most especially to women and small children, for it is not too sharp nor too rough.
Another manner of apothecary that restores the fracture and dislocation and twist: take zabar and ladani and enule and asafetida and gum arabic and myrrh, 10-20.; mirr and aloe, 5-10.; alepochaim 7-9.; and grind them into a powder, and mix them with much egg; if the composition of the hum is hot, then use this apothecary, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and serves many men.
Another manner of apothecary that serves for twist: take mugat and viscose, 10-20.; mirr and aloe, 7-9.; acacia 6-8.; armeniac resina 10., and grind them well, and confound them with egg or much egg, and administer it.
Other methods of applying plaster to joints and osseous dislocations from their places, and soothing the pain that arises, and the sawing of the bone, and the breaking: take another novel, and moisten it with easy water and oil cooked, and put it on its place. These plasters do not return, but they are good for soothing an abscess hotly, and properly relieving the pains.
Another method for restoring broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-pavement leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method of applying plaster to the restoration of a broken bone and for soothing the remaining part of an abscess: take roots of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, flours of times, each in proportion; grind them, and confound them with wine, and heat the members, and apply the poultice with coriander water moistened, or with water, and use it.
Another method of applying plaster, more effective than the first one, for the restoration of the member in case of an abscess that persists: take roots of mallow, linseed, borage, melilot, and wormwood, and violet flowers and chamomile, each in proportion; grind them, and confound them with brine or soft water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member and its need for rest.
Ypocras says in his book that one should not put on the broken limb anything but oil and wax made of honey and nothing else, and he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken limb dry things a little warm, as mirrors and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to prepare an ointment that is good for lesions and pain: take mugwort and oats, or feathers of an owl, and honey, and string, equally, and grind them, and make an ointment with it and put it on the wound.
And then let the patient lie a little while, and take care that he feels no pain or that his bones do not move from their places; if he does not, let him lie by hands.
And if pain comes to the place, or itchiness, or no rest or swelling, if you hurry, and remove it, and apply the poultice now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea-water moist, and dip into the water, and lift up the place, until the itchiness ceases, and the pain is relieved. Then leave the member to rest for an hour, then put on another dry cloth, wet in water or rose-oil, and bind it on with a bandage, until you are sure that the abscess is warm;
and let the inflammation of the member rest, and be relieved of pain, then begin again gently, and a little bit of plaster, and do not remove it too strongly as before; and gently until it is well.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you have to plaster and bind it; if it begins again, as you did before equally.
And if there is no movement in the limb in any of those that we have said, only after two to three days or five or six; and never more than ten days, according to what one sees, until the fracture sets, and the adjustment of the carriage on the cart approaches.
then you must restrain it more than first, and let him fatten his flesh, as I said before; and if you see that the head is drying up more than it should, know that there can be no movement. then let him rise each time from warm water, and let him rest for a day, and wash it with salt water;
By this treatment, certainly cut off the member, and gently put it back in place: it is bad, and if it is very painful, I see no other way than to let it heal without treatment.
Of the various ways of breaking There are many ways to break it, and they come in various shapes, and the causes are divided;
For it is broken by the impact of an iron sword, and the collar bone all the way to the shoulder socket, so that it is torn as if by a hook or pole; and for this reason this type of break is called "haichure".
For the sword pierces the bone from above, and this type of break is called an "absolute" break; and the wound from these two great breaks or one small break is deep.
And if there is a knock, or a chip, or a hole in the stone, or a seat on the stone, or others like them.
And if there is a fracture that pierces almost to the bone, which is on the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if there is a wound that pierces into the bone as fine as a hair, and this fracture is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary".
and if the wound is caused by a stone, or by a seat, or by a similar thing, and it enters the bone, and the nail is so fine as to enter like the blacksmith when he works on the cauldron; if it enters the bone.
And this one had more of his head wet with rain, like a child's.
and has all these kinds of injuries that small pieces of wood are feared as they are; and I will speak about its place.
and let's know all kinds of injuries by traction on them, and inquiry at tents, and by the cart that is on it.
The appearance of hair is known by what one does when he discovers the bone, and rubs it up, so that the break is black.
In the treatment of a break, take care of the accidents of disease, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of food, loss of understanding, stretching, paleness, feverishness, or hairs growing out and turning red, and other similar things in many conditions, it cannot be cured with doubt.
And if you do not see a hopeful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the break comes first to you, and it is wintertime, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day at dawn.
And if it is in springtime, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day at dawn, so that the decay of the bone does not cause the accident that we have described.
And if the fracture of the bone is only to the skin that covers the skull, then you must split the broken part so: and it is that you press on the head of the patient before, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound more gently than you can.
and if the blood comes out with the discovery of the bone, or an abscess, help him with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with wet linen dipped in oil; and let the wound rest as long as the abscesses are calm, and are sure of the blood coming out; then you begin to cut off the bone, and it is made according to 21 ways: one way is that you chop at the narrow end in front, and this is the shape:
Then take another more generous cut than the first one.
And the second method is that you have several different sizes of needles, some long and others short, pointed, and made of iron; and in working lightly, so as not to injure the head.
And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary that you pierce it from within, so that you bring the needles with twines, not perfectly so that they penetrate beyond the bone of the temple, and must have on top of the point a margin or i.i. circle, which does not let the point pass beyond the bone; and you need to have more, so that each comes in its place at the end of the bone, so that you have twines for all test; and this is the form of the iij. ways of needles:
The quality for piercing inside the bone is that you put 1. needle on the bone, and turn back your two hands until you know that the bone has been pierced; then put another hole a little farther away, and so do all around, then cut off the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do it more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take the bone in your hand, or in any of the tools that you have such as pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the skull.
And when you have pierced and worked on the bone, if it is necessary that you retain the aperture that is left of the bone in any instrument resembling an incision, but it is necessary that it be more soft and finer than the other incision;
and if it has not broken any small bones or scalps, but only slightly damaged the tools; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have described.
And the other way of working if it is that which Galen says, which is better; and he heats it very strongly, and this is his word. It is first necessary that you discover a part of the bone, where the break is open, so that when you have discovered that part, you will place the tip of this lens-shaped incision there, from which it gets its form:
And do not cut from one part, and is the part turned towards the bone, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then make a small mallet above it, so that you hit the bone lightly all around, and be well guarded against the splint that has been cut;
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
If the bone break does not pierce all the way down to the marrow, and the bone is cut only a little from above, and there are small pieces, then recognize that sharpness, and shave off the scales with a sharp razor that you must have in various quantities, so that you can apply them in each case most appropriately, according to the work and the shape of the break.
If you have a great many sharp razors, and then some even sharper ones, and never stop doing this as long as it is necessary.
In each of the other haircuts and slight breaks, you must consider how it matches up; and this is something that has not yet been fully explained to those who have set their studies in this art.
And if the patient is covered with a blanket of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and he wet it in oil and puts it on the wound; Then take another linen cloth, doubled, or triple, and wet it in wine and oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do it more lightly than you can, so that you do not harm the medicine, then apply a second, lighter cloth, and do not strip it off until it has tinged the wound only;
and leave it like that for a day or two until the abscesses are calm, then remove it, and apply medicines to it as if they were roots of herbs, and flour of times, and powder of incense, and all kinds of spices, and similar things; and from these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer medicines to it immediately without any biting;
and be sure that the wound is clean, so you do not leave it with the ointment, nor let any bowels mix with it, for when the bowels gather together over the cloth of the skull, if they corrupt and pollute, they bring great harm to the patient; because when you put the biting medicine on top of the wound, if it is mixed above.
Take care then, so that no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, if it is uncertain without doubt.
And if blackenings come to the patient only because of the medicine put on him, which has virtue, then you should squeeze one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and glues a single cloth with it, and lay it on his disease. and then treat him in the manner that seems right to you, until he is healed.
He also knows that no part of the nose has ever been broken, or if one has, because it is made of cartilage and will not break unless forced or twisted, and then it will heal.
And if one of the 19 parts is broken, then it is necessary that you put your little finger or a pin in its nose, and make an even cut inside your little finger, and at the knuckle by the side, until the nose returns according to its natural shape. and do it lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and the two cannot come together, then it is necessary that you put a small piece of wood at the top of the nose equal to the width of a ray of light.
And if the break is in two parts, then repair it otherwise, and hasten to restore the first day if you can.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
If you patch one place with another, if it breaks, and the drapings are large enough to fill the openings of the neck:
And they said that there is no restoration unless the drapings are wet with the juice of oak-apples and powder from a mill; then leave the patch in place until the bone has hardened, and the cartilage has become stiff.
And never patch with goose feathers in place of drapings, and if there is suet between the drapings, and if it holds fast, and breathes on the sickness; or make a shell of it.
And if abscesses develop, as you do, put tar or cotton wet with oil or a little of hydrastis.
And if abscesses do not develop, put an ointment made from flour and incense powder, cooked with honey, then put it on light poultices, and do not bind the wound.
and if the break in the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with suitable tools for this purpose, then cut the fracture, and cure things that hinder breathing, and bandaging, if with ointments and oils suitable for this.
and if there is no pain inside the nose, if he cures the bruises, and puts a plug of wax, until it is healed.
about the rupture of the jaw
When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, the break is not very deep, nor does it break into two pieces, except that it may be bent inwards, if one takes care not to do so gently.
If the break is on the right side of the jaw, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient from the right hand; and if the break is on the left side of the jaw, insert your index finger from the left hand, gently push the break inside, and make it even with the other hand from outside, pushing lightly.
And if the break in the jaw is in the middle, you should make an extension of half a finger's width, making it even.
Et si les boucles du poilz s'en allent ou s'affinent, alors il faut attacher le feu-couteau à la base jusqu'à ce que les cheveux poussent; et si quelqu'un gratte sa peau, il faut serrer les yeux pour ne pas bouger tant qu'ils poussent.
And if the hair strands fall out or become thin, then attach the fire-scraper to the base until the hair grows again; and if someone scratches their skin, squeeze the eyes shut so that they don't move while they grow again. And if you see that the figure has changed, if you wait three days, then reset what has changed; and apply ointment, powder from the mill with much egg or flour of sesame seed, after you have taken out the scraper; and apply another light ointment, and if the ointments work, and the patient's disposition does not change, leave it alone as long as it is healthy; many times it becomes healthy in three weeks.
And if the abscesses burst, then do what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and a wound together, then remove the piece of bone that is broken; if it is subtle, use the appropriate instruments for this.
And if the wound is narrow, then make it larger with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is no delay, then dress the wound, if it is wide, and put on it plasters suitable for this, to keep it clean, as long as it is healed.
carefully carefully
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparence ne chevement.
And if you have to extend further, then put a round spear of cloth or other material on the shoulder of the patient, and make it large according to your need; and gently stretch the broken force, and hold the spear with your hand, so that you make equal the fracture, as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the broken bone at the end, for it comes out perfectly, then it is necessary that the patient lie down on his back, and put the shoulder .i. ear-side down, and lower the ministers the shoulder down, until the bone's end is raised.
And then arrange the fracture on both sides, and if you find it difficult, then split it; and pull the pieces gently apart, and if the bone cannot be joined together by any means, then place this instrument over one of the incisions that you have made; but put the spear over the medicine.
and appears like a spoon, and is not a hair, and is also wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has 1 . 2 . teeth, as you see, and one is wide, and the others are narrow, just as is the split in the wound that you made when you broke the bone.
and when you are sure that the abscess is hot, if the split is small, or if you doubt about the hotness of the abscess, if it covers the wound with drape and tent, according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, if you dip 1  . 2  . drape in oil and in water and in wine, and put on it.
The dislocation of the bone, when it is painful and there are bruises, is that you put on the bone the powder from the mill and saffron, and lightly put staples on it, and put a spike in the assembly, if you need one. puis prenez une très grande bande d'une palme de large, puis mettez .i. drapeil double sur les épaules, et l'empâtez; puis prenez un étole souple de .iij. doigts de large et de long, et l'enveloppez autour de celui le bandeau, si que la tête du bandeau soient pendante; then take a very large band of an arm's length wide, then place.i. drapeil double on the shoulders, and empaste it; then take a thin towel of 1.iij. fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that band so that the head of the band is hanging; and put the towel on the break, and turn the band over the neck, and fasten the breastplate safely, and fasten the breastplate to the malady; and let them go from each part, and when you see that the time holds the band in front, and you see clearly that the towel does not move over the broken bone, then reward everyone every day, and when the ties loosen, if restrain them;
and make the sick person sit on their back, and put it on when they sleep.i. small shoulder from under the breastplate, to lift the shoulder in height; so that the break will be light by the alignment of the shoulder, where you tie the band around the neck, and do not remove them unless a bad accident comes, until .xx. days;
then begin the empaste again, if you see it necessary, and fasten it and leave it alone until it is restored; and it is restored in no more than .xxviij. days, and less for some men.
of dislocation of the shoulder
of dislocation of the shoulder
And if there is a piece of the bone forward, and do not cut off the curve, then make it hot and make the joint calm as we said in the dislocation of the shoulder to soothe an abscess.
of dislocation of the leg
The pains are never broken in the middle, but they often break at the ends; and when they are broken in the middle, if they incline to the side, it causes great pain and lack of breath, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens the veins in the broken bones, and smells good.
The broken bones should be made to lie in a certain way, and placed between the shoulders, then pressed together, and the ribs of the two sides joined with hands, and carefully put back into place, as well as possible, so that the bone takes its proper shape; then wrap it in a thin cloth, and cover it with salt (or another light substance), and wrap it up, and fasten it to the bone, so that it does not move, and turn the bandage smoothly round the back, and tighten it, and loosen it every hour, and if it relaxes, tighten it again; and if it needs to be taken off, because of corrosion or itching that comes to the surface, or pain or swelling, hurry and take it off, and remove the lining, and treat that part in a certain way; then put back the lining, and tighten it until it is well.
of the breaking of the ribs
Says that the rib breaker does not come except in large leaves behind the back, and towards the top, and do not bend unless they are bright; and the smell is good to the inquiry on two.
And if it is necessary, make the break even. And then put on the plastron, and hold it with a staunch, if you need one.
And if the break in the ribs is inclining inward, then feel the patient's great pain and throbbing, as if he were crying out; for the bone pokes the membrane, and it causes him to shudder and vomit much blood, and this is a sign of great illness, and the old have a great danger.
And if among those who serve it is necessary to administer meat that swells the belly, in order to push back the break.
We do not make this because heated abscesses do not come, unless it has come. And if there is pain, then the health.
And they said that one should put leeches on the spot, to suck out the evil, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless there is doubt that the leeches will not draw the excesses to the site of weakness.
And they said that one should cover the spot with another moist thing in oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the area equal, then it is cured of the plague, of meat, and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain at the point where the tendon is stretched, then there is doubt about the patient; therefore it is necessary to split the bone on the spot of the broken rib, and put there 11 tools in oil, and because of this the medicine is good; and after that, one must cut the bones, and pull them lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and cure with poultices, until he is well. And if the abscesses come, therefore put there drapelz moistened in oil, and put on the spot; and cure the patient who has an abscess, and let him rest on the cost where it hurts, until he is well.
of the break of the neck
No time comes breaking at the oss of the neck, and that there was not pain; and too to the spine of the back. And when this has happened to anyone, and you can know if he will be healed or not, if you see his hands become soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick them with an needle, if they feel pain. Know that there are deadly things in many dispositions, and that if they mute and feel pain when they are stretched, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is healed, if you put a cure on it.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you can know if he will be healed or not, if you see his joints are softened, and if the accident that is in his hands, and on his back it wind up and excretes without a will; and when you have soothed it on his belly, if it exhales without a will. And when it is soothed on his back and he clenches, he cannot. Know that this is deadly: do not work any more in his cure.
And if this accident does not come to him, then it is a lighter thing.
And the cure is such that if he has an abscess, put oil of rose or oil of mouse on it until it is calm; then put it on a poultice of cloth, and tie it with a string, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels pain until he is well. And if any bone is dislocated, cover it with poultice; and set the bone back in place, then bind it with cloth, and cure the wound with oil of assafoetida, until it is well; and if the chié de la kowe (meaning "knee" in Old French) is dislocated, hold your pouchet (a small bag or pouch) in your left hand, and place it against the other hand at your knee, then put on the bandage, and if there is a dislocated bone, push it back into place, and cure the wound until it is healed.
from the fracture of the bone of the hip
If the hip bone is broken, and if so, there will only be a little reduction in the head; and let it grow long, and bend towards the back, and bring great pain to the patient at the site, and swelling, and inflammation wherever it breaks.
And the reset if you extend your hand over it as long as you are above the break; and know what the break is and its shape; and if the break is at the top, then make that break even as much as it can be in a natural shape.
And if the break is long, and it declines inwardly, then make the patient walk on his stomach as much as the reset of that break is presented to you. And when you have made it even, if it is on the outside, then put it on a beam of wood or timber, and reset the break so that it does not move; and fasten the joint to the sides, as much as the place is even.
And command the patient to sleep on his side or back.
And if an abscess breaks out, if it doesn't burst, as long as the abscess is calm, and put what we have said above; and then return to restoration, and hold it back as it should, if there is no bad accident; and this is the way.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And let be .ij. chaps .ij. strong, and let them up, and chop the sick on .i. side; then let him fall some arms broken on the beam, as long as he comes to leave, and take me a basket of wood, then let them up any heavy thing or his ministers extend down; then put the mirrour the breaker equal to its hands together, until the breaker returns so as it should.
And the other way is that one sinner sick on his shoulder, and ties the hand to its neck, then orders 2 ministers that one of them holds what is on the breaker at its hands, and the others hold down all i. member, and extends each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then tighten 1. member of the breaker, and on the breaker, and extends each of the ministers to its part. And if the breaker is near the head of the shoulder, it should be that you put 1. member in the middle of the breast, and 1. other towards the foot, over the breaker; and also if the breaker is near the foot, it should be that you put 1. light member, without effort, as long as the breaker is equal to its place, and on its side; then set the breaker equal, as it should, and tighten it, unless apostemes feet come.
And if apostemes feet come, then do not tighten it yet until 2. days, and put on another moist thing and rose oil, as long as the apostemes feet are calm; then tighten it, and the way to tighten it is that you put the plaster on the breaker, then assemble the arm on the support, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the side; and put the drapeil, and tighten on the support, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a good position, unless something prevents it, or its bone is broken.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use of props, and place on the fracture a prop wider and stronger than the others, and put between each prop .i. two of space, and let each prop be so large that it passes the fracture 2.3. two of each part; then draw up on the props, so as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the paste on the fracture, more firmly and less by pulling away.
And if you see the setting of the props and the drawing up, as we said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and doubt the incision warm, let it lie tied for seven days, as we have said; then examine each 2.3. days of the ligature, that the pruritus does not flare up or come to the place where the member is too tight. If it heals, as we have said.
And if no such accident comes, do not undo it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put a clean cushion of equal wool on the dislocated member, and examine each hour during the day or night, that the figure of the broken member does not move or become soft; if it heals by the virtue of medicine, and give him the meat which we have mentioned before, in this manner so that the meat is at the first thin layer; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick. It is customary that the prop and the leg should be recovered in 20 days; and then it must be undone and wash and administer medicines of ointments for the healing. And if the stiffness is deep and blocked, delay to undo it 1 day or 2 months.
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is made of .ij. bones, which are called the "fospeles," one being small, and that is next to the wrist; and another is large, and that is opposite it, towards the little finger; perhaps a break may occur in the large fospel alone, or in the small one, and possibly both together.
When the small fospel is broken, the cure is easy and the healing takes place quickly; but when the large one is broken, there is great pain, and it takes longer to heal than when both are broken at once. If only the small fospel is broken, the necessary thing is to extend it slightly and make it even.
If only the large fospel is broken, then it must be stretched more forcefully; and extend it on .ij. cushions, and turn the wrist so that the palm faces upwards, with the fingers spread out and the little finger pointing upwards, so that the patient does not feel any pain; then extends the minister's arm to the dislocated part at its side, or with a bandage, and another minister at the other end above it. And then make the arm even according to its best form.
And if in the breaking into pieces, each one be put in its place, and if there is none that takes hold of it so that it goes out, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do you make it on top of the bone, as we have said above.
And if with the breaking into pieces there is a wound, I have spoken about it to the singular chapter; take care.
And if in the restoration of the broken limb there are abscesses, I have spoken about it to the singular chapter; take care. Now if some bad accident comes to the limb, such as a boil coming to the limb, it is conveniente that you dip the limb in hot water, until the boil is relieved; and let the limb rest without being cramped. And then begin again with the strapping, and if there are any loose joints or seems, so deal with them.
And if it is not possible for the member to return on its own because it is too tight, then you must soften it gradually and leave it in that state for a few days until the swelling passes and then hold it firm.
And if neither of these things that we have said comes to the patient, then do not loosen it until 20 days have passed. At that time, he will take off his hand from his neck, and let his neck be even, and keep it motionless and inactive, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture has healed in 60 days or perhaps in 50 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that at the back of the hand and on both sides there are few fractures, and only a little pain comes many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or rained on, it is necessary that the patient should cut across, and sit equally straight before him; then he puts his hand on the table extended, and extends the broken members, and sets them equal to the mirror, until they are well joined; and applies the plaster and the stapes; if there come no abscesses, then he puts a straw according to the quantity of the place; and let it be wrapped in 1.i. linen drapes.
And if the splinter is between the loins of the plant of the hand, then he makes a staff of drapes, and instructs the patient to remove it from his broken hand; and then he draws it out with a long drape, and the straw of the staff is as large as the plant of the hand, and he draws it out, just as it is necessary.
And if the splinter is on the side, then you put a staff on top of it, and another under the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then you tie it tightly around the hand, and tighten the bond between the two.
And if the splinter comes on one of the two sides, if it is in the index, then he makes it equal, as it is necessary; and ties it with the plant, and if you see that there is another splinter, put a small staff straight to lift the splinter, and do not move it; and if the splinter is on the other two sides, as in the index or the other one, then he makes it equal, and ties them together in 1.i. holding, so that they do not move, or you put one on top of the staff, as if to pout; and take care in the restoration and the disposition of aposteme, and help those who come, as I have said.
of the wounded
the wound is often torn, and we can see it clearly when it comes back before and behind; and the restoration is therefore such that if you lie on it above the tear, and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then extends each minister his link equally to his part; and it is when the break is in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the cuisse, so one of the links towards the knuckle, and the others turn the break; and since it is near the kneecap, and then are the links of the knee, and the extension downward; then put the mirror the bone equally to its 2 hands, according to its natural figure, and then put the plaster, and the link, so that the 2 achilles tendons do not come.
And if there is an abscess, let it be calmed, then return to your work and your treatment; the time is right in some way. And if there is an abscess, let it be calmed, then return to your work and your treatment; the time is right in some way. Wrap a bandage with tension on the break  .i. bend over double in .ij. or .iij., and let the excess fluid go, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of birth, and put 1 long thread between the thigh and the leg, freeing the knee from the socket, and bring the chief of the thread up; then turn on the leg and bandage, then put staves on the break, and put a staff on the bone of the leg; then employ the tension gradually 1 or 2 twists on the break; and as you go higher on the break, and less tension; then tie the two threads that you have put between the thigh and the leg, and lie 1 or 3 staves that are over them, then return to the socket at the chief of the thread, until you come out from under the foot; and tension, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, then if there is no swelling, no abscess, nor any other sign.
And if it comes off and turns towards that which comes off, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that catch, if possible, let it be; and if it cannot be caught, then split the place and draw firmly; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
And no leg should be broken where staves are put, as in the arm; however, when restoring it, do not wake up the patient.
And know that the cut is healed after one day, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
from the heel
For in the heel there is sometimes a slight injury, but it often heals many times over. And if it injures, it is only a crack, or a hole, and if it hurts, it is good; that is how it feels.
And the healing if it is put together what is round about it, even though it is not assembled well; then put plaster on it, and put a round staff there if you need one, and hold it as it should be held, then provide for each accident what is appropriate to it, as for the chaut and other things; put in place what belongs to each injury, as long as it is healthy.
Of the break of the leg
Saiches that in the leg there are .ij. bones, of which one is called by right not "mustelz" and the others are called "foscile"; and the break is the same as that of the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same as that of the arm.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
And if the thin bone is broken, then it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain and one sees it well; and return desoz. Then bring extension, and make it equal, and bind the stars evenly; but nevertheless, it is necessary that the fracture be ugly, and there are more pieces, so that the extension is smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your virtue.
And when you have finished your work, then take .ij. wands of fust that shade the leg on one side and the other, and are long of the leg from the knee to the heel; then wrap them in .ij. leus .i. bands above and below, and bind this ligature in the middle, and at this ligature cannot the leg decline to the right or left, and so is good; and no one administers .i. wands of fust, and it is made of wood, and I put the leg to ward off movement, and properly do I make this in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg to see if there is an abscess or some other accident; and cure as long as he is healthy.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but the bone of the foot comes in many fractures and both ways, and it never happens that it comes just fractured in one position.
And if the bones of the foot are broken, and you see these bones sovrapposing one another, put this patient as if he were dead on the ground, also as if he wanted to walk; then now put your foot on its side, where those bones are raised up, then press them down until they come back into their places; then apply the plaster and stamp it on, and place a small tablet of plaster in the belly of the foot; then fasten this patient to the front of the foot, then because you have wrapped drapes around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days are past, if the swelling has gone down, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two are broken, restore them, as we have said in the case of the hand; then put a stake according to the length of the two bones, and make it a little wider, then place the small tablet of plaster on the foot as I said, and fasten it onto the front; and if there are more than three or four, broken, put a stake according to their quantity, wrapped in one or two drapes of linen, and fasten the tablet behind the foot; and may it be under the belly of the foot, so that it is well covered.
And remember not to forget any of the other things that I have said about broken members, as soon as we have spoken about it; and attend to each accident as it occurs.
the break of the bone of the shoulder with a sharp blow
When the woman's natural bone is broken, if she is seated and elevated, then lean her back on the chest, and hold her there; then fill the wound with cotton, and put in as much hay as I.xx. (70) bushels; then turn the woman over, and pound her back little by little, and then remove the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the wound, and the bone returns with the hay; and when she urinates, if the hay is removed, and when she has urinated, put it back, and so do this.xx. (100) days or more: so the break will be healed, and she will recover, take a bladder of lamb's milk, and tie a cord around the navel, and pour all the milk into the wound; then blow on the cord forming, until the milk is gone inside: so the wound will heal; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the hand of the man or woman is broken, if it is restored as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these breaks are not hidden from him who sets his mind on their cure, and listens to my book. For the break signals to many people the right way to restore: hear it then.
In the throat, when it is broken, take a bladder of swan' s milk and fill the throat with it; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it like that for xx.  (3) days or more, and it will be healed in hospital.
from fracture with wound
for those who have fracture with wound, even if it is great, as the bones of the chest or shoulder or similar, must be healed now, so that the healed ones whom we have described testify.
And if the wound heals, if the vinegar restains, then you have nothing else, then begin again to restore the fracture in this very hour, or that day, unless the abscesses come.
And if the abscesses come, then leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the abscesses are calm, and do not touch them or go to the third day or fourth, for you would bring about a bad accident.
And if his nose is broken, it appears on the cheek as the blood is uncovered; so that you should put your hand to it lightly with a small extension.
And if the extensions are not equal in length so that your hands may be put together lightly, then take this instrument of iron, which has 2.5 or 3 inches in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary to apply it to the part that needs it in each cure of a broken nose; and let it be thin and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member with your ovraige, and is pointed at the front, and thick in the middle, thus:
And this is called a "palainche," because the broken bone should be placed on top of the head of the bone that appears; and it is struck once, until it heals, and they are equal to each other. And if the break is small, and the instrument cannot take hold of the bone properly, then you must chop off the head of the bone as much as the instrument can manage.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, if you use an appropriate instrument, or scalpel or chisel, in your power; then re-cut that which is damaged in the bone with roughness and small chips.
And when the jaw is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. If you do so that it is in its place, then wet .i. a cloth with red wine, and properly wash it if it is dirty; and do not put it on the wound covered with wax or anything else that has oil, lest it cause pus and corruption; then administer balm when you have restored the jaw, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap it all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and be sure that the wound is not tightened along with the break; and many times they have done this foolish thing, and have brought it on the sick, or dead, or腐敗したことがない;そして、他の骨折よりも柔らかく、もっと柔らかくする。
And if the wound is bad or large and you doubt that bad accident has come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not good to put on anything but hard things; wrap it around instead of splints, with hard cloths, and bind it. And when you see after 1 day or 2 days that the wound is broken, take off what you have put on it all together, and put on the ointment that heals wounds, as the ointment of tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
And it is necessary that you loosen the member 2 times a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and whole.
And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bowstring runs lightly.
And if there is a bone that has come loose, and it cannot be fixed but comes back together with the help of the bowstring, so that there are small pieces of bone, then you should stitch up the wound, and take out all these troublesome pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula comes to light, or any other kind of corruption, then you should treat it according to what is said in the chapter mentioned above. And if the bone is broken and has opened up on the limb, as with the hip bone or shoulder blade, or similar bones on the main limbs, do not pull it out, for many die if this is done too soon; but leave it until it has putrefied; then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
Of bruses that come from the sudor
We come again and again to the health of the broken, most of all when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the figure of the limb; and by chance it cannot do its natural work.
Take care then that we are fresh: if you administer medicines stinging, such as aloe, incense, myrrh, and sarcicole, for example, or other things like them; so that you do not squeeze any of these things, or all together, and confound them with wine stigmata, or with a lot of egg yolk, or with honey; and put them on the knot in piles, and tighten them well, and do not release them for many days; and then loosen it, and start again, until the knots are hard; or you hold it on a piece of leather well made; because the property of leather is that it hardens all swellings on the limbs; and if the knot has become hardened like stone, it needs to be cut open, so that the excess appears, or you have it cut by a barber, as long as it is hard, and heal it as soon as it is healthy.
For when the bone is healed, and the members remain weak and slender, for one reason: because they were too tightly tied, and were not tied as they should have been; or because there are too many ties, and cannot come to the member's aid; or because of too much swelling; or because of too great movements, not in their due hour; or because there is little blood in the body, so it becomes weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the frame soft, as long as the pains multiply in him; and he administers baths, and gives him joy and pleasure; then put wax on the limb, so that the wax attracts his great swelling, and drench it often with fresh water, until the swelling runs to the limb; and recover its natural shape.
the member is twisted after health
When the member is twisted after healing, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the member is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb completely new, and many such fools have done this in our land; and these treatments are blamed, and they bring about great evil, and perhaps death; however, if the nodulations and tortures are fresh, it is good to immerse them in warm water, or herbs that soften, such as vismove leaves, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and you make an ointment of softener, such as a well-made dye, and take the muscatel juice of vismove, and confit it with ghee fat or oil of sesame, and make an ointment; or you take ripe fig newts, and grind them with hay from colon, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And no bone is kneed to rub continually and for a long time with moist hands. And let there be movement in the member every hour.
And if the twisting is stiffened and hardened, as in the stone, then it must be opened by fire, covering to the bone, with a sharp knife lightly; and put on tar and study in the cure.
Here begins the book of dislocations:
I will continue with the translation:
When dislocation occurs at any joint, now is the time to bring back the shoulder to its proper place without delay.
For if one delays, and the blood increases, and by chance one sets it back to its place when inflamed; for in this way one cannot move it at all, and it causes great pain and other troubles.
However, when it arrives, if one makes the patient rest, then leaves him as the abscess calms down; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then move it lightly, and heal each limb as it comes back to its place.
And I have ordered the treatment of dislocations of the shoulder to the depth of a pie.
of the mandible
may be dislocated and how they are to be reset: that is, either they are slightly out of place and become stiff; or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the chest, causing the saliva from the mouth to flow uncontrollably and making it impossible for one to close their mouth, and enveloping the tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, return them through a series of nine movements.
And if it is complete, then you must reset it in the hospital, and do not delay.
and in this way that the ministers wet the head of the disease, and pour the mirrhe out of one of his hands in the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, the dislocations are .ij. parts; and the other two of the hands should be away, to make equal; and command the patient that he softens, his jaws, and moves them all around.
And the mirrhe met in a flat manner, until it returns in its place.
And if it is brought back, at the same time that the two jaws are together, if they are brought back with hot water and oil, until they are brought back lightly; do not delay in bringing them back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well with a mollifier, if placed on drapes wetted with oil made from rose water and wax, then lay it lightly while it still moist;
and the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between 15.2 inches, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor make any effort to improve, but eat light food until the pains are gone, and the jaws have opened.
and then eat lightly, and do not work at opening the mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is well healed and sound.
And if the 15.2 jaws cannot be set back to their place in an hour, and are not set correctly, then fever and usual acute diseases come, and perhaps a solution of the abdomen, and perhaps vomiting of clear fluid.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of death; and many die who have this in seven days.
from the fork
the shoulder cannot dislocate from within the continuation of the rib and the hip, and is dislocated once at the end, and you feel it.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the joint with your palm, and it will return; then put on the plaster and bandage, and holds it in place;
and the head that is toward the chest cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates once, then return it to its place as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and holds it in place, and instructs the patient to rest until he is healthy;
and thus the head of the shoulder is brought back first.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Says that the shoulder dislocation only occurs in three ways: either because of the upper part of the joint which moves out of its place; and the second is because of the lower part of the joint; and perhaps it will move out from above, and this happens a little.
and never dislocates from behind the shoulder, and never dislocates from within because it hurts; and many times it dislocates from above towards the joint, especially in those who have a little character, for at that time it will be hospitalized; and in those who have enough character, let it go, and return to its place.
And at times there is a noise or a crack in the shoulder of some man, and it swells up with heat from an abscess, and he thinks that it has been dislocated by him.
It is then necessary for you to test this, until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And the dislocation is caused when it turns upward toward the shoulder, and he makes a distinction between the diseased and healthy shoulder, and you will find between them manifest differences. And at the head of the shoulder there is a hollow, and tie the shoulder to the neck at the top of the shoulder, as if it were one; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, or make any movements.
and if it is dislocated upward, then not even hidden, for you will see it clearly on the back.
and this method of dislocation cannot be used when it is new, or when the patient is ill.
And the way is that the minister's hand leaves the sick man's top, then puts the patch over the joint, and pushes the joint upwards to its place; and the minister's hand, and extends it upwards, then takes it off; so come quickly.
And if it doesn't come as we have said by daybreak, then the sick person must be bathed in warm water; and the minister provides a soothing and softening infusion, as if of alth and fenugreek and melilote in water, and is provided;
Then have the patient lie down on his back, and place a shoulder under the body of another person who is equal in size, not too soft nor too hard, then put the foot of the ill person on this support, and gently lift the shoulder blade with care, and draw the sick hand away.
And others ministers shall take the shoulder of the ill person, so that he does not move downward; this shoulder comes back immediately, and we have shown you how to do it in this way:
and is that you make present .i. a man who is greater than the ill person; and is facing the side of the body, and puts the shoulder under the support of the ill person, and lifts the support upwards, so that the ill person hangs in the air: And others ministers draw the sick hand downward toward the stomach. And if the ill person is too light, then put something heavy on them, and the dislocation will come back now.
And he returns it in another way: and this is how you make a long piece of wood in the earth, with which the head is held as if it were a pistol, and is not too large nor too small. Then place the patient on his back, but cover him with a blanket; and extend his arm out to one side, so that the joint returns to its position with care.
and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a piece of wood two arms long and three hands wide, which has the head resting on it so that it can enter perfectly into the socket, according to this form:
Then place the wood on top of the head with the drape so that it does not hurt the patient, then place it into the socket; and extend your arms up the wood, and hold the joint on the wood, and put the hand on the side of the head, then place the arm down one side of a block of wood, and extend the hand down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will now come back.
And when it is in place, in any way that it is, you must put an equal ball of wool on the shoulder, then put the plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and alumen of oven, all over the shoulder and back, then strain out the ball forward, and return the ligature to the plaster, and embrace the hand at his neck, and let the hands remain in this way.
It is necessary that he suck a little, until the members are comfortable, for he will heal sooner; and then suck more after one or two days, and move him; and if he is firm and has not become soft, he is healed.
And if the joint has come out of its place because of moisture or some other reason, you must give it four dosages of the tincture, if as it is put before or the chapiter of the tinctures.
And if you do all this, and it does not improve after one or two days, and the joint does not hold up, and cannot raise its arm straight, then you know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is torn or stretched or weakened; and you know that the joint has never been set in its place.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
And if after the healing comes greasiness to the member, and delayed movement, then the patient often uses, until that greasiness is cured, and returns to its first nature.
from the dislocation due to moisture
When the joint is dislocated due to moisture, and dislocates again at the same place, and dislocates in all directions, especially before and behind, and the dislocation is not reset, for we see it and feel it well; and dislocate according to each shape. And when you join the sick shoulder with the sound one, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is lame, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you move it so that the skin comes first, for if the skin comes first, then it would be painful to move it; and by chance it cannot be moved all at once, most of all when it is behind; which is worse than other dislocations, and is very painful, and by chance brings death.
And the restoration is, when it is such that you can move it, that you extend its hand to your 2 hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands of the person reaching towards the shoulder in turn, from behind and from the front, and press the joint to its roots together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then return when it doubles its hand back to its other hand, and press the shoulder from behind at the root of its palm where it has come unstuck.
And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong extension; and that is that both ministers extend the arm, and dip it in water with both ministers so that it does not move in the extension; then turn the arm of each part, and then you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide;
and when you see the joint of his hand, if it does not get better with any oil to soften the joint, then pour on the joint completely, until it heals;
and when it is in place, put on dry plaster with honey, and strain it tightly, and tie the arm of the sick person to the collar, and leave it for a few days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then release it, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, then begin again with plaster and a bond, and leave it in this way for a few days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if he feels greasiness after the re-establishment of the joint, and it moves, then let him bathe and scrub well, and press until he is relieved; or you put on the joint a thin layer of greasy sheep's wool, then leave it there .i. a day and a night, then the bone, and let him enter or bath; And when he sweats, rub the joint well, then put on the wool again, and then enter or bath; and do so  .iij times or 2 times, until he is healed; and if you see, put on the bottom of the boot a wet leather heated with butter, and press it on; and it will return to its place.
the dislocation of the hand
the dislocation of the hand should be reset quickly, even if it is still slightly dislocated; also, the joints should not be swollen or painful.
And let him ramemens so that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend its ministers hand, and mirer it makes equal, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bottles until it revives.
Anyway, you must look to see if it is well placed; then put the sick back of his hand on a table for extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then put the sick person's back of his hand on the table, and let the mirer put his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it comes back now, it is good.
If not, if the retraction of painful appendages incisions, and he leaves it so untroubled.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, the joint will be twisted.
And do not try anything on the patient unless his hands are wet, and he cannot extract anything at all: then you know that the nerves or arteries have been cut; if there is no other way to extract it by a delicate cautery, and perhaps nothing else can be done.
And when the hands are in place, put it on the plaster that we have described, then extract and leave it for a few days, then unpick and leave it like that.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no gap, then moisten it with hot water and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the two bones of the hand
are never dislocated the two bones of the hand on each side, not at the back of the palm or the belly;
then are the two, and press the dislocation to your pockets until it comes back, then support the head of the two bones, and turn it towards the part where they are joined;
and leave it .ij. days, and then put it equal to this day; and of not, so com we have said, and dislocus the next day, and makes move, and relues it; and do this often, as long as it is tight,
and do the same if it is dislocated in the hand, and do as you have done before until it is well; and do the same if it is dislocated on the other side.
do the dislocation of the shoulder on the back
When the shoulder or neck is dislocated, and there are multiple dislocations, there will be no cure for the patient, because death comes quickly.
And the signs are that the excrections come without warning, cannot be held back, and often soften one or more limbs, or both legs or arms, or both feet.
And many times it mutates to four parts; that which mutates behind is called "gilbositez".
The cure is that you reward it if Gilbositez has come from childhood; if there is no cure or recovery of all.
And that which comes from sitting down or stings or similar things, the ancient ways of curing them with big words, or it has never done all great good;
but I have reduced it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the sickness which comes before, neither an enchantment nor a plague came.
and also that which comes in the middle of the back, and cannot be cured except by that which comes properly from behind, as I say;
and it is that the patient be extended on his back in an equal position, and has the draw out of him, so that he does not bleed;
then put 1 log of fire on the head in the ground formed, and 1 other under the chest, and tie a rope between the back of the patient, and 1 other under the hips, and between the knees, and between the ankles;
and two ministers know the lines, one to the head and the other to the feet, among the twenty-one torches;
and be well closed, the torch as we have said, and the mirror puts its hands on the spine forming, until it revives.
And if she does not return by this cure, then take a tray of three feet long, and cover the wall with it, and let the patient be on one side, and pour the head of the tray over the wall, then put the middle of the tray on the spine; and place the mirror's hands on the other head of the tray, and press well, until it revives to its place; and if you see, do it with your hand that turns back;
And that you set .ij. torches to the head of the sick in an arm of great length, and between each torch on either side, a palm of space of long length;
and let in each torch a loop or knot where the rope turns, and let the torches be firmly set in the ground so that they do not move; and between each pair of 2 torches let there be one small torch of a palm's length, so that the rope turns; and between the 2 small torches let there be one long torch, so that it turns back;
and then the rope that is among the 2 torches at the turn of the head, and the other rope towards the 2 torch pegs at the other turn, and each minister turns his torch at every turn of the rope, and the master sets the knot evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, put on dried thyme with a lot of pepper, and then the pegs, and then the wooden stake of a long board, that purple the head of the gibbet and the part of the spine healthy, then tie the rope, as we have said, and use subtle medicinal food until he is healthy;
and if anything comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer soothing and soothing drugs, with the stone that we have said before; and never does he administer a piece of plaster.
and never does the appearance come at the base of the spine of the back, and you must think that it is dislocations; and this bone opens up, so you should not have any presumptions: by adventure it may bring death.
dislocations of the hip
and that the joints of the hip and shoulder come only due to dislocations, not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiij. parties: inside and outside, and before and behind; and the more inside, and less in front and behind.
And the knowledge of his dislocations within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy, it is longer, and more so the knees of the diseased than those of the healthy, and cannot the diseased double his knee with fire; is the place that is inflamed hot of abscess because this head of the shoulder comes to it.
And the sign of that one whose coming is ahead, is that this accident are opposite to those before.
And the signs of that one whose coming is ahead, are that his leg is well according to the completion; however, it does not double the knee with pain, and if he is made to walk, he cannot go forward, and holds back his urine, and inflames the ankle, and when he walks, he goes on the heel.
And the signs of him who is behind, if he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the joint is softened, and the shoulder of the chest is out of place on the ribs.
And those who have this type of dislocation should be treated if the dislocation is old and it delays according to its situation, otherwise there is no cure; and it only comes that he has been presumptuous.
And in those who have this type of dislocation, there are three ways to treat it: if you hurry to set the joint back into place, and tighten it on both sides, and move it to the left and right; maybe it will go back, but there is no other need for treatment.
And if it does not go back in this way, you should prepare very well one minister, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or tie it to the bedpost; and others extend their hand over him in such a way that he holds his hands out from his sides, then he ties it to a rope tied to the chest; and others tie the head of the lasso to the rope.
and extend both forward and backward at once, so that the patient is lifted up from the ground all at once, and remains still.
This mode of extension is common to three appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If this is not the case, then you should put your hand on the patient's back, and then tie the rope to the root of the loins, and the loop that is outside the angle, then tie the rope upward towards the angle, and upward towards the spine.
Then bring others to minister to his arms, and embrace the large ball of the sick chest, and extend it outwardly with the form: so he will now come back to his place; and this way of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this way that we have said, then you must bind the .ij. feet of the sick together with a strong thong over the .ij. heels, and on the .ij. knees, and let the sick leg be extended more than the other two;
Then let it hang from the top of a beam, and be suspended above the ground with  .ij. long arms; and command  .j. minister to embrace the head of the sick person, and let others who are ministers hold the form of the sick person's chest, for the joints now come back into place quite easily.
And when the dislocation is outward, so let the sick person lie, as we have said in that which has gibbosity, and extend   .i. thong properly on the sick leg, and on the foot too;
then place 1...1...tows, 1...1...in the head and 1...1...other around the pieces, then insert 1...1...a towl between the legs of the patient to cover the shape; and it is planted with wet towels inside, so that the patient does not bleed; then extend each minister towards him, and let the doctor hold his dislocated limb in place.
If it returns to place, it is good. If not, place it on a table, and press it as we have said in the treatment of the gibbous phase, and position the patient on their side.
And when the dislocation is forward, if it is convenient to extend the leg of the patient hospital-wise, and according to what I have said; and position the doctor his pain on top of the ill leg, then press with the other hand, and make it lie down towards the ground.
And if the dislocations are on the side, it is not appropriate to extend the patient down, nor to raise up on the ground, but rather that he be placed as if he had been dislocated while lying on his side, as we have said in relation to the sleeping position on the 20th mattress. and be placed on his face, and the limb extended as we have said above, and it is necessary to press down on the joint with the hand.
and it will be necessary when the patient extends his legs, and they are to be even; then insert the poultices, and put on the plaster, and extract a bandage, so that the shoulder joint does not move.
and rest for .iij. days or .iiij., then take off the poultices, and put on the plaster; and if you see that they are even, as before, and let it be. iij. days; then take off the poultices, and make him bellow, until the members are comfortable again.
of the dislocation of the hip joint
is dislocated according to three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and do not dislocate in front.
And the signs are that you command the patient that he bend his leg to his knee, and if it does not move to his knee, know that it is dislocated;
and the treatment of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, and if he can extend his leg, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your knees;
Then take his knee to your palms, and draw back between the two, then fold the .ij. sides of the knee from the knee cap; and other ministers extend his foot, until the knees return to their place, and the sign is that he stirs his leg well in his socket lightly.
and apply the paste thereon, and make the leg move to its socket, and hold it together firmly for .iij. or iiij. days, then remove it; and do not work on the patient to walk, until the limbs are comfortable.
And if the limbs are not in place, then use strong extension as we said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healthy.
of the dislocation at the heel
The talons are never dislocated, nor fully displaced, inside or out.
And the signs that this is that the ankle is dislocated, and turning away from the part where it has dislocated:
The remédes are these: if it is light, and one must gently extend it with his hands when it is only slightly dislocated.
And when it has dislocated fully, so that you sit the patient upright, and tie him down:
and then hold the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left .iij. times, and then raise it up, and pour strongly the foot up;
and do this .iij. times, as we have said, pouring and pulling the foot; if it comes back, it is good; if not, the work begins again, for it comes back;
and if it cannot come back like this, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put .i. stake firmly in the ground between his knees, and tie the cloth around it, so that it does not bruise the patient;
and then put the ministers on the knees, and another minister extends the foot to his hands or a .i. thong, that he lay on the neck of the foot; then extend each minister equally, and let them be placed close together beneath the patient so as to restrain the patient when they are stretched out;
then place the dislocated limb equally in his hands, and let other ministers dip the healthy leg in the solution, and the dislocation will return gradually to its place.
And when it is firm, then apply the plaster and set it in place, fastening it to the leg, and keeping the nails that are behind the ankle safe, so that the ligature may not be too tight;
then let it rest for .iij. or .iiij. days, and when the plaster has set, then remove it after three or four days; then he should not go out to work until he is quite recovered. and if it goes forward this end, it is not yet secure that it does not dislocate again.
And if the abscesses come out, so that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, as long as they are healthy.
the two
When the two are separated, if it is nicely extended work, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, it is fitting that you make the patient sit on .i. the floor or on .ie. a table all upright, and put your foot upon what opens out of those joints, then press your foot with form until it regains;
and when it is even, and it does not open anything, so put the sole of the foot on a table with 1/2 chairs, then strain it with form, and let it be 1/3 hours, then release it; and let it rest, until it is healthy.
of wound and dislocation together
When the wound comes with dislocation, and it is restored many times, often the patient dies:
If you are not proud in the remedy, then you are ignorant in the art and have not used it for a long time, and you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, nor bold.
and apply at the beginning of things soothing poultice, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope for health; and when you see hope, if I restore now the member to its place, so that the poultice may come;
and when the member is in place, if you apply soothing poultice to the wound, as it should be, with dry ointments;
and with dislocation, there is fracture, and small bones are dislocated, if the bone, and do as we said in simple diseases;
and keep yourself from entering a path of fear, according to what I have said, because this will bring you to death according to your Creator, and for the sake of protecting your soul and your body. Amen.
