O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and by its declarations. And in a vision it came to me that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely 'surgery'.
And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is unfamiliar to all, it has been lost, and nothing remains of the ancient knowledge except for small descriptions in books that have been handled by hand.Et quanque li fuers ne puet estre prescheve par les livres ne par les uers, et n’est riens quere demore, si convient que le corps soit traittre en la cirurgie, et li fuers estorbes par les mains, s’il poait estre. And from this has come error and vanity, closed intentions, and alienated knowledge.
Here I seem to want to give life to it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the tools of cautery, and of other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And one who undertakes this must surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of members, and forms and conjunctions and separations of veins, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of teeth, and the movement and of their veins both moving and resting, and from where they originate.
And therefore Hypocrites says that he who knows the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, must be careful that he does not slip into error and harm people; just as I have seen many of those who interfere in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he also cut the arteries in her neck; so much blood issued out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in the groin of a man, and the stone was large; he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.Et vis un autre qui copa une veine de brasse d’une femme et li donna tuit li sangs qui estoit en la veine, si que la femme cheit morte adont.
And I saw another who lanced a vein in the breast of a woman and gave her all the blood that was in the vein, so that the woman died then. And I had already been called to treat her, and I saw the nature of the disease and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out she would have died then.
And I saw another man who had broken his leg treated by a doctor from our land, and with the break there was also an open wound; and the ignorant doctor bound up the fracture on top of the wound with a splint, leaving the wound uncovered, and instructed him to keep it that way. As a result, the leg became badly swollen, as did the foot, and both ended in gangrene.
I was called to attend him, and when I arrived, I hastened to release the leg from its binding. When I did so, he felt no pain and was at ease.
However, the corruption within the limb had already set in and could not be healed; and the decay continued to spread throughout the limb until it was entirely lost.
And I saw another doctor who lanced an abscess that had become infected due to the negligence of his lord.
Because a ulcer, when it is pure of melancholy humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove all that is corrupted.
And so, dear son, you need to know that the work of the hands is divided into two parts: namely, where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each section of this book where there is doubt and danger.
So it is necessary that you be careful, so that the foolish people cannot speak ill of you.
Now take up your weapons in caution, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave the terrible diseases of grief behind, and put away from you what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galienus says in one of his warnings: "Do not ignore a serious illness, lest you be called a foolish doctor."
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cautery and medical cautery, and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and of cautery tools, and all that is necessary in the craft.
The second chapter is about cold cautery and medical tools, and it is ordered from the feet to the head; and of instruments and tools, and all that is necessary in the craft. The second chapter is also about cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it includes the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torques, and similar things; it is ordered from the head to the feet, and includes the forms of instruments.
Thus, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I describe the nature of aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the most lengthy speech and subtle knowledge, and the secret responses; and the majority of sages spoke about this and agreed upon it; and I am satisfied with a little of their words, for I abhor lengthiness.
I say that cautery aids universally in all complexions where there is matter, whether it be the .ij. complexions: namely, the hot complexion without matter, and the dry complexion without matter.
In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some people say that cautery is of great aid; others say the contrary: that cautery does not help in diseases that arise from heat and dryness.
Because fire's nature is hot, it should not be treated for hot diseases with heat, nor for dryness; and those who say otherwise state that cautery helps a great deal in hot and dry diseases that affect the human body. Because when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body is cold.
And I agree with this opinion. For I have found this to be true through experience.
And yet, one should not practice this without first having experienced it oneself, and knowing through long usage the nature of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and their outcomes and the pace at which they progress; we have no fear of treating the other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians agreed and concurred about the use of cauteries.
And know, my son, that a cautery combines fire with the secrets of healing, and is of greater benefit than a burning cautery.
Because fire is simple, and does not harm except the member which is burned, and does no harm to any other part if properly applied.
Burning medicines spread from one member to another by contact, bringing grievous diseases and often causing death.
Fire, because of its intensity and the goodness of its substance, does not harm if there is no excess.
And this I have found by experience and through the length of my service and study; and I stand upon the truth of things - therefore I excuse myself for the length of my words, for it does not please me to take from you the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of its work, how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration. So receive this in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on which days cauteries should be performed, and chose a suitable time.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmfulness beneath is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially when cautery is for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot wait until a time when greater harm might come to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as the foolish believe; for there is no recurrence of the disease that is healed by cautery; and they say it is so, but it is not as they think, because cauteries are not medicines that move the complexion, and dry up the humors that cause pain, and are worth more than other medicines for their swiftness in action, and for the virtue of their work and significance.
And it is possible that the disease may sometimes depend on the complexion of the patient and the location and nature of the disease, and are assembled in him due to the consumption of food and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little excess humors and moisture, as with tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things; but this rarely happens.
And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine; but it is true. But they do not believe that cautery is better than medicine; their intentions are false. Cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any illness and they do not work, then we administer cautery and it does work. Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish people.
The ancients said that cautery with a gold instrument is milder than with iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold or because of the height of its substance; but they said that the heat of the cautery does not cause blisters, but this is not true, as I have experienced it, and have found that it is true in some people; and cautery with gold is milder than with iron, as they said.
And yet when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down immediately; and if it is heated too much, it will bend in the fire; and thus there are many difficulties.
And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Now I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet so that the way is easier to find.
of olive oil cautery
This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two reasons for it being used in a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for many diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a solving medicine which purifies the head for three or four days, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can bear; then have the head of the patient shaved again.
Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his knees; then place the root of your palm between the roots of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two middle fingers meet, it will bleed—then heat up the cautery, which is called "olivare", and this is how it should be used:
And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while squeezing gently in a circular motion; then lift your hand gently and check the area again to see if there is any bone exposed; if not, then repeat the cautery as I have described until you do see bone. Then take some salt and place it in soft cotton, and apply it to the wound; leave it for three days; then apply an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until the wound is healed.
And according to the ancients, when a wound is left open for longer, it purges more effectively; and because of this, they recommend using leeches.
And some say that one must leave the cautery in place until part of the bone is burnt, and then have the burnt portion of bone removed and the wound healed.
And others say that one must apply the cautery and press so hard that one dislodges a portion of bone as wide as a woman's thimble, in order for the humors to flow out; then leave the wound open for a long time; after which one should cleanse and dress it.
And I do not consider these two methods of cauterization to be entirely good for anyone, except in cases where there is fear; and I prefer to leave it as it is, for the shoulder is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, just as we see in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak from nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems better and gentler to me, so I use this method together with it.
of headache
When a chronic headache comes and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills that are called 'cochie', as well as cleansing of the head with oils and poultices. If they then receive the cautery that we mentioned earlier and it is ineffective,
Take care that the head of the sick person is not too cold in nature, then cauterize them under this cautery a little bit as we mentioned above.
After that, cauterize each horn of the head up to the bone as we mentioned earlier, and also cauterize in the place called 'vessel'; there is a spot for which cupping glasses are placed; ease your hand so that you do not reach the bone, as the patient will feel much more pain with this cautery than with the others, and I will speak about it later. The cauteries on the horns should be finer than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and here is its form:
of the cautery of the head When sudden pain arises in the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and the other treatments I have described in the section on diseases have been carried out, but none of this helps: then cauterize according to two methods, that is, with medicine or fire.
For the cautery with medicine, take an egg, remove the shell and coat it with a mixture of honey and vinegar, and then apply it to the shoulder where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the egg underneath the skin. Then, after it has been applied for twelve hours, remove it and treat the area with butter until healing occurs.
After the treatment with ointment until it is healed; and if you see fit, use some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth section on burning medicines.
The cautery with fire is performed as follows: Heat the cautery tool so that it is red-hot and then apply it to the area where the pain is located, moving it in a circular motion. Once the skin turns white, remove the tool and repeat this process several times until the pain is relieved.
And it is called a "close" because the chief is made in the form of a cloak, with a small curve at the top, and in the middle has a small appearance; and he puts it over the painful spot, and holds his hand and twists it slightly, so that half the thickness of the skin is burned; and lifts his hand so that the artery does not burn, which is deflected, and an abundance of blood flows.
Afterwards, he puts cotton in the wound, and keeps it for three days; then he puts moistened cotton on the wound until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called  "cultellare", do so at the very tip, and be careful not to touch the artery in this hemorrhoid which is not old.
of a hemorrhoid
When you cure hemorrhoids as we have previously described in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine and fire do not help, then you must heat the cautery called   "cultellare" until it is white; and thus sign on the painful spot a line half a finger long, and lift your hand once, and press so that you do not touch the artery and so that it does not reach the bone; and be careful of the jaw so that it does not bite when one chews, and let the nerve have no regard for the bite and let no spasm come to harm, and be careful of the blood flow from the artery when it is cut, or the cutting has great fear and especially for someone who is not experienced and untried; and leave the wound open in the middle; but I will tell you how to stanch the blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the wound in the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
of the pain in the ears from coldness
When there is pain in the ear from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other remedies that we have mentioned in the previous chapter, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called 'the point', whose composition is as follows:
After puncturing all around the affected ear, or around both ears if the pain is in both, and then move slightly upward from the root of the ear after you have identified the site to be treated; and there should be .x. points around each ear; afterwards, treat the area until it is healed.
of mouth torture
There is no cautery for those torments which are caused by flujoes of blood, as we have said in the sections on diseases; and no cautery should be used for conditions that originate from dryness or inflammation of nerves.
When you treat this type of mouth torture caused by blood flujoes and discharges from the head, and gargling does not help, then you should use three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another just above the temple, and the third on the junction of the two lips. Apply the cautery to the area that appears healthy, and also cauterize the top of the ear, about a finger's width below the horn of the head, and another cautery above the temple, as long as a finger. Leave the cautery in place until half of the brain is burnt; this is the shape of the cautery instrument:
It is similar to the scalpel we described earlier, but it is a little more slender, and the blade should be a little thicker. After treating the area as described, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called 'vassels', as we have said before; and do the last cautery over the mouth of the stomach. And let it be treated as we have said before.
of litharge
For this disease, give the patient large and cleansing pills for the brain; after that, wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and apply the mustard plaster which is described in the book of plasters to the back of the neck; and here is how to do the cautery: do it as I have said.
If he is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, do three cauterizations in the middle of the head going down to the neck, with a distance of two fingers between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see fit to adjust, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, do two more on the two horns, and cure him as before. And let the cautery be what is called 'olivare', as I have said before.
of chill from the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and of that which we have previously discussed; after washing the head of the patient, then make cauterization in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you have more need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the heart is burned most, and lift your hand; then cure it until it is healed, and use the cautery which is called "olive" that we have discussed before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic; it is necessary first to cleanse the brain of hair and other remedies that we have discussed in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meat; then press the head in milk, and make .i. cautery according to what we said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is forceful and painful, make cauteries as I said for the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I described.
If the disease is in a child, make him  .i. delicate cautery according to this manner:
When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupt humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with part cauteries as we said for the one who has paralysis.
And if through the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink that purifies the brain, according to what has been described before in the division.
After you have bound the head of the patient; then make a well-fit bandage, as a circle, and place it around the head; and let the patient cross their arms, and be held tightly from all sides; then apply the liniment, and use the fat of an old ram; and heat it gently over fire so that the person can bear it; then remove the bandage from within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with good governance until they are healed.
Or, if you wish to cauterize it, make many small pricks all over the cautery tool. This cautery method moistens the brain greatly; then place wet cotton in grease and tallow of a young cow on top.
of their eyes When awesomeness first comes to the eyes due to the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make them sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
After he commands him to hold his head steady, and he cauterizes in the middle of the head, and makes .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the descents of the eye are both together, or .i. if the descent is .i.; and close all the veins and arteries that are under the heart with the cautery, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of blood letting, and if you see too much blood issuing out, then stop it as best you can.
I will teach you the extraction of arteries and incision under the two bones at the back; and sometimes cauterization or hatereil is done under the two bones at the back.
of the body from tears
When the tears from the eyes are old and habitual and are on the veins, or within the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outward; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I said at the beginning of the eye descending to the eyes: .i. cautery in the middle of the head, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or hatereil under the .ij. bones; and if there is a need for more, then he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery all over .i.
where the body weeps inside them
When you treat him according to what we have said in the discussion, and he does not improve, then give the patient three nights of poultices; after that, shave his head and cauterize the middle of the cautery with olive oil; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two sorces, one just below the hairline; and be careful to avoid the artery so you do not cover it. And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the membrane of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called  "olivare". This is how to make it:
And if you see two sorcerers, make two cauteries on them as long as the sorcerers are; and do not leave off with the hand until a third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that pokes the eye Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are turned towards the inside, and poke the eye, and they make cauteries according to two manners: that is to say, with fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy position; after that, draw on the paper the shape of the leaf of the myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs; then put wet cotton in egg white and mustard seed paste on the eye, then heat the cautery so that it has this shape.
After that, cauterize little by little according to the shape you drew, so that the skin is burned in the right place; and the sign of the health of the eye is that you see the paper lifted up, and the hairs raised at the tip of the eye; then lift your hand and leave it like that for three days, then put wet cotton in butter until the burn is healed; after that, treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if after that the hairs grow and the paper becomes soft, then start the cautery in the same place again, just as you did before; and if the hairs are torn, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and even, and do not prick the eye.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make parchment into the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live coals, of each one-third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it over the shape you made like the myrtle leaf, and put under the eye cotton wet with egg white; and if the disease is in one eye only, then operate on one, and if in both, as well; and put under the eye cotton wet with egg white; and let the patient's head be in a healthy position and put your hand showing over the medicine, and press a little and move it all the time that the patient feels stinging from the medicine, because he feels stinging just as from fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the bite has passed, lift the area, and check if you see the skin raised as it was by the constraint of fire or by incision; if so, all is well. If not, apply more medicine to the area where the medicine didn't take effect, until your work is even, and your eyes are focused; then place wet cotton in a cloth until the burn is cool, afterwards clean the area of the ointment which is called 'dyafenis' and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not get into your eyes. And if the skin becomes soft after, and hairs grow in the eye, then restart the medicine on the area which is softened by the skin properly, just as you did before; afterwards clean it until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle wand:
And know that the eyes of humans are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this are your constraints; and do not be reproached for the straight path to one who has the study of this art.
on the treatment of fistula with cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then you should use cautery according to the following method:
Instruct the patient to place their head on your lap, and hold their head steady so that it does not move or turn; then soak cotton in white vinegar or pepper juice and place it over the eye; next, heat the cautery which should be shaped like a pen, with a pointed tip, or like a tent; but overall, the cautery should be curved for your work.
Then press the fistula if it is open and drain any pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, open it and draw out the fluid; next, place the hot cautery firmly on the oil gland, holding the cautery at the spot below the eye where the nerve is located, taking care not to cause pain; apply the cautery directly to the grease of the eye gland and corrupt it.
If you reach the bone at the start of cauterization, that is good. If not, then repeat the cautery again if necessary and leave it for three days; then put on wet cotton in butter, and treat it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is still unhealed, then apply an corrosive medicine to uncover the bone; and the king will follow what happens in his kingdom.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that some of the ancients mentioned. Cut to the fistula, and make an incision; then put into the slit a small piece of cotton wool with which the shape [of the fistula] is known. and they make the amount of a bean; and hold your hand or the cotton firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, so that the molten lead does not run into his eye; and one should put on the patient's eye wet cotton in olive oil or in water: the lead melts the fistula, and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have described, that is good. If not, then one should apply an incision to the vein, and bring the fistula back into the body of the vein according to what is appropriate in its own place.
of cracks in the lips Many times, cracks occur on the lips which are called "hair", and especially on the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this form:
And place it gently in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; after that, treat the area with ointment until it heals.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess occurs in the root of the throat or the uvula, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, it causes swelling and rot and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have described under 'Fistulas', but if it does not heal: then you must have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after cleaning out the fistula's opening, hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches its depths; do this once or twice, after treating it as we have described in 'Treatments', until it is healed. And if it is cured thus, then it is good; but if not, you must open up the area and remove any decayed bone, according to what you find in his throat.
movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heat the cautery, which will be described below, in such a way that you place one end of the hot cautery on the tooth; and hold the other end of the cautery over the root of the tooth, and keep your hand steady so that the heat reaches the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and re-heat the cautery as needed; after fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let them gargle for an hour.
And in this way, the tooth which was loose is made firm, and the soft gums restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried up.
of toothache
When toothache comes from coldness, or there is coldness or swelling, and medical treatments do not help, then cauterization is needed in two ways: with a cautery made of butter and with fire cauterization.
Cauterization with butter is done by melting butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon made of iron or brass; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and moisten it in the butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools down; and do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the wool and cotton moistened in the cold butter, and apply it to the aching tooth, and place a hot iron on it so that the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
The fire cautery is such that you take a rod of iron or copper, and it must be thick enough so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient. After heating the cautery, whose shape will come out later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down. Do this several times, as the pain will be removed on the same day or the next. The patient must fill his mouth with good butter in anticipation of this cautery, and then rinse afterwards; and this is the shape of the cautery:
When scrofula is due to phlegm and cold moisture, and is not responsive to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery so that the shape comes out as described below, and have two openings for the smoke to exit from the other side of the cautery; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice if necessary, going to the bottom of the abscess. If the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for 3 days. Then dress the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged with solutive medicines; then make cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not come up to the throat, but only scorch the chest slightly. Then make another cautery at the junction of the neck with the head of the spine, using the cautery called "clavicle", as we have described earlier; and treat the area as we have said before, until it is healed.
of the tongue When all diseases of the lungs are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is chronic, then make two cauteries on the breast in their usual places; and another cautery in between the breasts; using the cautery called "clavicle" as described earlier.
And if you see fit, make cautery at the point with all the cauteries called "points", as the form is described earlier for diseases of the ears; and let the points reach up to 30 or even higher. After that, treat the area as described before, and use 3 cauteries according to this form:
And for this reason, cauteries are gentler when you do them three times.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, treat the patient's back and sides with fomentation; then gently press the heart, which is inside the chest, with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery that has two tines like a fork, here is its shape:
and cauterize the chest until it pierces to the rib, and the figure of the cautery will appear with four cauteries; and for this reason, a cautery is made with the cautery that has three prongs, so that the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerve follows the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery that has three prongs:
And sometimes it is adjusted above this one nerve, so that there are eight cauteries.
After placing the crushed porridge on the cautery, let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is well healed.
And if it is dislocated above, whatever happens, then make a cautery on the thickness of the cautery with a key, or with many cauteries piercing. For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
of a cautery of phlegmon
The ancients said that one should do cauteries of phlegmon with roots of aristologe, and in such a manner: take a long root of aristloge as thick and long as your fingers; moisten it in oil and heat it in the fire, and cauterize. Perform 1 cautery between the chin and neck, and 2 small cauteries slightly lower in the area below the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, declining slightly backward; and 1 cautery on the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two at the sides of the breast away from the cautery between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it gently as when applying a perfume.
And some ancients said that one should use a cautery like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the phlegmon; and if he jumps away from the pain, as we have said in the phlegmon of the liver. But in this procedure there is fear of death for the patient, or a fistula may result which cannot be healed.
of the mouth
When you treat the illness of the moon with what we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not help at all, then there are three methods of cauterization that are all good.
Of these, one method is to make three or four cauteries, marking according to the length of the moon, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver that we mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, but let the patient lie on his back.
And another way of cauterizing is to heat the cautery that has two or three needles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the coccyx where the pain of the moon comes from the right side towards the left, and the elevation by which you lift the coccyx according to the coccyx, according to the length of the body, and the cautery according to the width of the body.
After that, put the two needles into the flames until the coccyx is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and so there will be four of them. And if you see fit, cauterize the entire cautery with three needles. After the cure, when it has bled for a long time, and this is worth as much as any of the other cures mentioned before.
of dropsy
Cautery is of no use for dropsy, except in the manner that is called "ascites." When you treat it according to the methods we have described in sections, and your treatment does not help, then you must make .iiij cauteries around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one by the anus; and the cauteries should be close to the hard part of the heart.
Afterwards, leave the cautery open to drain for a long time, and do not cease treating the patient after the cautery; healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the belly should be the clave as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown here before.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep, thus the yellow water will be driven out, and the cautery should be according to this form:
Afterwards, make 2 cauteries on each leg, one below the knee in front and the other above, midway up the leg; and leave the cauteries in place for a long time without cleaning, until the water comes out; then clean this as we have said regarding the other cauteries.
of menstruation
When diarrhea comes from coldness and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive power in the stomach and intestines is weakened, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly with a strong pulse, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said above about the cautery on the stomach, using a circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the belly with a thin cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see an abundance of moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the shoulder, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
on the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are in the rectum, either one or more, and are old and consist of thick, cold, and corrupted moist humors, and are treated as we have described in divisions, but it does not help, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that is, all defecated below the anus, a little by little in a triangular shape; and two cauteries under the belly.
and if you think that his stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face swollen, then on the face .i. large cautery on the stomach, as it is said before, and .i. another on the liver, and i. another on the mouse at all the cautery clave; and let the cautery open for a long time. After cure the place until it is healed.
of the fleshiness that is called "thelul"
When you scrape the thelul, use a cautery that looks like  .i. razor, and then put it all ablaze on the scraped thelul; and let your hand stay so that the cauteries reach the base of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or  .ij., and if there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each one as we have said. After curing with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on a wound, it will have more help.
of an improperly healed wound
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
When a person has a fistula, and it is swollen and exudes pus and corrupted moisture, then you should probe it with a thin needle, and be careful to feel how deep the fistula is. After heating the cautery iron like a razor, insert it into the fistula according to how far the needle went in, and repeat the cautery until the infected and corrupted flesh is burned, once or twice or thrice, according to the amount of pus; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and large veins. If the fistula goes towards the bladder and intestines, be careful of those areas, and do not apply the cautery too close to them, and think that it is not sensitive; after curing the area until it is healed, and if the opening is swollen and the matter is not discharged for a long time, then know that the fistula is completely healed. And if the matter is not discharged, know that the fistula has pierced through, and the bone at the bottom is corrupted; and thus as one of those we will discuss in their place.
of the disease of the kidneys When cold pain comes to the kidneys, and with violent winds, and it does not take talent from a woman, then you should apply cautery to the kidneys on one side and the other with the clave cautery that we mentioned earlier. And if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have 3 cauteries in a line, and they will do more good.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then one should cauterize the part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region emerge, both on the right and left, and each cautery should be as long as a man's thumb; and one should also do another cautery below the back, or two if you need them; and the cauteries should be flat according to the previously mentioned shape.
of the mouth When the mouth is cold and moist, and it cannot conceive, and the buds are corrupted and their terms are delayed; and when they come, one feels great pain: then one should do three cauteries around the mouth, as we have said for the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries below the back; and the cauteries should be flat, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moisture descends to the socket of the hip, and because of this it moves out of place, and the sign is that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and the places of the dislocation are found wet, then you must cauterize the dislocation on the hip with a 1. cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and the cautery should be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make 3 large cauteries of the olive oil, and let the cautery be as deep as all the scabs; and treat it until it is healed.
of the hip pain When pain comes in the hip joint, it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: so you must purge the disease of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-smelling pills.
After that he must be cauterized; and the manner of cautery is according to two ways: namely, with burning medicines together, and with fire. Fire cautery can be done in many ways, one of which is as follows: cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauteries according to this form, making a deep and large wound, and between each cautery there should be a space the thickness of a thumb; the cauteries should be olive-shaped. Sometimes a cautery is made in the middle of the hip, so that there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it so that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
And this is the way that is done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it reaches the thigh and leg, then he should be cauterized where the pain is felt with two cauteries there where the pain holds; and one cautery above the ankle bone of the fourth toe, on the left side a little; and let the cauteries be cuticular, and burn the thickness of the heart. And if the patient feels that the pain extends to one or both sides of the foot, then he should be cauterized there where he feels the pain with three cauteries there, called "points".
And if necessary, do more; and if he feels the pain below the knee towards the thigh, use a knife or circular cautery, and be careful with all your cauteries that you do not leave it on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more harm and contraction.
I myself have seen several who had cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it became pierced and rotten all over the foot. Afterwards he died from a stomach ailment.
And if the pain is in two places together, do cautery on one and on the other, according to this method. // And they said to the wise man about the cautery of the hip, whose method is this: make a piece of iron as big as a little finger at the tip, or a little less, and let it be between the teeth, and from one tooth to another a distance of the amount of a thumb joint; and let the teeth be apart in two places, and also like nuts, and have a good handle made of iron. And this is its shape:
And let it be heated until it is all red and dripping hot, and then put it on the box of the hip that hurts, and turn it to the healthy side; and cauterize it once with one cautery and leave it for 3 days; and then use a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the ointment is cured until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly due to fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it; nonetheless, it is one of the good cauteries which those who can bear it should apply where it is needed.
of back pain
When back pain comes from sitting or impact or excessive evacuation, or due to cold matter spreading, in none of these cases is cautery beneficial except for that which comes from the infusing of cold matter.
It is necessary, after the patient has voided foul pills or other similar substances, to place a fire mark on their back where the pain is located, marking three lines intersecting at right angles, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can bear; and the cautery should be performed using the cautery called "pin"; and if you wish, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. with the medium cautery tool according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight chest when they wake up, and fear; and you will find it in the lower spine in the back and in us the appearance that comes over the other vertebrae.
When you see this and cure it, cauterize it with the hot iron according to this form.
If the cautery turns purple on every part of the spine equally, then cauterize around the spine with a pointed iron .ij. or .iij. lines apart and let the points be close together. After this, cure the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware of administering cautery in a place that has swelling which is on top of a nerve.
The vertebrae of the neck are at the base of the skull. And when you want to cure the spine, if you cannot get the spine to be healthy according to what we have said, then cure the area where the strain is and do not put the cautery on it, because the nerves are close to the head.
When joint pains are caused by moisture that is spread throughout the body's limbs, and when pain comes in the feet, which they properly call "podagra," and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured by medicines, then it can be treated with cauterization in this way: make a mustard cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this formula:
And if you need to apply the cautery on the instep of the foot, apply it with a small point. And if pains come up to the knees and other joints, which often happens, apply cauteries above each knee in groups of three or four, using olive-colored cauteries throughout; and if you need more, apply more, but do not hold your hand against the skin longer than until the thickness of the skin is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cautery as we have described in its chapter. And if there is pain in the hands, apply mustard to the wrist for one inch; and if any pain remains in the fingers, apply mustard to each joint and to the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and exercise good judgment with the patient and give medicine. For if you exercise good judgment with him and cleanse the blood, he will be healed with God's help.
of the root of the eye
When rot occurs in the groin, and the testicles descend into the scrotum, which is new, then when you see it being cured, he should not eat that day; and he should use things that loosen the belly so that the farts come out of his belly. After this, let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the testicles are repaired, and bring them back to your fingers, and mark an inch below the rot over the bone of the groin, and at all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery with which this is done:
until it is white and dripping blood. Then bring the testicles back to their place; and the minister holds his hand so that they do not return again; and well work the groins for the patient, and put a pillow under him and two cushions on the groins, and one more under the feet so he can hold his hands; then put the cautery over the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again another time until you come to the bone; and be careful that the testicles do not pop out when you use the cautery, so that you do not burn him; and so that through this the patient does not die, or have other ills.
And you should know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And cauteries for children should be smaller according to the size of their ears, and for large people as large as their ears; after 3 days cure the place of the cautery with butter so that the burning is removed; then cure it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well sewn up; and it is necessary to let their scrotum hang loose for a long time, so that the testicles do not pop out when they stand up in rooms.
And after .40 days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and wear it for another .40 days; and let him have good rest, work little, and guard against too much drinking and eating, and too much loud laughter; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed. And I will now describe the treatment for cutting into his shoulder. from the disease of the belly
When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing anymore, then make a cautery of the cautery depending on its quantity, and burn it a third of the way into the skin; after the treatment, according to what we have said. And some of the ancients have said that one should cauterize it with a three-pointed cautery according to this form:
but first sign the spot with ink and draw a line along the edge of the ulcer, and another one above it, and hold your hand firmly over the entire cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, from falling or from being hit, and the pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine doesn't help, then it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery called "point", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its virtuosity and location of twisting and its pain. If he is healed by the first cautery, that's good; if not, do another cautery on it, for such is the custom that it must change in the limb that is nearest to it, so you must do cauteries until the patient is healed.
from mixing
Miasmas are sometimes aided by cautery with great effect, and so are diseases that come from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it cauterized, take care whether the disease is in its early stages, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not persist or remain, and you doubt that the corruption might spread throughout the body, then do 5 cauteries on the head: 1 on the crown of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and 2 on the temples, and one behind on the nape of the neck; and he should hold his hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and as long as the skin in those places comes out so that the vapors of the gross humors can come out; and he should be cauterized on the scalp according to what is before him.
And if the disease is scattered everywhere; and it is manifestly lost, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned in the head, and one cautery in the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large cautery on the croup, and another one next to it, and two cauteries on the two shoulders; and two cauteries on the armpits, and two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, and one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And you should know that the more cauteries you do, the more help and benefit it will bring; and you should know that the sick person does not feel the pain of the cautery as a healthy person does, because their body is already corrupted. And the cauteries should be large or small according to the members and joints, depending on what you find in the ways of the irons. After this, treat the wound with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
swelling
When swelling occurs in a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, yet it does not heal, then one should make cauterizations on the limb according to its size; and let the cautery be slightly penetrating into the thickness of the skin. Then treat it with ointments until it is healed. Sometimes cautery is done on the hand, foot, or back, at the outlet of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; yet one should not attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the outlets of the nerves that move the body.
of poplars
When the disease called "albaras" occurs, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a moderately deep cautery according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and the color changes; then treat it with a poultice of equal parts of barley flour and lentils, mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the intestines and blood of an almond tree; bind it all together and apply it, keeping it in place until it heals.
the treatment of cancer by cautery
When a ulcer appears at the beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery which resembles a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer. And yet the wise say that one should also make cauteries in the middle of the ulcer; and yet I do not think this is good, for I fear that it may become inflamed and corrupted, and I have indeed seen this happen sometimes; and a more direct method is to cauterize around the edge, using the cautery called "circle", as we have said about many cauteries.
of the swelling which cannot subside
When someone has a disease called  "adubelati", and it is slow to heal due to either the excess fluid it produces or the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, very old) and have little blood, or because of the season; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries by pricking; after that, leave it as it is. For it will hasten to heal.
And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery with which it was formed:
And put your hand over the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has penetrated the skin, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning in such a way that the course of the infection is alleviated. After the cautery has healed completely.
the fire cautery by iron
A different kind of disease is called "corrodens", which is simply a corruption or decay in a limb, for it rots the limbs just as fire burns dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cauterization with fire, then heat the cautery tools small and large, according to what is needed in the location of the disease; then cauterize all over until you have removed all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that all that is decayed is removed. And then let it rest for three days, and apply ointment made with oil to the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are healed and all the corruption is gone. After the cautery, use ointments that promote healing. And if you see after three days that new skin has not formed, then restart the cautery on the areas where the decay remains. This decay can sometimes be treated with a medicine called "ague", but cauterization by fire is generally more effective; I have already described how to treat "ague" in the section on diseases: you can look it up when you need to.
of warts that appear on the feet
Many times it happens that in the feet by default a disease called "close" according to our intention arises, and it is a large blistered thing that blisters the foot. And the cautery of this disease is according to two methods. That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is that you heat one cautery iron as hot as an owl's feather, and it is made of good iron to the size that it can prop up the claw all around, and that it has thin edges; then put it all hot on the claw, and turn your hand all around the claw until it comes to the bottom of the claw; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to ooze pus; then make him an ointment of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the ointment all night, and the claw will fall off and be uprooted by its roots. Then cure the place with ointment until it is healed.
And if they are converted by default in the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, then you should administer hot water cautery; and it is in such a way: take a brass or iron rod, or an owl's feather, and put it on the claw and the athael, that is to say, warts; and put the rod on so that it purples all around, then put a little bowl of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the rod comes to the root of the claw, and can find the hot water a deep way to the root; and let the patient endure the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted at all its roots. So do one after another, until you draw out all those who are in the body, then cure them with ointments that generate flesh.
the cure for trembling
When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other, then you should make four cauteries on their spine, one cautery between each spinous process; and one cautery on the penis, and one over the stomach with an olive-sized cautery; this will cease the trembling and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
of stinking pustules
Sometimes they appear as boils, or stinking pustules, which come from thick corrupted matter. At their first appearance, one should make a cautery on the tip of each pustule: with a fine twig of myrtle, the point being taken in the fire, or with a long root of aristolochia, or with an lenticular cautery. Sometimes they are cauterized at their appearance according to this manner, and they cannot grow any larger thereafter, but the surplus from which they come is disrupted and they are healed; but it must be done after bloodletting.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great flowings of blood from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very sad thing to stanch.
And yet when this happens to someone, you must hasten to place your index finger over the wound of the vein, and press it very hard until the blood is quietened beneath your finger and no more drips out; then prepare some olive-wood cauteries, both small and large according to the wound and the location where the artery lies, and place the cautery upon that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold it there until the bleeding has stopped.
And if it bleeds afresh when you lift your finger from the wound, and the cautery has cooled, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
And do not cease to apply these one after the other until the bleeding has stopped; and beware of hurting the nerve which lies nearby, and causing any other harm to come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well stanched merely by itself when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods which we have described: by cautery, or extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicine placed on top which has the power to stop bleeding; and let it be bound and pressed firmly.
Whoever administers a tight binding with cloth or placing hot objects on it, or other similar treatments, will not benefit if only a little.
And if this happens to someone and there is no doctor or medicine available, then he should put his index finger on the wound as we have said, and press hard enough that it is tight on the wound; and he should not move it but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and swollen and pressed tight; and he should seek out those who can provide cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all the diseases that require cauterization by fire or hot medicines, and their symptoms, causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I included in that chapter from the head to the feet, and I will continue in this chapter following the same path so that one can more easily find what they are looking for.
And so that I begin this, my dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore greater caution is needed.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to be foolhardy. Because there are many types of people who come for treatment: some are so desperate because of their illness that they would easily be led astray by the deception they find in their illness, and because of the great seriousness of their illness; one must fear for them. And among these there are those who give up their senses and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the disease is stubborn. You should not consent to those who come to you with such behavior, but put more trust in your honor than in your greed, and do not open up thoughtlessly but wisely of what you are certain of, and of what you can have possession and enjoy; and use prophecy and indication in the treatment of your illnesses, to which salvation is converted; and that will help you to this good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Very dear son, may Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have arranged this chapter in a conversational manner, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have discussed for you from the head to the feet, so that you can find more easily whatever you need.
the head full of water
Do you know that this disease often comes to children when they are born, and when the delivery is too forceful, pressing the child's head; and sometimes it comes from a relaxed cause that one does not know about.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone except children, and in all those I have seen, death was imminent; and because of this, it seems to me that I should leave the treatment in several parts.
I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and the head swelled every day until it could no longer be supported; and the moisture accumulated under the bone between the brain and the bone; and the treatment is such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should split the head widely halfway through; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out; and see the form of the spatulum:
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the corners of the head opening from each part, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not close again; then you must split the head into four parts in this manner:
And after the incision, draw out all moisture firmly. After that, squeeze the cracks with rags and powders, pour in wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then loosen it, and cure the wound by tenting and poultices, and let the head be extracted equally, and give the patient dry meat with little moisture so that the limb is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you observe where the aperture of the abscess is, and the gathering of pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Therefore cut where the abscess is open and the gathering of pus, and make an incision according to what you are able; and be careful not to cut into the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
of gout
When someone has a disease called "cataract" in their eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the best treatment is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them being cut, the patient should face away from you; then rub the area of the vein with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then hold the patient's neck still with one hand and with another hand tie a bandage around his neck; then look where the vein bleeds, and the spots are behind the ears, and they are very close to each other; then sign the spots with a cross, then cut both of them with a sharp spatule two parts deep so that the vein reaches the bone, and this should be done from the back of the head.
And if you see it, push the spatule under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also as deep as two parts across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood will continue to spurt upwards.
If the artery does not open to feeling, then you must measure the quantity of the space of three digits, then cut in and slice to the bone; and the amount of blood that should be let out is 25 units, and perhaps a little more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains nothing over the bone, so that pus does not come from an abscess, then extract the wound and ligature it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
of emetic
When old-age dementia comes, and the catarrh is acute, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and ancient madness and similar things, and it is treated by various methods of medicine and all that does not help him, then we should extract the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the method of extraction is that the patient pulls back the hair from his temples, and feels the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens clearly through its beating, and is not very deep-seated except in some people who are too cold; and if it is deep-seated, the patient should stretch his neck backward with some cloth, then rub the area with some rough cloth, and anoint the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulum of which there is the shape:
then scorch the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with tweezers and cut it well away from the threads that are beneath it in each part; and if the artery is fine, return it to the tip of the fingernail, then bandage that part according to the quantity of the two heads. For if it is not bandaged, the blood will not stop flowing everywhere.
And draw the blood from 1/4 to 3/4 inch; and if the artery is large, you should tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not come before the healing of the wound, and there is a slow flow of blood; then cut away the excess between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with an iron cautery to the bone until the head is cut; and this is the best method if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
For cauterization helps to finish moisture: that is why it is of great help for moistures.Et si li artere fu grans, si covient que tu traies dou sang des  .xij./ et si li artere ne vout pas estourdir, si le remets en son leu et tue li sans par la pointe d’uncine, car il ne peut bien demorer ains. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.Or there is a better method for extracting arteries that one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method for extracting arteries: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills For when the instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less firmly. And there should be between the two knives a finger's width of space, and then when you have pricked both sides, you must hold the hot iron against them until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two at both sides, and they should be spaced so that they are not soldered by this cautery all the way through; and this is the shape of the cautery:
of tears
When tears are flowing from the veins that are on the forehead, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the sick person turn red, and they feel heat in their forehead and trembling all over their body, and their eyelids are swollen and red, and the skin around their eyes is peeling from the heat of their tears, then this treatment is needed.
And the ancients called it "cure contused", and you should do to the patient who has this disease to the hairs on his forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as two fingers all over the forehead going down until the nose, and the other two at two sides above the eyebrows, and beware of cutting the arteries that are at the two sides above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of three beans across.
From the incision which is to be made at the temple all the way to the second incision; and scrape all of the skin that is between the two incisions up to the skin that is on the bone, then make another incision from the middle incision all the way to the other second one, and then remove this spatulum.
Then insert into the first incision the instrument that is called  "cultellary", and it is very sharp on one side, and not at all sharp on the other, and this is its shape: And cut the incision towards the chest at an angle, and the lower one towards the bone, and make it as wide as necessary until you reach the median fissure. And tie all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to the aperture in the chest, and then make another incision in the median fissure up to the other aperture; then extract the blood evenly, and express the area for the extracted blood; then place a tent of old cotton in each fissure, and place dampened cloths in wine, oil, and garlic on top, and be careful that no abscesses develop; and after three days loosen the ligature, and administer a large amount of cold water, then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
from the eyes
When someone experiences acute catarrh regularly, and you see their eyes are sunken and small, and their vision weakened, and the eyelids burned, and hair falling out, and pain in the head, and they sneeze; then know from these symptoms that this matter and these catarrhs come from many veins, and the medicine for it is what I have described.
And you should command the patient to lean back, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another from the left temple to the right; the incision should reach the bone. Keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that control eating; when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, then insert old cotton and linen bandages between the two lips of the cut. Then apply wet rags soaked in wine and oil, and be careful to avoid hot abscesses. When it is removed, you should rub the bone until it starts to grow warm, then treat it with things that promote healing.
In this way: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colocynthis, and make an ointment from them; then administer it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
for earache
All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, or a stone, or something similar like iron; or seeds, such as peas, beans; or something flowing, like water and garlic and similar things.
When it falls into the ear, whether a pebble or something else that does not adhere to the ear, nor grow in the ear, hold the ear towards the sun. If you see the pebble, then distil some violet oil or oil of sesame, then administer extraction; and cause him to sneeze with snuff, and plug his nostrils when sneezing comes on, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and hold the ear upwards. Often it will come out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, have extraction administered by slender pincers, thus is its form:
If it comes out through the pincers, that is good; if not, then administer extraction with a slender needle of small tubing; and if it does not come out in this way, make an iron hook and push the hook's tip into the ear canal firmly, and plug around the hook with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out forcefully, for often it will come out as we have said; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take bird glue, and put some on a tool designed for this purpose, and place a bit of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the pebble or whatever it is, and pull it out. And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then you must hurry to split the ear so that pus comes out, and a spasm; and the manner of splitting is that you first make the patient's head bleed, and draw blood according to its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small split in the root of the ear at the fat where it depends; and the split should be like a crescent moon, so that you can reach the pebble, then extract it according to your ability, and suck on it vigorously with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed. And if it is grains which are there and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer .i. spatulum with a thin needle according to this form:
And administer incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with thin tweezers and a suction cup, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In the acute condition that affects the ear, the patient should use the first remedy and pack the ear with soft cotton. And he should lie on his side with the affected ear upwards. If the water flows out through the ear, that is good. If not, he should take several thin stones according to the size of his finger, heat them in the fire, and place one end of a stone in his ear and the other end on the ground; and he should press down with his hand so that the water flows out, as we have said for the stone. He should continue doing this with different stones until all the water has come out, just as we have said. Then he should take a stalk of grass, insert one end into the ear, and hold the other end over the fire until the thinnest stalk is burnt; then he should do the same with another stalk until all the water has come out, as we have said for the stone.
In the extraction of the worm, if it is small like a flea or similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, administer extraction with tweezers; and this is the easiest way to remove what is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help, then you must look at the ear in the sun; if there appear no worms, then pull them out with subtle pincers, and if they don't appear, then take the skin where the form is.
And it is narrow below and wide above. And insert the thinnest end of an instrument into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient feels, then suck gently all over the skin; do this frequently until all the worms emerge. And if they don't emerge, then stop up the skin with cotton as I said about stones; and if they don't come out as we have said, then administer distillations which the ancients have tried in the treatment of worms, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, according to where the form is located, as you see it:
And it should be made of silver or brass with small holes below and openings above for distillation; and to press the distillation into the instrument, use a brass instrument specially made for this purpose, and if you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want from your medicines, into the skin, and let the skin be in the ear; then insert the razor all the way into the cotton, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled into the ear; and the patient feels the medicine inside, and let the distillation be a little warm as it is distilled into the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, because the medicine will not be as effective.
of the treatment of ears
No child is born without a hole in their ear; and the same thing happens to adults due to an abscess or wound inside the ear, and sometimes this abscess erupts in the ear, which cannot be seen; and sometimes there is only a small opening, which can be seen clearly.
When it erupts and cannot be seen, it indicates a poor prognosis in many cases, and in such cases, one should hold the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane exposed, then it has reached this stage due to the following reasons:
And if it is sharp and pointed in front and behind, without piercing the ear; if the membrane is due to an abscess or the body of the ear, then hold it with tweezers and gently peel it off until all the pus is removed.
And if the infection is deep in the ear, take a thin, delicate razor, heat it slightly in the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear. If you feel the infection that the sick person feels deeply in the ear, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the width of the aperture, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, then take a tent and moisten it in rosewater, and sprinkle powdered vitriolic stone on it; and if you see swelling in the ear, it is necessary to withdraw the tent and move another tent moistened with cerotum made from rosemary oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, take a sponge and cloth dipped in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding that are used for distilling.
of paper charcoal
This ointment comes in papers when they are moist and dry; you should therefore extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the root of a spatula; then place powdered vitriol on the site.
And if they are not removed by scraping, then cauterize them with a delicate lens-shaped cautery tool, and the cautery after the incision is beneficial; they often reappear when something remains in their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of hail
Many times they come in papers as things that look like hail in their shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called 'hailstone'. It is an accumulation of moisture, thick on the paper above and below; the treatment is as follows: if the hailstone does not move from one side to another, and it is a minor issue, then it is easy to understand. Open it with tweezers, then peel it gently from each side; if you cannot cover it without piercing the paper, it will not harm the patient. If the tear is large, there should be a stitch, and the wound treated until it is healed; but if it is small, no force should be used, as the ointment will restore it immediately and prevent infection.
And if the hematoma is descending within the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and press it with pincers; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it does not matter; and when the hematoma is pressed, wash the eye with salty water, and cure the place of that which causes infection until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinac is a fat which is woven into webs of paper above, and this happens most to children with no people, and it hurts them a lot, and the catarrh comes to them in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and because of this, they lie on their faces, sleep on top, and have moist eyelids that are swollen and covered by the appearance of the exinac which opens in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exnac coming out between them.
And the method of the operation is that the patient puts his head on yours; and then take .i. linen cloth, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that exnac contains in each part, and then put it on him; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exnac is brought together within the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moisture with a spatulum, making it no larger than the wound made for bleeding; and in various dispositions, exnac comes out of the incision according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Take therefore a piece of cloth and hold it between your fingers and thumb, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to push into the fissure so that you do not go all the way to the sphincter muscle up to the eye and injure it.
And if the external orifice opens at the beginning of the fissure, gently dilate the opening slightly so that it appears; then extract it as we have said, then moisten the cloth in vinegar and water, place it on the area, and bind with bandages.
And if there are men who grind the area and apply something to corrupt the moisture that remains; then treat it until it is healed. And if a hot abscess comes to the area, treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.Et s’il vient au leu aposteme freddure, si met sus emplaustre chaut tant qu’il est chaud; puis li met sus dous oile, et li cure de bendelz.
And if a cold abscess comes to the area, apply a hot poultice until it is warm; then apply warm oil, and treat it with bandages.
When hairs grow from papers that are different from nature, and they are enveillit, they harm themselves and cause various diseases, such as tears, softening of the papers, and albugine, leading to the destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways to treat this: either by cauterization with fire, or by using a medicine applied directly to the eye, or through incision and suturing, or via canes, depending on what I will describe.
You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the affected eye paper towards your left hand; if it is cured, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle with thread through the edge of the paper where the hair is growing, and pierce 1 thread through the upper part of the paper all the way to the edge, then turn the paper over and make an incision in the part under the paper, under the abnormal hairs, up to the sphenoid bone, following the path of the tear duct from the large lachrymal gland to the small one; then remove the thread and place a small tent made of cotton and linen underneath the paper, then draw a figure of eight on the paper, like a myrtle leaf, but the shape should depend on how much you see the divided paper rising.
And if there is a need to cut out a large amount of paper according to how soft the paper is, then make an incision along the two lines you have marked, starting from the large lachrymal gland up to the small one; and let one of the incisions be close to the normal hairs in the thickness of a hair root, then insert the needle into one of the corners of the wound, then cut off all the skin; then bring together the two edges with a single stitch using an aiguille and fine woolen thread, and wipe away any blood, and allow the excess threads on the eyelids to dry for a while if you wish, or else cut them off, then leave the stitches in place for 3-4 days; then treat the wound without stitches using drying and constricting remedies, for the paper will heal quickly once the wound is closed and the edges brought together, but stitches are painful (as the ancients say), and this method is performed without fear.
and if there is another way: and it is that you draw the paper in the form of a figure which is like the myrtle leaf, as we have described, with .iiij. notches made according to the shape which is here:
then cut out what is above with small scissors evenly according to the shape which is here:
And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with which to sew up the figure, and take another thread through the large pore, and the second thread through the small one, and bring the threads together between your fingers evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have signed, as we have described, then bring together the two lips of the wound by suturing, and heal it until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments;
and sometimes the hair of the paper is reversed; so you should use what we have said about the incision, but the suturing in one and the other is more artful.
The treatment of warts is as follows: convert the parchment and insert it according to what I have said, then make two warts by skill, and two fine threads as long as the width of the sputum and the broad part; then tie two threads at both ends where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other skillfully above what is on top of the parchment of the eye, and strain the two warts from the two formed parts; and leave it thus for several days, and the skin that is strained will die and shrivel up and fall off when it dries.
If it is slow to heal, then treat the wart until it is healed; and when the wound is closed and the parchment lifted, the hairs will no longer grow; and this is the form of the two warts that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
the work is such that you prick with a fine needle, and thread it with a fine and soft silk thread; then assemble the threads and tie them skillfully, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then prepare in the case a fine silk thread, and tie the ends of the thread; then put the patient's head into your hand; and let it be in the sun so that the work is declared, for it is a subtle and minute work, then pierce the needle all the way through the parchment to the root of the hair, and draw it out through the parchment until it comes out with the natural hair; then thread the hair into the case, if there are one or two or three or more hairs; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out through the case with the natural hair.
And if the wound is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then treat the wound underneath all the way to the root that you have assigned to it, until the wound comes out from above the opening and you see it through the eye; then treat the wound and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for 1 or 2 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, then accompany one long hair of the horse's tail, and let it grow with that one you leave it, until it is elongated and then release it.
of the eye's pus
When this disease called 'alacrity' or the pus comes in the eye, there are two ways it happens: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
And the way to treat it is that you split that soudure, and loosen its eyelids, and put in it tents of linen, and dress it until it is healed; and one must not use in its treatment things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, then the disease will return worse than before; but one should use soft things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altered and seeded, and daiquilon ointment melted in some of the oils, and wrap a tent around it, and treat it thus.
And the treasures of your cure are that you must take care that it does not heal according to its former shape; and these works which we have said are not remedies for this disease, but preventions so that it does not return to its former shape.
of the flesh that comes in the eye
This disease which lies beneath the skin is truly called "axacrati", and it has natural and accidental causes. The accident comes from wounds, cuts, cautery, and similar things; and the way to treat it is to take a needle with .i. double thread, pierce the flesh at the outer corner of the eye so that the thread passes through both eyelids, then tie the thread tightly so that the eye is pulled up and the eyelid is opened wide.
And if the shape of the papery returns to what it should be, that is good; if not, take a razor and insert it into the slit, turn the paper over, and cut  .ij. slits along the sides within the paper; let the corners of the  .ij. slits where you inserted the thread be at  .i. angle so that when they are joined together, the shape is like the shape of a letter with the name " .j. griesche"; then remove the thread, according to the quantity that his sides are cut underneath, then attach the two separated parts and sew them together with a thread of wool; then treat it as we have said with softening medicines, and tents, until it is healed.
If the disease comes from a split or a stitch or cautery, then one should make a plain slit underneath the hair of the scalp, and according to what is mentioned above; then unsheathe between the two lips of the tent, as I have said; and one must perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare remedies with all their might, so that they may bring the figure back to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is needed in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
suddenly from the scalp
When this suddenness happens to the scalp in such a way that the scalp above is separated from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then one should insert the tip of a razor underneath the scalp, and lift it upward; and press it with tweezers, until you grab what is cut into the spatulum, which is neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot bear the pain of the too-sharp spatulum cutting into the eye; and your incision, by which you peel back this membrane, should be light, so that the scalp returns to its natural shape; and all of this assembly is healed, and they sometimes produce a saline solution in the eye, and raise it with sweet water, and use a bandage; then place a tent made of linen between the scalp and the eye, and place soft wool soaked in egg yolk on top of the eye; and after the third day, use the ointment and soothing remedies until it is healed.
of the eyelid
Know that the nail is in two ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard cyst, and another which is not nervous but resembles white congealed moisture; when touched by iron and pinched with tweezers, neither can be removed. Both appearances begin at the large tear duct, growing little by little until they cover the entire eye and its sight and movement.
And the method of incision is that the patient tilts his head toward you, then he opens his eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then grab the nail with tweezers and pull it up slightly; then take a needle and thread through a horse, cow or ox hair, and double the end of the needle over, then pierce the nail with the entire needle, and tie the nail with a string and tie it above, then scrape all along the side of the nail where the tear duct is, up to the eyebrow, leaving the natural skin around the tear duct, so that by the incision the tears do not come out as usual; sometimes the nail is just stuck on the needle and thread, as we have said; then scrape it off all along the tear duct gently and with small movements.
And be careful that the tear duct does not touch the thread and break it, and that the eyelid is not pierced; after the incision, put a little powdered chalk in the eye, and make a collar of litargir, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nerved and you cannot push in the needle and the hook cannot enter, this kind of nail is often cured by medicines; they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the disease, and take the spatulum gently punctured according to this form:
And draw the nail gently, and if you see that it is not lessened and the reason approaches, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litarge and red copper and powdered chalk, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same action, until it is all removed.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid hurts the eye greatly, then suspend it on the hook, and cut off a part but not all so that the body of tears does not come in; then distill into the eye red collar made from litarge.
of the flesh which grows on the eyeball
In some people's eyes, red flesh sometimes grows over the eyeball, covering it and pressing down on the eyelids, and it looks like a rosebud; then the patient puts his head into your lap, and you work on the eye, and cut away all the flesh with suitable scissors, and hold it in place firmly; then cut away the first piece of flesh, and continue cutting carefully until it is all removed, being careful not to cut the eyeball while working on it. The incision should be made with a spatulum as described for the incision on a fingernail, using gentle force to remove the flesh, as demonstrated in this chapter.
Once the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, apply eye salve made of linseed oil mixed with red vitriol and other corrosive medicines; then cover the eye with a pad soaked in egg white to protect it from hot abscesses. If nothing remains, and the warm abscess becomes cold, and you still doubt that there is an abscess, leave the eye and treat the abscess with cooling remedies. Then return to your work on the eye until it is healed, and do the same for any other eyes with similar problems.
However, you should also know how to treat weak eyes by the natural way, and with surgery for accidental injuries; and do not insert your fingers in any of these procedures until you see that this member is suffering from that procedure.
of veins of them
Red veins that are covered above the eye, and tolerate vision and weaken the eye all day. Therefore, first, you must examine the eye, because if it is in such a state, it is out, and there is no other disease except the red vein; then treat it in this way: instruct the patient to lower their head into your lap, then gently squeeze those veins at the edge according to his judgment, and let the edges be double according to this shape:
And let two edges be gradual in one body according to this form:
Then treat the veins firmly, and draw out the blood drop by drop after another, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to bruise the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not touch the veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the vein.
And if you do not have the power to pull out all of them in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and there is assurance of a hot abscess, then begin again according to this method which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of strength:
of the eye fistula
The doctor should also examine the 'arissati' fistula: when you cure it with cautery and medicine that burns according to what I have said before, if it is not healed, then there must be a cut made over the abscess where it should remain, and all the moisture within must be drawn out until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, then it is necessary to use this instrument; and it is called an 'aspre chief', and it must be made from a very hard substance, with one end pointed like a file as shown in the present figure.
And place it on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little while until you know that the corruption has been removed; do this several times, then restore the site with drying medications.
if the site is sewn up and there is no swelling and the body of the bow is sewn up and remains so for 40 days, and it does not open and no evil occurs, you know that it has healed; if not, then you must simply open the fistula at its opening with a knife according to this form: you uncover the bone a second time with an iron and with watery medications, and when it is uncovered, take up .i. forest according to this form, and let the head of the iron be pointed, and let the staff be thinned down to the tip as you see here:
then place it on the bone over the ulcer, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then bring back the whole forest until it pierces the bone and he feels it through his finger; then restore the site with dry medications as I have taught you, and when the scabs come out and harden the site, wash the matter off at the finger; this is an easier thing for the patient.
from the output of the eye
When the eyes are fully open all around and do not disturb the nose or cause thinning, then you should ligate the patient; then cleanse the eye, then place leeches or suckers without piercing to draw out fluid; then apply a poultice made from acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla onto the eye; then tightly bind the eye with bandages and linen; the method for the linen is that you take quite soft linen, double each piece in four, then place one on top of the other according to how much the eye needs; then tightly bind it from above with a sturdy bandage, and repeat the leeches without piercing to draw out fluid; then remove the leeches and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the ligature becomes loose, you should re-bind it tightly; then remove the ligature after one day and one night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, then repeat the poultice, bandages, ligature, and leeches until it heals.
from the rupture of a woven fabric
When a tear occurs in woven fabric, it opens and reveals something like a grain of resin, which is frightening to see; therefore, if you see it covering, the work is such that you thread a needle into the root of the lower part up to the upper part, then thread another needle with a double thread through the part of the tear; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the area of the double thread and tie one part of the fabric tightly, then pull out the needle and place wet woolen cloth on the eye; and leave it until the threads tear with the fabric, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound heals; and sometimes the wound is constrained by the fabric on each side in a circle of cloth, until it heals.
And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce them with a thin spatulum which comes from the bottom of the eye, and scrape away the white moisture and bring the eyes down, and enter in immediately; then extract it until it is healed.
from the corner of the eye
This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but an inflammation which gathers in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water; and the appearance of its treatment is that you make the patient sit upright and still, then take his head in your hands from both sides and move him until you see the corner of the eye coming to the front of your eyes; then let it settle there, and don't let the light go away and have the patient see things as he used to; and if it doesn't go under, know that it is water, and if the corner of the eye isn't appearing as we have said, make the patient sit between your hands, then take a thin spatulum and press on the surface of the cornea with the conjunctiva and the corona until the water comes out; and when it is discharged, distill into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek that has been boiled and honey, then let it be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
of the eye waters
We have the appearances of the diseases in the division, and what is necessary to pierce; then act according to health. You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light so as not to be affected by the sun, and tie up the healthy eye tightly; then place the paper over the eye, on your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or your right hand if they are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument alongside the crown by the thickness of a hair in that white part of the eye to the point where the tear duct is smallest, then push the instrument called 'almagda' skillfully, and turn your hand so that it pierces through the white of the eye, and feel that 'almagda' comes into the empty space; and the measure of the path of 'almagda' should be at the bottom of the space between the pupil and the edge of the iris; this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the horn-like tissue, and then place the instrument where the aqueous humor is, then express it beneath one pathway after another. If the aqueous humor flows out now, the patient can see in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After a short rest, if the aqueous humor flows back up the second pathway, push it down with the instrument, and when it is firmly lodged and does not flow up again, gently remove 'almagda' by turning your hand a little; then put in a little more sealed oil gem, and leave it in the eye. Then place a soaked cotton or wool pad in rose oil and egg white on top of the eye, and tie it with the healthy eye. We, and those of our time, apply crushed comfrey with plenty of egg white.
And if  'almagda' cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called  'alberit', which has this shape:
And so pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make a small slit, then put in almond milk, as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare for the patient a dark room where he can sleep on his back in a dark place; and keep him still from all movements, and give him light food, and do not let him move his head or to the right or to the left, and tie him according to his condition until the third day; then untie him in that same dark room, and test his sight, and show him some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but you should lighten it, so that the water rises gently.
And if a hot abscess comes, you must untie the eye before the seventh day, and use what soothes the abscess; and when it is soothed, untie the sight and put on an eyelid cover to cover one eye, and then stay in that dark room. And then leave the house little by little, and return to his normal state; and know that no student should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from Iraq, who told us that in his country they pierce and put almond milk into it, so that water is drawn out, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps this is a new thing.Et s’il vient a l’oil que le tenebros ne peut estre remedeiz par nullis de cestz chapitrez, que tu deslie la veue et la metes en son leu, car il ne se pourait mie remedeer.
And these are the appearances of the shapes of almagest , because those who do not know them will see them; and they are properly of iron:
And the heads of the needles have this same subtlety, and the hindmost are pointed in three angles.
of the eye through the nostril
Sometimes, there are various types of growths that emerge from the nostrils, some of which resemble scorpions with multiple legs; and among these, there are those with a dark-colored swelling, and others with a light-colored lump. Therefore, for the latter type of growth, you should make the patient stand facing the sun, pinch his nose shut, pour the medication onto the growth, and pull it outwards; then, as far as you can endure it, use a delicate needle to pierce the growth from one side, until you are sure that the entire growth has been removed.
And if there remains any thing which we cannot cover, then open it at all .i. of the subtle instruments slightly, so that nothing remains; and if without you are overwhelmed, or abscess bad, then dry it as it should be; and if it is malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize it until the blood is stained and all the flesh is removed, then pour or neat's milk and water or wine.
And if the ear works, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not break through as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, because the instruments do not come to cut: therefore you must put into the ear a thread of linen about half a finger thick, and let it hang from the hand, and have between each knot a distance of one or two fingers; and let the patient hold the end of the thread in his mouth with all his strength, and draw it through until it comes out through the nose; and many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it; then hold the end that comes out of the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth in the other hand, and pull them gently towards you alternately while holding them steady. Do this until you know that the thread has corrupted the flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the ear as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh; and then put a plug of pitch in the nose for a few days until it is healthy, and if medicine is needed to dry it, then use it. This is the form of the instrument to clean the ear, with which one distils oils and medicines into the ear.
And it should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and it should have a handle to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid. And if you wish, make a closed cane, and let the instrument be hollow to clean out the ear; and have a plug in the ear to hold it while heating the oil or other liquid.
of the heart through the nose
Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the tip of the nose; it grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye. Therefore, you should cut it at the beginning and remove all the pus; then apply fire cautery or burning medicine. If you delay cutting it until it becomes large, take care that it is not hard, of dark color, or insensate: do not touch it with iron, for this is a deep abscess. For when it is cut once, great harm comes to the patient. If the abscess is due to touch and not to dark color, and you see that it can be entirely covered, then empty the wound and cut it without fear, cleansing the area of dry and constricting substances.
when the nose is cut and sewn
You should know that when pus comes from a broken cartilage, it does little good in some people. Therefore, whenever this happens to anyone, you should examine whether the wound is fresh and full of blood; then bring together the .ij. lips with one stitch, then cleanse it until it heals. If the lips are dislocated on both sides, you should scorch all the parts of their skin until they heal, then bring together the .ij. lips with a stitch, tighten them, and apply powdered dragon's blood and incense; place a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster over the powders, leave it to dry by itself, then cleanse it with ointment until it heals.
The manner of sewing is that you prepare the thread: either with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly; or with a thread, as I have already informed you.
of lip abscesses
At home, there are hard abscesses inside the lips, resembling grains of wheat, smaller and larger; therefore, you must twist the lips, and slit them at each end, then grab them with tweezers and cut into each part; then apply vitriated quicklime to the incision until the blood is stanched; and then leave it with garlic, and treat the area with dry substances until it heals.
of gum swelling
Many times a growth arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albus"; you should hold it with tweezers, and cut at its root, and let the blood or pus run out; then apply powdered vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders, over the site. If the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again, and cauterize it; if it does not return after the cautery, that is how you treat an abscess.
from filth
Sometimes there are growths at the base of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, which are unsightly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green, due to corruption in the gums, and they smell bad; you should make the patient hold his jaw open and expose the teeth or gums, removing everything until it is clean; and thus you should treat blackness, yellowness, greenness, and other discoloration, until they are cleaned. If what was removed at first returns, it is good; if not, then do it again the next day and the day after, until everything is removed. Know that teeth require various types of instruments for cleaning, depending on what the job shows you, so that the instruments used to clean between the teeth have different forms from those used to clean the gums; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat a toothache that you delay pulling the tooth only as long as you can, because it should not be done; for it is a very serious matter to pull a tooth without cause. Therefore, when the patient is forced to pull, you must be certain about the tooth. Many times, the pain deceives the patient and thinks it is in the good tooth, and pulls out the good tooth; and yet the pain does not go away because of this, as long as the bad tooth remains, for we have already wanted to do this to these patients. And when you are certain about the tooth, you must scrape around the tooth all around strongly to push back the gum from all sides; then move it with your fingers or with small tweezers into the first pocket and pocket, until it is well loosened, then hold the tweezers firmly. And let the patient's head be between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Then pull out the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it slightly into each side, and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and rotten, you must fill the holes with cotton, where the holes are; and then hold it firmly with tweezers so that it does not break when pulling; and you must work very gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful not to break it and leave a part of it, and bring back greater pain to the patient through the malice of the root than before. And beware that you do not do as the ignorant surgeons do, who often in their haste and arrogance break the tooth, and do not pay attention to what we have said; but sometimes they bring great illness through the holes made by the roots that remain, or by breaking the tooth, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine or garlic and vinegar; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, then apply powdered vitriol to the site; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, which make the teeth loose first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
And they should be made of thick metal so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made iron, and they should be toothed to grip the roots.
of the tooth roots When the root remains during pulling, you should put wet cotton on the area for one or two days, until the gums are softened. Then, use tweezers called "algefri", which make the gums look like a doctor's beak. They should be made inside like a file, and this is their shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, you must uncover the skin all around the root, and insert the instrument called "althali", that is, a spatula, whose shape is as follows:
Let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through it, that is good; if not, use all the instruments, whose shapes come later:
And one can also use this instrument with .ij. fingers, whose shape is as follows:
and other tools which are in front of the reason for the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, whose shape is as follows:
Let this instrument be so strong that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise, subtle master finds his own instrument according to what his work and the illness show him, for there are many illnesses where the ancients did not teach an instrument because of the variety of causes. And if it does not break in the bone or in any of the other bones, but protrudes, then he searches for the instruments that he needs, which I have told you about, and helps with gestures, by which these are the forms: And let them be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone, so that it does not slip but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with suitable medicines. And if there is a protuberance in the bone, and it is small, then treat it with this instrument:
When a tooth appears not according to nature, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, you should know whether the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in its proper place, and cannot be filed or ground down. Then pull it out; and if there is an air pocket with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is like a small beak, and let it be made of iron with a pointed end:
And tap it gently day by day because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent that it can be ground down, then grind it with a file like this, in the shape shown:
and it is like the lime that needles are made from; and with lime gently prick the tooth little by little day after day, so that it does not move until it falls out; then smooth it completely at the end with a file, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, file down the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
when the tooth is loose
When the front teeth loosen, by a blow or falling, and the patient cannot chew without spitting it out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines without success; then they must be restrained with a gold wire, because silver wires turn green and rust, but gold never moves; and the wire should not be too thin or too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth. And if you want to direct the teeth, take the wire and wrap it twice around the two healthy teeth, then place the loose tooth in between, whether there is one or more, so that you reach the bleeding to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then start covering again from where you began, and pull your hand gently and firmly, so that it does not move; and the ligature should be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then twist the wire with pliers, and assemble them, and reinsert them between the healthy tooth and the loose one, so that it does not cut the tongue; and then leave it tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the wire breaks, then restrain it with another wire. It will stay like this all his life, and this is the shape of the teeth and the form of how to direct the two healthy teeth and the two loose ones, as you see:
And when a tooth falls out, if one is put in its place, fresh after fresh, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and experienced should attempt this, and sometimes the shape of a tooth is made from a cow's bone, and it is put in the place where there is a defect, and it is restrained as we have said, and it stays and serves for a long time.
cut off the hair of the tongue
At times this ligament comes from under the tongue as a birth defect, or it can result from an abscessed wound. The treatment is to open the mouth of the patient, tilt their head back, and lift up the tongue. Then cut the thick nervous ligament, making sure that the tongue is loosened from its socket. If there is any hardening due to an abscess, cut it open and treat the wound. Be careful not to cut too deeply into the artery underneath. Once you're finished, raise the affected area with a poultice of rosewater and garlic, or with cold water. Then place a tent made of linen under the tongue, and every night apply a blistering agent to the wound so that it doesn't heal closed. If there is any bleeding, apply crushed vitriol; if not, cauterize with a lentigo cautery, which is suitable for this purpose. Once the wound is healed, treat it with other treatments as needed.
And if you see it is black or hard and the patient doesn't feel any pain, then don't touch it, as it is likely a cancerous growth. If it is declining towards a blister and there is moisture, pierce it with a needle and release the fluid with a gentle spatulum, opening it from both sides. If bleeding occurs due to your intervention, apply crushed vitriol until it stops, then return to your treatment until all the pus is drained. Raise the affected area with poultices of garlic and salt, and treat the wound with other remedies until it is healed.
from abscesses in the throat
Sometimes bumps called "godath" appear in the throat, and they are properly called tonsils. When you treat them as described in the section on tonsillitis, and they do not heal, be careful: if they are hard abscesses of small size and a dark color, do not touch them with iron. If they are red and the root is thick, do not touch them with iron either, to prevent bleeding; but let them be until they rupture on their own. If they are white and the root is thin, prepare an instrument for cauterization, but first check that the abscesses have subsided and are calm. Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with his head tilted back, and the surgeon holding a piece of cloth between his teeth and pressing the tongue down under the instrument, which should be made of silver or thin brass like a small knife.
Then press the tongue down with the instrument and you will see the abscess. Take a pair of tweezers and grab it, pulling it out of the tonsil and up towards the surface as far as possible; pull some threads from the cloth along with it, then cover the instrument again, which should be shaped like a hook, to create a grip, and is made of either iron or copper.
If you do not have this instrument available, use tweezers, which should be shaped like a hook:
And it has a sharp point on one end and a flat edge on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, cut the other in the same way, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and with water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, gargle the patient with water, or with peels of pomegranates that have been cooked, or with myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses besides the two tonsils appear in the throat, so cut them thus as the two tonsils are cut.
I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely, one abscess of small size; and she had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the opening which was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had stayed like that for one or two more days. And the abscesses had risen up so much that they had pushed two teeth out of their sockets. I hurried therefore at once, and made an incision in one of the openings, then removed a large amount of pus; then I made another cut in the other opening of the throat, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I inserted the knife into the abscesses, and cut out part of it, and only a little blood came out; thus the throat of the woman was unblocked, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to cut that abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again, filling up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; so I packed it with a poultice and cauterized it inside her throat; thus it stopped growing. And I left those parts, and did not know what happened to her afterwards.
of the grape
When the lens has descended into the pupil, and it is swollen and it is long, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round beneath, then it is called an "uve." When it has been cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the coat of the abscess is pacified, and it is thin; and it is round and not long; and it is blood-red or yellow or black, then you should avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger in doing so. Therefore, when you see it, according to its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the pupil, and draw it underneath, and cope with it using one of the two instruments which I mentioned for the incision of the two almond-shaped areas. And you must not cope beyond the natural limit, for if you do, it will harm his voice and speech. After the incision, use what we said about the incision of the two almond-shapes, and cure it until it is healed. And if the patient fears having it copped, then you should use a cautery on him without fear. The manner of cauterization is as follows: The patient puts his head on your healthy shoulder, and then presses his tongue against the instrument which we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and applies it with live coals so that they are not too thick or too hot; and use the tip of this instrument, whose shape is thus:
And it has a handle on its head where the medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and you place the instrument with all the medicine on the pupil; and the patient lies on his side, so that the saliva and mucus from the medicine run out of his mouth and do not go down into his throat and lungs. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the pupil for the duration of half an hour, until you see it become numb and the bites of the medicine are pacified. And if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton on top, so that the cotton sticks to the pupil; and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and remove it after four or five days. And if you need to renew the cautery with medicine, then renew it, and after the cautery, wash around the pupil with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and use a cold compress, and treat it with gargles until it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision or cautery. If it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calamin, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, wormwood, and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and add garlic, and let it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with strong earth, and in the pot there is one instrument with a handle shaped thus: And be of silver or bronze, and put one of the heads into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is mortified; after that, repeat often, until the eye dries out, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the occurrence of a hot abscess, for many things happen then; and do not do this except at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put inside it an egg-shell, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the egg-shell will not let the vapor burden the mouth, and this is a good and safe treatment.
Many times a bone or fish spine, or some object, gets stuck in the throat; so you must try to remove what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with the whole instrument, so that you can move the object; and if it does not come out and is lodged in the throat, you should make the patient vomit until the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry piece of bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the spot, it will lodge there, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have described, take an instrument of lead according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and let the head be raised upward; and beware of touching the epiglottis, lest it be torn, nor push the bone in; and move the patient's head so that he vomits, in order to dislodge the object; then he swallows the instrument, so that he can dislodge the object; if he cannot swallow it, then pull it out with the whole instrument, equally, until it is out.
of the saliva of the throat
Sometimes the saliva is treated with medicine, as I have said in the classification, by applying remedies; and if this does not help, then examine the throat of the patient facing the sun, then press his tongue with the instrument I told you about. And if you see the saliva, pull it out with a small hook, or use fine tweezers that are suitable for this purpose. If this doesn't work, take a long needle and put it in the patient's throat, then heat the needle, and do this frequently. If the patient has a fever all day, take a glass of cold water, open his mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, moving his jaw often; as soon as the saliva feels the water, it will come out.
And if it doesn't work as we have said, then smoke the patient's throat with assafetida, using the instrument I described for smoking the throat; do this many times, because it will work without delay. The method of smoking is to place burning charcoal in a pot with a perforated lid, and insert the tip of the instrument through the hole; then blow your smoke into the instrument, and have the patient put the needle in his mouth and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches the saliva; the saliva will come out now, and if it doesn't work, then repeat the smoking many times. Let the patient be thirsty, and eat salted and sour foods, and drink no water; and then he will need to urinate.
And the shape of the instrument used to pull the saliva is, when you can see it, similar to curved tweezers that can enter the throat; it should be shaped like a surgeon's forceps, with roughness from lime so that it can grasp and not let go; here is its shape:
the chapter on abscesses
There are many types of abscesses, depending on their appearance, as the recollections in this book from various sources show, and they differ in how they are punctured and in their size. They occur in two ways: either according to their appearance or according to the location in the body. An abscess in the head is different from one in the fundament, and an abscess in fleshy tissue is different from one that occurs in joints, and each requires a different treatment.
And in some abscesses, one must not puncture them until the pus is mature according to its completion; and there are some that one must puncture when they are mature, or they will not complete their digestion, as with those near joints. For when an abscess occurs near a joint, if you let it become purulent all around, the ligament and nerve of the joint may become corrupted, causing contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the principal organ, if you delay piercing it until it is mature, it will harm the principal organ; or if it is near the fundament, one must pierce it so that it may mature; and one should not puncture a mature abscess before its digestion is complete, except for those near the fundament, which may become purulent and prolonged inside without causing fistula, and will heal in a reasonable time.
And one should know the time of piercing an abscess that is mature according to its digestion, and it is when the pain has subsided, and the decrease in fever, and the lessening of swelling and redness, and the improvement in appetite and the appearance of pus; and one must pierce where the abscess is most dependent, and where there are signs of pus forming. And the piercing should be at a distance from the heart, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints affecting nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no folding of the skin.
Here, [you should] treat according to the affected member. And when an abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is best that you leave the puncture until it is fully healed and digested, as we have said. For if you pierce it earlier, it will lengthen the body from which the venom comes, and it will fill with filth; and the lips and depths of it may harden. And for some abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs. And one should treat small abscesses with small punctures, and large abscesses with large punctures, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where one must pierce the heart, and cover it when it has become like a drape, and is deadened, one should do as one does with blisters. And there are some that are split into three angles, and some which are covered like the leaf of a bay tree, as with abscesses of the fingernails; and some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions, and similar covers.
Those without a head, such as a superficial abscess, should be punctured directly; and when the abscess is large and has drawn a great deal of pus, one should not draw out all the pus at once, but only a portion; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more pus; do this repeatedly until all the pus comes out. This is especially important if the patient is weak, a woman, a small child, or an elderly person. For sometimes the pus will spurt out with the opening of the abscess and the patient may die from it without your realizing it. So be very cautious with this chapter; after you have punctured your abscess, wash the wound, and examine whether the wound of the abscess is small. If it is a plain incision, dress it with tents made of linen or old cotton; if it is a large abscess with many punctures, you should stuff each puncture with a tent so that they press against one another. If you have cut into the skin of the abscess and spread it open, then fill it with dry cotton or a lining of a linen dress without moisture, and leave it for three days; then remove it and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding from your work, then apply cold water and vinegar, and moisten a cloth, and place it over the bleeding area repeatedly. And if the bleeding continues, apply a regime and treatment, and the powders I have described earlier in this book; and if it is winter, and the area is very nervous, then you should place moistened tents and cloths that have been warmed in wine and hot oil over the area. If it is summer, and the area is fleshy, then moisten the cloths with water and oil, or cold wine and oil, for three days as we have said; then loosen the abscess, wash and treat it, as appropriate, until it is healed.Et se li apostemes est en leu nervouseux, si covient que tu mettes sus drapelz em aigue et vin, et oile, et l’eschaude, et ponses par maintes fois; et se c’est ou tens de l’iver, si mets sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en aigue chaude, et en vin chaut, et en oile; et se li leus est charnu, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz em aigue et vin froit, et en oile, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit.  Et puis deslie l’aposteme, et essue la plaie, et cure, si com il covient; et se li bowe est mout grant, si traie tentes derechief; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement, si com il covient tant qu’il soit sanez.
And so it is necessary to understand generally in the treatment of abscesses; now I have told you how one must go about treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
of sores
Or of the head come small abscesses, and they are like those of people who are in cloth, like the jowls of a guinea-hen, and there are many similar ones. Some are fatty and some have pus; and there are some that are hard and stony in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery doesn't cause problems. The action of the jaw is such that you should test all instruments, called 'entromissoires', from which the form comes, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then draw it out from above the long bone. And when the moisture has been drained, then scrape off the skin that contains the moisture, for it will heal as it dries; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and salt, and apply this to the wound and leave it until the next day, and then repeat with the cotton as before on the second and third days, until you are sure that it no longer contains any moisture; then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it heals. And if the abscess contains a hard knot, cut it according to the following form from above, and gouge out its roots, and scrape away all around it, and apply all your treatment to drawing out the pus from under the coat in which it lies; and if the artery causes problems, then do as I told you later. And also do this for an abscess that is stony, in terms of texture, and in terms of treating it, just as I told you.
And the incision on a moist and stony abscess is easier, for they contain little blood. And there are some abscesses on the head where there is no moisture, and among these was one that I opened on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a pebble, rough and white, and could not be broken up; if anyone had cut it, they would have caused a wound like a stone. Other abscesses coming on the head, before those that come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should be made as low as possible so that the pus can flow out; and treat them as appropriate.
of scrofula
Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere in the body, and they are numerous, and are interconnected with each other. Each scrofula is properly located within its coat, as we have said for the vein and the abscess of the head; and there are many similarities among these scrofulas. Some contain moisture, and some are malignant and will not respond to treatment. So when you see one that has a good disposition, and resembles the color of the body, and is flat on each side, and is not adherent to the nerves of the neck, nor to the artery or duct, and is not deep; then you should cut it from above, and scrape away the skin from every part, and if necessary, you should use the two lips of the heart as we have described for abscesses in the head. Then gently pull it out bit by bit, being careful not to cut any nerve or vein, nor let the spatulum dig too deeply, so that the hand does not slip, and do not go too far ahead, so you don't cut anything you shouldn't.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it will not let you work on it, then put in the wound powdered glass, or some powder that stops bleeding, and tie off the wound; and leave it until the abscess is resolved, and the wound softens and begins to suppurate. And when the blood has clotted, return to your work, until you have finished it; then seek with your finger if there are any small scrofulas remaining, and cut and clean them. And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, then do not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread, and let it hang by that; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you scrape all the scrofula, you should bring together the two lips of the wound and stitch them now, since there is no longer any surplus due to the size of the scrofula. Then you should attend to covering the root of it, pulling it out and stitching as we have said. For those scrofulae that hold a surplus, pierce where it appears dead; and pierce in the same way as the one previously mentioned, hanging a tent with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, cure it with ointment mixed with charcoal until it is healed.
of scrofula
The ancients spoke of cutting the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the written account of their words.
For those with scrofula, it is necessary to cut the throat, which is called the "epiglottis"; and one should not make an incision through this, because all the veins and the lungs are affected by the disease in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits. When the illness is in the channel of the lungs, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we must split it below three or four circles, or a small slit across, between two circles, or according to the amount of the slit in the soft palate; not in the cartilage.
and those places where it is suitable to split the epiglottis so that there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long within.
And if the master is fearful, he should extend the skin of the throat to the entire opening, then split the soft palate as far as the uvula; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cover the soft palate as we have said.
and is demonstrated by the section of the blood vessel of the finger which jumped out through the place which is broken, and by the failure of the voice;
and leave the wound open a little.
And when the hour has passed of which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the heart, and heal it all along without the cartilage; then administer remedies that promote healing, until it is healed.
Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely healed, and the patient is judged dead, and the lack of breath. Therefore, press on the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
and for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the maliciousness of the disease had passed, and it passes in 3 or 4 days. And therefore they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, as soon as it was cured;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a young maiden take .i. knife and stab herself in the throat, slicing through some of the windpipe;
and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
I uncovered the wound and found that the blood had not come out through the throat or windpipe but instead was escaping through the wound itself.
I hurried and sewed up the wound, healing her as best I could;
and had not the maid been bled, and returned after to her natural state;
therefore I say that in cutting the epiglottis one should have no fear.
of the large throat
This hernia is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess in the color of ash, and it occurs mostly in women;
and it is according to two ways: natural and accidental; where nature has no cause.
And the accident happens in two ways, one of which is similar to a boil that comes out of our veins, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and one should not operate with force unless in the smallest part, and test and examine throughout the entire opening: if you find it like a boil, and cannot push through at all, then cut it as one cuts a boil, and treat it throughout its entire depth, if there is nothing inside; and surround it well, and treat it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
of us
There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe in detail.
and now I must explain the difference between a dislocation and an issue.
I say that discharge is hot and feverish, as long as the boil has not passed, and the pus is completed; then the fever and heat subside.
With the nose, there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains a sinus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a pimple, and becomes large.
And they are according to their appearances, either greasy or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
When you come to the treatment of the nose, you should first test and examine it with an instrument called an "introducer", according to what its shape comes from in the following chapter.
And the manner of inquiring into abscesses in the brain is to press on the dampest spot you find in the abscess, and gradually turn your fingers this way and that, until you feel the instrument has penetrated the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
then withdraw the trocar, and be careful in case it jumps out.
If the flowing pus is clear, whatever color it has, treat it as I have described for other abscesses;
and if after the trocar no pus comes out, know that it is dense, so treat it in the shape of a cross, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape off the crust on each side and guard the wound where it lies so you draw it clean with the needle;
and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will return to us many times;
and if some remains and the pain troubles you, then employ corrosive powders on the wound, and constrict the wound, and apply hot ointments for abscesses, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and if the wound is large, then cut the .10. lips of the wound, and treat it with that which causes pus.
and if the vein pulsating is contrary or other, you hurry and apply powdered vitriol to the spot, and leave it for 2 days or 3, until the wound suppurates, and the blood flow subsides; then return to cover what has remained of the night.
Here are the forms of the probing instruments, which come in 3 varieties: large, medium and small; and there are 3 squares, which are called 'albaret', and 1 that is called 'breb', and there are of 3 kinds: large, medium and small, for surrounding abscesses of fistula;
and are also like the needles used to sew sorcerers' charms, and are made of brass, iron or silver, and those that are yellow are best, and are more proven with black pitch for surrounding the channels of fistula;
and there are 3 kinds: large, medium and small, depending on the size of the opening of the fistula.
The forms of warts are very varied, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are warts that have two curves in three ways as well.
and some warts that have three curves and are in three places as well; and some warts that have two curves, and are only in one place, but in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
The main ones that are cut are sharp, and there are some that only cut on one side, so that the vein or nerve is not cut;
and these intrusions are placed in wounds, so that the patient does not perceive it when opening abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you can see;
and we do not use them except in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar places.
and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling the shape of a pair of forceps, according to this form, with which blood is stanched:
and it is sometimes placed in the place that heals by filling the veins and arteries, and sometimes they are filled according to this great form:
At times the breasts of some men swell when they become corrupt, so that they look like women's breasts.
and remain ugly and swollen; and if anyone wants to cure them, they should treat them according to the form given in this chapter from line b to g: then scrape off the fat and clean the wound with a cauterizing agent, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches and let it heal;
and if the breast shrinks and becomes soft due to its size, as it does in women, then cut it in two similar slits; so that one holds the other at their end, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line [b] up to the line [g]. then scrape the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely done, because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then you should fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and let it remain until it dissolves the remnants and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the armpits
These abscesses that come from under the armpits are like hard scrofula and they have nodules, and some contain moisture.
Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b. to the line g.: And when all the content of the abscess is drained, then fill the wound with clean cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and dress it with suitable ointment until it heals.
And if the abscesses are like scrofula, then treat them as we have said for fissures of scrofula, and if the wound is closed, then administer cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sewn shut, then abscesses often form, and likewise the vein swells and becomes abscessed.
And if one knows this is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. and when you feel it with your fingers, you will feel a dislocation; and when it is in the vein, there is a visible swelling;
and it is folly to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and on the arms and neck, and in many other places; it is very large. Therefore, one should avoid the use of iron, and that which is at the head, one should also avoid, and in that which is inflammation of an artery, they should cut through the skin from above.
Therefore, one should avoid the use of iron, and that which is at the head, one should also avoid, and in that which is inflammation of an artery, they should cut through the skin from above. then perform the incision with a scalpel, and carefully cut the artery from the threads, so that it is exposed;
then put a needle underneath it, and pierce it all the way to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in .ii. places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the .ii. arteries which are in the temples;
then pierce the place between the .ii. threads of an instrument so that the pus comes out and the abscess is relieved;
then apply the treatment that causes bleeding, until the thread comes undone; then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed;
and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, then you must hold in your hand as much of the pus from the abscess to the skin, then insert the needle under the area you are holding in your hand and pierce it, and use a double thread so that you can pull it from the other side; then ligate the abscess, as I told you, on one of its two sides with the thread;
and if you doubt that the thread will hold, insert another needle through the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads tight in four places;
then lance the abscess until the pus issues forth, then lance the superficiality of the chest and leave what is attached.
then place on it a moist bandage soaked in wine and oil, then administer poultices and ointments until it is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Also, as abscesses come in the artery and vein, they also come in the nerves when they are injured, or from too great exertion, and similar things.
And this happens most often in the shoulders and in the hips, and everywhere there are joints, and it is a deep abscess, and its colour resembles the colour of the body, and in many places it has no pain.
And when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the surface of the body but deep inside.
And it is silent in all parts, and does not go forward or backward, down or up, and for those who are in joints, one should not use a hot iron, lest there be contraction.
And for those who are on the head or forehead, they should apply the spatumile to the skin. If the abscess is small, hold it with tongs and cut it at its base;
and if it is large, they suspend it with a hook, then cut it open and remove the bone, and sew up the wound to heal it.
of large, hanging Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance to oats, and it has a subtle root and the scabs are thick. There are small ones and very large ones;
and I saw a man who had two in his belly which looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were split open, and moisture was flowing out of them.
I examined them and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces; and the treatment for this is to look if the swelling is moist, and if the color of the joint is white and moist with a thin root,
if the wound is large and deep, and if the blood flows freely, then hurry to use the cautery. For often in deep wounds there are great flowings of blood, and if it flows away, then quickly use the cautery;
and if you see the patient terrified and fearful of the cut with the knife, then take a well-made thread and tie off the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to twist the thread of the finger until it dislocates the joint, and piece by piece without effort; and if the roots are large, then have fear in dislocating it for the belly, but you can certainly dislocate half.
then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to dislocate the testicle which is of a dusky color and poor sensation and milky appearance.
For this is a deep abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers next.
when the boil has burst
If the appearance of a hernia comes from cauterization of a wound or a fissure in the syphilis, and it is on the belly and some of the bowels, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from flatulence;
and if it is from the rupture of syphilis and from the exit of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a slight thing without pain, and it opens from various exits. And if it is from the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it pops out, and then returns in, and sometimes it is dried up, and increases a lot at the entrance of the bath and through hard work.
And if it is from moisture, it is a slight thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrict at all; and if it is from blood, it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a certain quantity;
and if it is due to windiness, then there is swelling in the area, and the treatment is to look at whether the appearance is caused by blood from an artery or vein, or windiness. If it is necessary to let the wound heal. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bowel, then you must instruct the patient to hold his breath and be completely still, then sign all around the belly; then command him to lie down quickly between your hands, then go around the area you have marked for the entire spasm. then cut through the top half of the abscess to the large nail;
then open the top half of the extended abscess over the string, and push your finger in, and feel for the intestine; if you find it stuck to the intestine, loosen it and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
and if you find the gallbladder, take it at its base and cut away the excess.
and if the artery or vein causes resistance, then go around it carefully and return to your work. Take two needles, thread them with strong thread, and insert the needles where you made the cross-shaped incision.
Then, pull the abscess in four directions using the needles, and if you can, remove the needles and let the area drain until it is clean. Scrape away any dead flesh. or cut it when it is small and tender, then treat the wound as needed, and lance the abscess as we have said.
or cut it when it is small and tender, then treat the wound as needed, and lance the abscess as we have said. and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as needed and bind it up.
for sores
We have discussed the types of sores and how to treat them with medicine, including cauterization with iron; now we shall speak of sores appearing in the throat, and great care is needed in their treatment. Ancient scholars say that when sores appear in places where they can be reached by scraping, such as on the nipples, thighs, or other similar areas, they should be completely removed at their onset. However, once they become large and chronic, one should not attempt to treat them, for I have never seen anyone healed from such sores, nor has anyone ever been healed from them before me.
And the operations, when it is in place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you sometimes purge the patient of black bile; then make him bleed if he has manifest fullness; then prepare the site for the operation; then shave the area around the ulcer and the head of the wound, and the bone all around without leaving anything; and let the blood run out completely, and squeeze well the site with your hand or something, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein makes you feel uncomfortable, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat the wound with other treatments until it heals.
of dropsy We have already discussed the appearances of dropsy and how the accumulation of fluid is caused, as well as the signs of each type of dropsy, and the treatment through medicine and surgery. Now we will focus on the latter; you should not use surgery for two types of dropsy: tympany and hydroperitoneum, as these are very dangerous conditions. So, if you are treating a patient with dropsy that is called "eclites," and medication does not help, then consider whether the patient is weak or has other ailments besides dropsy, such as digestive issues and similar conditions; in such cases, do not use surgery, as there is a risk of complications. However, if the patient is strong and their only issue is dropsy, and they are neither too young nor too old, then you may proceed with the following surgical treatment: Take the patient by the right hand and press his belly to force out the urine into the lowest part of the penis. Then take a spatulum according to this form: It should be pointed at both ends, but not so narrow that it can enter all the way to the intestines when inserted, nor so wide that it can cause bleeding.
Then examine if the hydropsy is in the intestines: You should split beneath the navel on the right side three fingers' width deep. If it's due to liver disease, then the split should be on the left side three fingers' width deep; and if it's due to the spleen, then on the right, and the patient must not lie on the split so that the excess fluids do not flow into that weak area.
Then pierce all the way through to the instrument, and stop up the urethra, and pull your hand away from the spatulum in between the skin and the glans, as if skinning to the thickness of a fingernail or nail; then pierce the glans until the spatulum reaches the desired depth, and that is the location of the hydropsy. Then pull it out and stop up this instrument which is like a small silver needle, made of brass or light bronze, with a small hole on the underside; three holes on one side, two on the other, and one on the opposite side; the tip is shaped like a feather, and that is the form of the incision from which scribes cut feathers.
at the head of this instrument is the alemele, so that when the instruments come to water, they now descend upon the instrument; empty therefore half or one third part, for if you empty more than is fitting in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit through the weapon, or he will faint away, or he will approach death;
but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the malady indicate, and his pulses; then withdraw the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the heart that blocks the orifice that is above the syphus, of which I have spoken, which you pierce in this manner; then renew the instrument on the following day if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw off a small quantity of water;
do this on one day, and beware of following it up until there remains but a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave in much water, then use the cure of sepulture or hot sand, and with much sweating in a bath and in the sun, and drink no wine; and the cure of medicines that are drying, as far as he is healed, and cauterize upon the stomach and upon the liver and upon the spleen after the drawing off of the water, just as I said before.
of the stopping of the penis Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small opening, or it is not in its place. In this case, he must immediately pierce it with a very thin spatulum according to this shape: then put into the opening a very thin piece of lead, and tie it and hold it there for three or four days; and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, and then replace it. And perhaps it is not necessary, because the urine that comes out will not let it close. Those whose opening is small, if they are treated with the lead plug as we have said, will be enlarged. Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are troubled, for some are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, and because of this they cannot urinate without lifting their penis upward; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the glans, and this is a serious illness.
And the way to treat it is for the patient to lie on his back, then the head and glans of the penis are raised up like a feather, as thick as a pen, so that the opening is in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding which often occurs there, and if it does, stanch the flow with something that stops blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of pustules on the penis Many times this albata occurs on the penis, and it is an ugly-looking growth; there are both malignant and non-malignant types; therefore you must take them with a small, sharp knife, cut them and clean them all, then put wet cotton in Egyptian ointment on top; then cure with thin ointment until they are healed. And if the albata is malignant, of a pus color and foul-smelling, then you must apply cautery. When you have cut it, and if the albata is in the head of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the albata that is inside; and when it is healed, cure the outside. For if you cure them together, the penis will not be secure from being pierced, and blackness and corruption will come in its head and testicles; so cut away all that is black and rotten, then apply ointment of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and rosebuds, then cure with other cures until it is healed.
And if the albata is in the penis and cannot be removed from the skin, then cut it and cure with ointment of wax and pomegranate bark and rosebuds and flour, and anoint the albata with honey; then apply cautery, and it will be healed.
and if it is difficult to treat this, you should cut into it with a spatumile at the tip of the penis and scrotum; then gently pull apart, and place a fine wet linen cloth in cold water, so that it does not dry out again.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not a matter of continence like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this act of our own will, and properly on infants, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest cut for their salvation.
I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their infants, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experimentation.
For I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who perform circumcision all around the foreskin, some forcefully, and on all new borns; thus, the head of the penis would become inflamed as there are two membranes, and by chance one gets pushed upwards while the other remains underneath.
Then they cover it again, and the pain becomes doubled, and at the purification which is done on the foreskin isn't secured the tip of the member; and at the purification of the nail sometimes the cautery slips and ruins the work, and many times they are born such that they don't need purification, and I have seen this.
Of the purification that is done forcefully all around the thread of hair, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly both above and below.
For when you press your hand, you cut evenly all around the thread; but let the thread be well wrapped around the skin; and let the manner of the first operation be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the penis, and then let him move it in every way he can. then have him stand upright between your hands, and hide the strength in your hands or under your feet so that the infant does not see it, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and breathe or blow on the heart, and pull it up until the head of the penis is inside; then cleanse it well of the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the place marked with a double thread, then tie it underneath from .i. to another string; and hold it at .ij. for the second time at the pouch and at the index finger, and press between the .ij. strings, then lift the heart quickly and pull the head of the penis;
then have him stand upright between your hands, and hide the strength in your hands or under your feet so that the infant does not see it, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and breathe or blow on the heart, and pull it up until the head of the penis is inside; then cleanse it well of the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the place marked with a double thread, then tie it underneath from .i. to another string; and hold it at .ij. for the second time at the pouch and at the index finger, and press between the .ij. strings, then lift the heart quickly and pull the head of the penis; then let the blood flow a little at a time, for that is the muedres; and put powder on top of the powder 1. a piece of cloth glued with a half-cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, cooked with good and fresh rose oil, and let it stay until the next day, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
The shape of the forces for purification is as follows: both heads should be tense and pointed, and the heads should be as large as the palm equally:
the error of purification is when the pus within the incision has dried up; therefore, you must extend it with your nail, so that the pus forms an abscess; and then cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, hold it with tweezers and then cut.
And if it persists for 3 days, and that which is beneath the foreskin is swollen, let it be until the abscesses are healed and the skin slightly peeled; then cut it as much as you can, and beware of the foreskin, it will not harm him in any way.
Therefore, heal the area of the wound with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders; and if it cuts too deeply into the skin, and it goes above, it will not harm him; therefore, heal it, as we have said, until it is healed.
from the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or a growth, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division.
And if the urine is not released and you see that it is retained due to a stone that is lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over at the knees, with his feet placed on his back, and he should stretch his abdomen from above his back, and restrain himself as much as he can; this will force the neck of the bladder upwards, causing the expression of the stone and the release of urine.
And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should use a device called a 'syringe', of which this is the form: it should be made of thin silver, light as an owl's feather; the tube should be a palm and a half in length, with a thin nozzle at the end.
And the way to make the urine pass is that you take a double thread, and tie to the end of it a little ball of wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe; and squeeze out the excess wool and push it up to the end of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or lard and egg white, and make the patient sit on a chair, and anoint his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;
then gently insert the syringe into the penis so that it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis downward toward the scrotum; then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and you will feel the patient's urine flow into the empty vessel, but if this is not done according to this order, because the conductor where it goes is twisted, then pull out the thread all the way through the wool, and the urine will follow the wool, then withdraw it outward, and make the urine flow;
and use the syringe again until the bladder is emptied, and be careful of the patient.
of diseases of the bladder:
When burns or blood come in the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see water and medicine distilling, then do this to all of the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and it is formed:
It is closed and has 3 openings: 2 on one side and 1 on the other, as you can see; and the end through which the medicine flows should be such that it blocks the tube well without any addition, so that one may draw out moisture and push it in when necessary;
and when you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, place the end of the catheter in the moisture and draw it out through the tube that is there; then push the tube firmly in again; then the moisture will enter the catheter and go into the bladder immediately, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema by which one enemas the bladder: it is made like this:
And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher up; and below there is .i. breast or the .ij. breasts meet; then take a lamb's bladder and put in the moisture which you see is clotting the bladder, then tie it between the .ij. breasts with a double thread, and heat .i. pot of this moisture over the fire; then pour the head of the catheter into the penis, then hold your hand over the bladder until all the moisture has gone in comfortably, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make 1 circle out of it, and pierce it all around; then thread a strong string through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dal, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, by pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of the stone
We have already discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction, along with medicines; and I have said the difference between a stone lodged in the urethra, and all the signs, and in which type of stone one should operate on cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the urine exits from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; and it opens up like an onion, and the patient feels pain in his penis, and he can urinate many times, and then it blocks again; and many of these stones cause a fundament; and the healing is easier for children until they are four years old, and it is very serious in the elderly, and it is intermediate in those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is appropriate first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the feces which are in the intestines. For they sometimes obstruct the retrieval of the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and move him around, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from the top; then let him sit between your hands which are prepared, and his hands are under his thighs, so that his bladder is completely tilted downward; then you probe and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hurry to cut it with a knife. And if it does not come out with touching alone, then wet your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is an adult, or with your middle finger, if the patient is an adolescent; and insert it into his anus, and probe for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, push it towards the neck of the bladder; then press with your finger, and cut where you feel the need to cut.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend his fingers up with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin under the testicles in the area where one performs the incision; then he fills the spatulum, which is the mold.
And cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but along the left side of the navel; and it should be straight over the stone, and both testicles should be pressed against the anus, and the incision should be diagonal so that it is wide at the top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
Perhaps it will press the testicle that is against the anus so that it pops out without effort; and you should know that there is stone which has angles and edges: one type grinds its way out; and there is another which is under, similar to a grape, and round, whose exit is easy.
For that one with angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not pop out, then you must pull it out with tweezers which are like a file at the tip, to pull out the stone so that it doesn't slip away; or you fill under it a very thin instrument, and if you cannot catch it that way, then widen the opening a little, and if the blood is exposed, then stop it with vitriole;
if there is more than one stone, then plug the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then press upwards, then draw it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are several. And if it is very large, then it must be cut, and a larger wound made. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out where the urethra cannot heal; but nevertheless, try to draw it out, or break it up with forceps, until you have drawn it out in pieces;
and when you have finished your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it, and put on top a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then re-bandage the patient over his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses and blood clots come in the wound and congestion of blood in the bladder, and it is retained so that the urine does not pass out easily with the urine: then press your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if any remains, it will corrupt the bladder and burst.
Then raise the wound with salt and vinegar and oil, and help it in every way you know how until it is healed; and whenever you treat it during the day, tie the two thighs together and apply the medicine to the affected area.
And if the stone is small and lodged in the urethra, causing urination to be blocked; then the treatment I described above is sufficient, even if you have to cut him many times, as I have experienced myself.
Take an iron needle with three pointed ends and insert it into a hot brand:
then take a thread and tie it around the urethra below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then push the needle into the urethra gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the needle in the stone with your hand little by little, until you pierce the stone from another side; then the urine will come out at once, press your hand on what is left of the stone inside the urethra. As soon as it breaks, it will come out with the urine and the patient is healed;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that defies it, tie a thread under the stone and another one above it, then make the wand straight on the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of women's stones
It sometimes happens that a stone is lodged in women's bodies, and if it does, the cure is difficult due to three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a skilled female healer who can be trusted, especially when she is chaste.
The third reason is that one cannot find a skilled female healer in the art of medicine; and the fourth is that women's stones are often deeper than men's, so a deeper incision is required, and there is great fear involved.Et il est grant diference entre li piere des homes et de la femme: car li piere de l’ome si est en leu plus fenestrez et plus pluzible a trover et a tailler, et la piere de la femme si est plus parfont et plus emmiée.
And if you need to go to the toilet, then you should take a small amount of well-prepared dung and apply it, and if you cannot find any, then use a small amount of fine earth; and show him a wise old woman who is experienced in matters relating to women, or a woman who knows something about medicine, and instruct her to do what you tell her regarding the examination of the stone.
And be sure to check if the woman is a virgin: then she should press her finger into her vagina and look for the stone; and if she finds it, she should push it out with her finger, and you must instruct her to press her left hand firmly against her bladder.
If she finds it, then she should move the stone gradually from the entrance of the bladder all the way down to the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle of the groin, where it is most sensitive; and feel for the stone in that area. She should not move her finger above or below the stone, and the incision should be made small at first;
then insert the thread into the incision, if you feel that the stone is sharp and cut the flesh so that the stone can come out; and know that there are many types of stones: small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with horns. Know their likenesses in order to understand how they will come out.
And if the blood flows, put in its place powdered vitriol and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work, so that the stone comes out, and have the instruments that I told you about for extracting stones to help you with your task.
And if the blood flows and it is from an artery that has been cut, put powder on the wound and press it with bandages and bindings, and do not release it again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, as the patient might die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, return to your work so that the stone comes out.
of meat hernia
Ramice aquouse is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white pus, which is located under the heart of the testicles, within the egg; and it is called "pus," and sometimes it is properly located in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that it is not the same egg.
And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness that comes to the testicles and is spread out from there.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colours; it may be a yellow colour, or red, or black, or a watery white, and more besides.
And these are the signs to recognize this accumulation; if it is in the white pus that we have mentioned, then it is a reon, like an egg, small and round like an egg, and does not burst the testicle, for it has moisture all around it.
And if there is moisture in the fabric itself, then the abscesses will be filled with part of the yolk, and because of this people think it's another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white part of the scrotum, then it feels good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should test all the way around, from which the form is as follows. According to this, then, what comes after the insertion point, judge what is inside.
According to this, then, what comes after the insertion point, judge what is inside. And when we cure it with iron, then the patient should be bled according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he should lie on his back, on something a little high, and put a lot of cushions under him;
then sit on his left side and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the wand to one of the two ribs of the heart;
then take the lead spatula and cut the skin of the testicles through their length up to the scrotum, and make the incision straight while describing the skin of the testicles until you reach the white subcutaneous tissue, and carefully peel it back according to your ability;
then pierce the subcutaneous tissue with a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then put in your fingers, and stretch out the scrotum upwards; do not touch the testicles themselves, but only the scrotum; cut it all or in pieces just as carefully, for if you do not cut it well, the water will return;
and if the scrotum has become detached from your work, then return it to its place when you have finished working on the subcutaneous tissue; then sew up the two lips of the testicles with a single stitch, and then treat the wound as you would any other, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the suspended vessels, fearing the flow of blood; then cut open the scrotum throughout its suspension, extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if pus has collected in two parts together, know that these are two pockets; then cut open the other part just as you did the first equally, then wash out the blood and put soft lamb's wool soaked in rose oil into the wound.
And put another piece of lamb's wool soaked in wine and oil on top, and place it over both testicles, and bind it tightly with a double cloth all around according to this shape:
Then take two pieces of cloth, and fill them with wool according to this shape, and sew them together at the opening of the pants, and have one piece hold the testicle up against the anus and back, and the other at the part of the groin, and both ends on top of the two thighs; and have all the binding in the loop of the pants.
and sometimes this ramica of cautery is medicated in the place of an iron brand, and it is that you grip a subtle scalpel, and cut through the skin of the testicles, and it is heated as we have said, so that the white pimple containing pus is revealed;
If one takes the cautery according to this form and pierces the pimple gently, and burns it with this subtle hot cautery;
And cut it in all ways that you can, until you have removed everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle; and know that this action is much safer; and watch out for blood flow and damage from cutting;
and if anything contradicts you, such as a hot abscess or blood flow or anything else, then treat what contradicts you according to what has already been said.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure because of its horror, then administer a perforation as I have told you, and when you are quite certain by the signs that we have mentioned that the watery fluid is gone,
then let the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part to the full depth of the spear-head, and insert the perforation into the body; make the holes wide so that all the water flows out;
then put cotton on the spot, and bind it, and let the rest of the water flow out, then treat the wound until it is healed;
and if the white membrane does not let the water flow out of the wound, then you must insert a pipe or instrument used to treat dropsy, of which the structure is described earlier; enlarge the wound a little, and know that the water will return, and be gathered again after six months or so, and when it is gathered as before, the patient will pass his days.
of the abscess of the testicles
Know that in the dissection of this branch there are many dispositions of fear, because of which it seems better to me that one should leave it untouched.
And I will tell you the work and appearances of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the testicles; and it is because of various causes.
This is to be known by excess of bitterness and bile, which is spread throughout the body, or from a blow.
and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and it does not subside in pain, and is a serious abscess;
and sometimes there is a gray abscess, full of pus and blood, which comes from a vein or a swollen vein.
When it is from a vein, it is recognized by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
Those who are made of wine lees are recognized by their appearance through the touch of the fingers,
and anyone can well judge the quality based on this appearance and other similar characteristics; and you should cut the skin of the eggs, then the yolks will be on top, and the white part will be beneath, and release the suspension from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already cracked with these new shells, then you must break the egg and crack the shell.
And if it is airy in the face or in those who are inside the vessels, then you must deliver all that membrane and crack it smoothly.
And if the crack is at the back of the shell, then you must crack it all and extract the egg as we have said.Et s’il y a u neuue char ou dedens la tenve, si covient que tu la cope et la delivre, et mets l’uef en autre vaissel.
And when your work is done, then dress the wound with soft wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
of the testicle abscess
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to a plum, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans painfully when he walks;
and the treatment of this disease is also painful like this one before.
And yet we will tell you how to treat it according to what the ancients did.
You should make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspensory of testicles tightly with your fingers, holding all the vessels that are close to the penis, and pulling them upwards, and stretching them firmly;
then cut with a scalpel across the width of the vessels, as far as they are exposed
and then scrape from each side, just as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
then he inserts a needle where there is .a. double thread, and ties it at the first place where the vein came from, and ties it directly to the other end; then he cuts them in the middle correctly, according to the length of the body, and draws out the corrupted moisture;
then cure the wound as with the others or wrap it tightly, so that no blood vessels rupture and bleed out from either side.
this does no harm, and if all the vessels are closed, then one should draw out the clotted blood from all the vessels. so that the vein does not lose its clotting because of the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
of the rotgut wound The causes of this disease are the incisions that come from syphilis, or the swelling on the abdomen in the region of the intestines, causing them to descend from that opening to one of the testicles.
and this opening is from syphilis, or from the swelling of it; and these two types of fester come from many causes: from a blow, or a fall, or from straining, or from lifting a heavy load, and from similar things;
and the signs that it is from a syphilitic ulcer are that it occurs bit by bit over a long period of time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are even throughout, up to the depth, because the syphilis presses on the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the sinus, that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are different abscesses appearing underneath the skin close to the surface, and it is due to the discharge of the intestines and the body from the sinus.
And sometimes the fester comes with the intestines, and is retained inside, and causes great suffering to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these treatments using iron, there is fear, which is why one should avoid them.
And the method of the treatment is that you command the patient to draw in his intestines with his hand inside the wound if he can reach it; then press on his neck between your hands, and lift the buttocks
then turn him over on his back and brush all the hair from his chest then push inside the lips of the wound with a hook according to what you need in order to open the wound, and let such that the pus can come out
then scrape off the scrotum skin that is under the chest skin, until the white, tough scrotum skin is uncovered all over
then put your index finger in that which follows the anus, in that which is between the white membrane which is under the shell of the egg, and between the second membrane
and separate that which is behind the egg, and between the second membrane; and then move the right hand inside the anus, and hold the white membrane up in your left hand, and lift the egg out of all the membranes towards the tail; and instruct the assistant to hold the egg upright, and untie that which is behind the diaper;
and feel with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped up in or a hard white membrane, and if you find anything, then put it back into the belly underneath;
then take a needle with .i. thick thread made of .x. threads, and insert it into the rear part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the testicles; after the scrotum, then tie the threads that appear, so that there are .iiij. threads; then tie them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the scrotum, of which we have said is underneath the skin of the testicles, with a strong string of  .ij. parts; then wrap the threads around the scrotum and tie them tightly, so that no blood vessels that nourish it can enter, so that an abscess does not form; and place the thread according to the first long line of   .ij. parts from that one, and after these   .ij. lines leave the scrotum which is under the skin of the testicles the size of a bean;
and then the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut into the part which is under the skin of the testicles, as much as the blood flows, and the bowels, as we have said before;
then apply wool moistened in oil, and place it on the wounds, and then apply the ligature that we have described. And sometimes the white syphilis that we have described is cauterized after the incision, due to doubt about blood flow.
For this happens many times, and leaves the ligature until it bleeds through; and if it is slow to bleed, then use hot water, and apply what we have said until it bleeds.Car li sans ne peut corer s’i n’est de l’aigue chaude ou feu que nos avons dit.
then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.
of a fleshy hernia
In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is done like the branch that is together with the vein, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting above gently from below;
then press upon me, and open the abscess of him who works, until the vessels burst; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes the anus tears, as we have said, and the wound opens; and none of the intestines come out, and if they do, it is only a little, and they heal up again in no time.
But if he stays too long at this point, the wound will fester and the intestines will come out.
And this happens because of the swelling of the abscess near the anus, as we have said, for it is swollen, then softened and swollen, and the wound opens.
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way:
and the patient lies on his back between your hands, then press the site of the fracture hard with a broad instrument according to the quantity of 3 eggs;
then pull out the sac which is under the skin where the abscess is, then take the thread and place it on the exposed area of the abscess;
then press it deeply into the abdomen, then sew up the 2 exposed areas of the abscess on the head of the thread, and sew one and then the other;
then pull out the head of the vein, and cover it with nothing but syrup or extend the wound with anything else, as I have made you aware in the treatment of intestinal wounds;
then treat it like any other wound. And when you cover the stitches, clean and treat the wound until it heals.
Syrup is constricting and has no appearance in the wound, and cautery is better for this purpose and closer to safety.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men, because the parts inside are softened, and it appears milky white; and when one wishes to treat this, he should make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin on top of the natural skin; then bring together the two edges of the wound with a single stitch, and if you see that there is excess softened skin, sew it shut with three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as you would other wounds until it heals, and remove the thread.
of chastisement
Do you know that chastisements are forbidden in our law, and because of this I would prefer not to discuss them in this book; and it is only necessary for two reasons: one is so that the surgeon can respond when asked, and understand how to treat them; and the other is because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, and horses and other beasts. I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. For the method we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in warm water until his testicles are softened and hanging; then grab them with your hand until they are removed and you no longer feel anything. For the castration by cutting: one must tether the animal, and cut the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie off the scrotum, and cut each sac in one place when you have well-scratched them; and I leave some pus and the thin membrane that covers the vessels; and this method of castration is better than the one by attraction, because in the one by attraction sometimes something remains in the testicles, causing the animal to desire lust; then treat the wound until it heals.
of hermaphrodites
There are two kinds of hermaphrodites: the first is when between the two genitals there is an opening like a woman's vagina, with pubic hair and sometimes urination occurs from it.  The second type is in women, who have a penis on their groin and two genitals.  The treatment for both men and women is to bandage everything tightly, and treat them as you would other wounds; but for the second type of man, where urine escapes through the skin around the genitals, there is no cure.
of the testicles
Tentigene is a swelling on the natural part, so ugly to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure. You should dye the excess of the testicle with your hand or fingernail, and bandage it lightly; and do not go too deep, so that no bleeding occurs, then cure it with another cure until it is healed; and for one which emerges at the mouth of the womb, use it, and perhaps it will work, and it is according to the likeness of a cow, and therefore they call it the "cow disease". You should bandage it, just as we have said for the testicle, and cure it until it is healed.
of erratics
Erratique is when the nature of the woman is not understood, or the opening is small; and it is by nature from birth, or by accident through illness that has come to be; or it is due to a foreign object, or a sottish tumor, and is formed in the womb, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever; and it should be understood by examination of the belly. If the tumor is clearly apparent, then you should examine it with your fingers or with a stick. If it is a sottish tumor and it is close to the skin, then you should do this: place the woman on her back with her legs spread out, and form the two lips so that the sottish tumor becomes visible and the tumor is exposed; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the area, and have the woman lie down for a day or so that it may not adhere. And if the tumor is hard and solid, then you should cut it with a spatulum similar to a bay leaf. If the tumor is made of flesh, then one must suspend it and cut it; and one should use medicines to stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, and egg white beaten together; then prepare a broad lance so that the wound may not close up; and this should be for a long time, and one should apply a tent of dry linen; then treat with other treatments until it is healed. And when in the womb there is flesh that has formed, then one must cover it according to this manner, if it is not an abscess. For in an abscess that is in the womb, one should not touch it in order to pierce it.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are opened veins that bleed without cause, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become throbbers; and we have already described their appearances, signs, and how to treat them. I say that hemorrhoids and throbbers, when they are completely inside the anus and do not appear to the touch, cannot be cured by iron. Those that are at the mouth of the anus can be felt, and they can be treated. Therefore, you should first put the woman in a cold room; then, cut off the hemorrhoids with tongs, and burn their roots; then powder them with medicines that constrict blood vessels, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water. If there is any bleeding, let her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, galls, and similar things; then take barley flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and make a poultice out of it to apply to her back. And if it stops, that's good. If not, make her breathe leeches on her back and breasts without using iron; then take wool, moisten it in plantain juice or dogwood juice mixed with old wine, and make her breathe it in at the affected spot. And when the abscess has subsided, treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red and looks like a rough head, so it should be covered as I have said for throbbers; then treat it until it is healed.
Here is the translation of the text into English:
There are many types of abscesses that occur in the anus, such as ulcers, piercings, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, as well as other diseases that I have described in the previous section. Therefore, I will now describe the treatment for a hot abscess that occurs in the anus, which is not among the types that heal quickly. If you want to know how to treat it with iron instruments, observe whether the abscess is soft at the beginning of its appearance, and if it is accompanied by heat and fever, and if it turns red when you look at it. Then, do not rush to pierce it; instead, let the pain subside first. Then, make the patient sit on a low stool or chair, with their feet elevated so that their back is tilted slightly forward, and their knees bent with their arms placed under their knees. Tie their arms securely with a strong cord, then suck the anus to open it and insert the instrument used for this purpose. Check the depth of the anus so that the instrument does not go in too far and injure the patient. If the instrument is large, cover the entrance of the anus with cloth to prevent discomfort. Then, insert the tip of the instrument and apply pressure. When the abscess breaks open and the content is discharged, treat the wound with soft tents dipped in rose oil or virgin oil. Place the tent inside the wound, reaching deep into the anus, and put a pad soaked in warm water or a decoction of mallows on top of the wound and around it. After two days of treatment with suitable ointments, the wound will begin to heal. Sometimes, raising the anus and applying a poultice made of water and honey, followed by a poultice of mallows that have been cooked in water, is beneficial. Then, return to treating the wound with ointments. If the wound has subsided but is still open, refrain from using iron instruments for treatment. Instead, follow the methods described earlier in the text.
of childbirth
It is important for the midwife to know the natural signs of childbirth, and to understand what to look for when you see a woman struggling to breathe and desiring to smell aromatics; then you know that the baby is about to be born quickly. The natural birth occurs when the baby emerges head-first, with the placenta following close behind; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so that the baby is delivered swiftly. For when the baby descends, the placenta follows, and the mother's body is cleansed of its excess fluids through a good purification ritual; anything else is not considered natural. Sometimes, however, the baby may present feet-first, or may emerge from the torso, arms, or abdomen, and in rare cases, the birth may be inverted, with the baby's head facing upwards instead of down. In such cases, it is crucial for the midwife to be wise and knowledgeable about these variations, guard against mistakes and disappointments, and I will now describe all the different positions and how to assist in each case.
If the baby is born head-first in a natural delivery, and the woman is struggling, and her vitality is weak, then have her sit on a stool or be supported by other women; prepare an aromatic oil made from cooked celery seed or fenugreek, and then use a small spatula to apply it between her buttocks, as follows: and split the placenta, and press her nails into her skin until the fluids inside flow out; and press her belly so that the baby descends, and if he doesn't descend, then give the woman a enema with a mixture of fenugreek and olive oil; then have her sneeze and cough to stimulate her bowels, and hold her mouth and nose closed for an hour: then the baby will be delivered.And if both hands emerge, then gently push them back in one by one; but if they cannot go back in, then have the woman sit on a chair, and lift her feet up so that they are elevated; then tilt the chair backwards so that she is lying down, and if the hands still won't go in, and the baby is dead, then grasp the hands at the knuckles and pull them out, and deliver the baby in the same way.
of the child's feet When the child comes out of its feet, it should be pushed upwards; and then turn it slowly and gently until it is even;
then grasp the foot and extend it gently.
When it jumps up to the armpit, instruct it to grab, and make it sneeze with this condition; if it jumps out, God willing.
And if it does not jump out as we have said, then pull it back and forth gently until it is in its natural position. For then it will be easy.
And if it does not come out as we have said, take mussel shell, and oil of sesame, and molten gum, and grind all in a mortar; and apply this ointment to the woman's privates and drive it out. Then have her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
And when she is soft underneath, make a collar of myrrh and put it on her, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and pinch her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will come out soon. from the birth of the child on his knees When the child comes in this way, then he puts his hands little by little;
of the child's exit, which comes out as wide as a hand I must find a way to bring back the hand: if they cannot bring it back, then have the woman stand up and walk.
If she cannot walk, then let her lie on a bed and raise her legs straight;
then administer the medicine that I have described;
if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair, then study how to bring the hand back; and turn the baby according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and tell her to squeeze until the baby comes out.
from the baby's exit on its neck, and have her hands spread out, and her face turned towards her mother's back I must tie her hand, then turn it little by little, and hold it gently;
and when it is even, then place on it a poultice of alum and oil as we have said, then instruct that it move little by little.
and when you have done this, then let her sit on a chair, and instruct her to hold it in; and make her sneeze. in the same way for all of the afterbirth
in the same way for all of the afterbirth When it comes out in this way for all of the afterbirth, then catch the afterbirth with your fingers, as long as the moisture is expelled;
and if the child bites on its face and neck, and the mother slaps it, let it not be restrained, and the child will die.
then put the child inside, as far as it should go, and instruct the woman to hold herself back at times:
of the issue of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely. Twins are a strange thing, and do not live long if they are born prematurely.
I know that they are multiplied and separated by the placenta which divides them, which is attached to the womb;
and sometimes they issue just as naturally as a single child, as we have said.
And if they bleed a lot, then treat as we have said, and be subtle in your movements, and quickly and lightly do what she does; and act thus as it benefits their health. of many children
of many children Sometimes they are formed in the womb as one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more, up to fifteen, and they are all shaped like children according to the measurement of the glorious sage,
and it is fitting that the surgeon know all this, for by chance a similar thing might happen to him; then act according to what is appropriate.
of the dead child
When you are treating a woman for a dead child or fetus, as I have said in the division, and no blood comes out, and you are compelled to use manual pressure; if you need to know whether the woman is of sound health and has no fear of death.
the woman should be lying on her back with her head tilted down and legs lifted up.
and the midwife should use a ten-part mixture to apply to her womb, if she is lying in bed, so that the child can be delivered.
Then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils, mixed with musk, altée, and fenugreek, and linseed; then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and musks. then press them gently into the wound, then bind it up in the usual way where it is convenient,
and be careful that the child does not slide down onto its head; if it thrusts them into itself in its eyes or throat or mouth or under the beard or near the armpits,
and if the dislocation is in the feet, strike or press at the middle of the shins;
and it is necessary that he holds the needle in his right hand and places the thread between the fingers of his left hand, and ties it around all of his fingers lightly, and inserts the needle into any of the holes we have described so that it reaches the hollow place.
then pierce with another needle, or a third one if you need it, so that the extraction is even.
and then they are moved evenly back and forth to extract it, and the needles should be bitten down upon to hold them in place, as shown in this image:
And if a part remains, then anoint the ball of one of his fingers with oil, and press it into that part, and draw out the other part.
And if nothing remains, then place this joint or a higher one, and do this until it all comes out.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the dislocation, then you must wrap it in .a. cloth, so that it all comes out.
then press on the joint of the sole or on the ankle; and so you should do with the other hand and both feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is narrow in the outlet, or it has a sharp point you should push the spathomile between your fingers, pierce the head, and draw out the water or you can use the instrument called "almidach", of which the shape comes with the instruments in this chapter;
and so, the infant is naturally born with a large head; and then pull out the bones with tongs,
and if the head pops out and is forced, it is split until the moisture that is in the wound comes out;
and if she cannot come out, then cut her into pieces as much as you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
And if the swelling is above his feet, the pulse is light, and the breath comes easily to the mouth.
And if it is swollen in the belly or the groin, then you must strap it tightly with a bandage around the hand; and pierce the belly or the groin, so that the moisture which is within flows out;
and if the other limbs are paralyzed, and the eyes remain then he bathes his hand in warm water, and leads it up to the mouth of the wound; then he adds one ounce or two ounces, and draws it out;
and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed there, one should not work on it, then you must apply moist and greasy things; and he applies poultices, and softens and moistens with water.
And if the fetus is on its side, and you can make it even, then administer what we have said about a living child:
and if one has no strength, then cut it into pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
And when you have done this, if they are given what we have said for abscesses that come in the sea;
and bloodletting comes, it should be placed in restraining water, and other remedies are administered.
And I saw a woman whose fetus had died within her; then another was sewn over him, and the other died. After a long time an abscess came in his arm, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to discharge profusely.
I was called to the priest, and I thought long and hard, but could not heal the wound.
I applied a strong drawing plaster, and out came a bone, and after a few days another one. I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Examine the wound, and with your hands pull out bones until the woman feels better. And let the woman walk like this for a long time, and she will suddenly feel a bit of relief from her pain.
I have only included this chapter because when masters find an unusual case, they should know how to provide aid.
to return the dislocated shoulder to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the press, to which one adds the books; and at .2 turns as .2 heads of .2 lines. Nevertheless, let the horns be more slender in the constrictor, and made of boxwood or of ivory;
and let the mouth of the beam be one digit wide, and the edges of the trees one digit, and long a palm and a half; and in the two beams there are two adjustments of this same wood, which are firmly joined together, one half a palm long or a little more;
and these two settings are placed in the mouth of the wound to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of pincers; and it has two heads with two settings, as you can see, a palm long and two fingers wide;
and when you see the wound opened with all the instrument, let the woman sit on a bed, hanging her feet and opening her legs, then insert the two pieces of the instrument into the wound, and hold the head of the instrument under between your thighs; then work your hand on the whole instrument, just as you did with the tongs equally, according to the amount that you see the opening of the wound, until the patient makes the face she wants.
These instruments are all decorated, and their appearances are multiplied; and when the patient sees them prepared, the action is faster and higher in people because of their size.
Do not despair over the instrument, but prepare it, for their need is inexcusable.
When the placenta is retained after childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze with a scent, and pinch her nose and mouth tightly. And if she vomits, all the better.
If not, take a pitcher and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the mother, such as calendula, rue, anise, chamomile, and centaury;
All these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over the fire; then put one end into the pitcher and the other into the mouth of the mother,
and the dye as long as the vapors come within the wound; then make it sneeze, as we have said. If the pus comes out quickly. And if it remains after this treatment and is not gone, then command the patient to wet her left hand in oil of wormwood or in a poultice of alder, and then put it into the wound.
and wants to find the pus; and when she has found it, she should squeeze and stretch it gently little by little, so that the wound does not hurt with the extraction; but it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled; so it will come out and release itself.
And if the mouth of the wound is narrow, we have described the treatment of sneezing, and of the fume of herbs;
and if it is not [healed] by all that we have said, then beware that you do not cut;
but it is necessary that the person at the mouth of the wound ties it to the woman's thigh, then cleanse with four-fold ointment;
if it can be released and reset, then it will come out; but still, when it is released in this way, there comes a bad odor to the stomach and head, and it harms the patient.
If necessary, suitable fumigations should be used for this: some ancient writers have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The instrument used to fumigate the woman for retained placenta and afterbirth is as follows:
And it should be made of glass like a cane, with a slender neck and wide base to sit over the fire;
and let there be fume over the coals, and the dye until it is wasted, and start another one.
to pierce the fundament
Many children are born without their fundaments pierced; instead, they have a thin membrane. So the midwife should pierce that membrane with her finger, and not with a spike or needle; and she should be careful not to tear it.
then put on wet linen with wine and oil, then dress it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will heal, then put a wooden splint through the wound and leave it for several days, then remove it when the child wants to walk around.
And sometimes the healing comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess; then it must be covered suddenly: then it should be treated, as we have said, with a wooden splint.
from the fistula of the fundament Fistulæ which come underneath the fundament are nodular, and growing in size, or from within the fundament, or in the space of two parts.
if there is one or more fistulæ; and when this nodulation is old, it opens, and then moisture causes a white discharge or thin pus.si l’on queré qu’elle soit seure et close, si convient que li médecins la fasse boire vin clere ou eix,
and sometimes these fistulæ are piercing; and they are caused by what comes out in egestions or emissions when the patient makes an egestion, and sometimes a worm will jump out.
And if there are fistulæ which penetrate as far as the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they can reach the joint of the thigh, and down to the testicles.Et si a fistules qu’advenent desoz le fondement et par les costes ou par la nuque, ou par le petis de la cuixe; et sont mals aincis.
And thus one recognizes the fissure which seeps at the anus, and does not seep: and you should stab your index finger or thumb into the anus, and stab a thin needle made of bronze or iron into the fissure when there is no twisting.
And if there is twisting, then you should stab a thin tent made of lead, or a horsehair, as far as you can feel the tent or hair with your finger;
and if you cannot feel it, and there is no egesta or flatulence or discharge as we have said: you know it does not pierce; then you hurry to cure.
And when the fistula penetrates as far as the bladder or the duct of urine, and urine escapes, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it is pierced as far as the hip joint, then the vein bleeds as far as the spot. if there is no twisting and the pain is not relieved, then it will be cured by boiling water and not by ointment.
and for these persian ulcers there is no cure other than work, and the folly of those who meddle with them.
For that which is not Persian and not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have proven.
And let the patient lie on his back, and lift his legs up to his thighs, and have his thighs inclined towards his belly; Then insert a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, as far as you know the tent goes.
If the pain is felt around the anus, you must insert your index finger.
and if you feel that the membrane has been pierced; and if it is uncovered where you feel between your finger and the flesh, then know that it has been perforated; if you do not work on it, it cannot be healed.
One says that some can be healed, but it rarely happens;
and the help which one does, then one scorches the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before. and stuff it all hot into the fistula as far as the anus; and do this twice or thrice, as long as you know that these charred tissues are burned, which look like a feather of a bird.
And then cure it with moist bandages in butter, as long as the char comes out, and then cure with ointment that softens and heals.
If he is thus healed, it is good. If not, it cannot be healed otherwise.
and if the tent enters and does not penetrate to the right which is in the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula below the covering of the heart; cut at the beginning of the fistula, and then stop it before the tent, and then cauterize afterward, as far as the head of the tent;
and the tent will be delivered and will fall out; then cut away the false flesh that looks like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
And if the pus comes out and flows between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with an astringent medicine.
For fire cautery brings together two things: the burning of the flesh and the clotting of blood and the drying of moisture.
Then treat with tented bandages moistened in butter or ground substance, until the site drips fluid and the flesh burns through to the bone.
Then treat the wound with sudatory poultices of hard, dry matter.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes all the way to the bottom of the foundation, and is removed from the body, put your finger or foundation in it, and inquire about it.
If you feel the tent, and between them is the thread or the cloth, or it is about to pierce, there is no strength except through faith and hope, by administering one of the three remedies:
either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can, put in tents and cure it as before.
And do not go too deep, so that you do not cut the tenant who holds the foundation, and let the evacuations come out through there as they wish. then treat, as we have said;
then treat, as we have said; by chance if it is cured, or you remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut away from the foundation, or by tent or other pointed instrument; then mend that broken bone which is in the wound, as much as you can;
then endeavor to heal the wound and to keep the fistula in the part above the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes they are fistulas according to this manner: and it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation below the skin above. Take a tent pierced at the tip in this shape: And he inserts a twisted thread into it, and he inserts the tent along the entire thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
If it pierces through the margin inside, then pull out the thread from that opening, just as you would push your finger into the fistula.
and draw the head with thread, and bring the two heads together, and hold them tightly for one or two days;
and restrain it sometimes, until the threads cut through the flesh between the two;
then heal the wound until it is closed and healed.
If the fistula does not open on its own, then you must make it open in every way that you can, if it is not too deep.
For it is not appropriate to cover the wound with a bandage, then treat it, as we have said, until it has healed.
The form of the spiny spatomile, which they make into a fistula, is very sharp and pointed on one side. And on the other side it is not, so that one should not cover it, as you can see here:
Hemorrhoids are of two types: sometimes they are inside the anus like grains of resin, and there are small ones and large ones, and some ooze blood. Some have one or more of these hemorrhoids outside the anus and at the top of the anus; but those that are outside have a little moisture,
and ooze water or a little yellow water or a little blood, and are the same color as the body;
and the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you command the patient to stay in bed until the anus heals and the hemorrhoids fall out. If you rush it and grab it with tweezers or your fingernail, then pluck it at its root.
And if they cannot be held with tweezers due to moisture, then take them with a cloth or cotton or a piece of camel's hair. Then pull it out with your fingers, pluck it and powder some warm powdered cautery on top. Or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
and if the foundations cannot come out, then cleanse the patient with a biting and harsh enema to wash what is in the foundation so that it can come out clearly;
if the patient presses himself, and the thread comes out from under the foundation, then the cure is easy; and you should grab them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed and the incision is no longer feared.
It is necessary to administer the stitch in this way: take a twisted thread and put it into a needle, then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle from the other side, and return both ends of the thread under the needle, and if it is too wide; then tighten the thread tightly, tie off the thread, remove the needle, and do likewise with all the others, leaving one to drain the excess blood;
then place over the wound a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and then apply pressure on it, and instruct the patient to rest.
Then leave it until they heal, and when they are healed, then treat them with ointments and other treatments.
from dryness of the anus or rectum Drying of the bowels occurs often in the intestines, due to constipation from natural causes, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
If necessary, cut into the skin at the tip of a spatula or your fingernail, so that it does not become moist. Then dry it until it is hard and as it should be.
And if it cannot harden, then restart the scraping more fiercely than before, until it heals completely and is scoured. then treat it until it heals.
where there is trembling A freckle is a small discolouration on the skin, which goes deep under the skin and moves around a lot.
and sometimes the trembling affects the fingers, and one feels it like a deadness from the trembling, and it comes all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
And the cure is that you take a cane of goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place this cane on the vein, until the purple circle surrounds the vein all around; then return your hand to the entire cane as you press all around the vein, and put it in deeply, and squeeze the vein from its roots.
And if you see fit, make a cane of bronze or iron according to this shape, and let it be thin underneath and drawn out on top:
nor pierced, so that it may hold the finger, and press firmly. And if you see fit, cauterize the vein, just as it is described in the chapter on cauterization.
of the form of the enema Sometimes they are made of silver or brass, or melted copper or wire; and sometimes they are made small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Those which are administered for the treatment of children and the weak and painful are small.
The form of the small and large enema is above wide, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
and it has an opening where the belly is tied, as you can see, and the anus is pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other;
and the belly where one puts the medicine is made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes;
and between each hole there is a distance of one digit, then insert into these holes a strong cord of twisted gut or thread wound around, and assemble the belly so that it looks like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong cord, then cleanse; and this is the form of the circle:
Let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the clistere with oil or egg white, or similar thing, then insert it gently;
Then the minister squeezes both ends of the clistere together until it is empty, then withdraw the clistere, and let the patient lie on his side,
and if the medicine wants to come out, then hold it as long as he can, and if he sleeps for a night afterwards, it is even better.
And if you use the clistere for the disease of stomach ache, and the medicine rushes to come out, then repeat it until he is cured.
And if hemorrhoids are in the anus or an abscess, then use an enema as thin as for a child.
This is the form of the thin enema that the skin should be stretched onto:
Of wounds
We have already discussed in the division the cure of wounds; now we will discuss the cures by hand and medicine according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
The objects that cause wounds are from stone, and sword and knife, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar things;
or according to the places in the body where they are made, such as a wound on the neck, or head, or thigh, or belly, or liver, and similar organs;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come to him in his chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, one should take care whether it is from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still intact but the wound is large, and you doubt whether it is a hot abscess: then have the patient bleed from the head immediately if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction to the injured part;
and let the patient avoid excesses of wine and rich foods.
And if he does not want to bleed, then his diet should be reduced, and he should neither drink wine nor eat meat;
and apply a poultice to the wound, if a hot abscess comes, only wet cotton in rose oil, or in astringent wine;
and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is still bleeding and not moved by the air, a powder that I will describe soon;
and if it has been moved by the heat, then put on some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like that of a sword, and the lips cannot be brought together with tenting, then stitch them together, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and gapes, and holds only by a little, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard skin in place of the hide. and instruct the patient to eat coarse meats such as testicles and cooked wheat, also like fowl, and similar things.
And if you find rot in the hide, and it isn't attached to the bone, then cut off the rot completely, and pour out the pus, then cure it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which isn't clotting, and cannot be staunched with medicine, then tie it off, and if you find it loose, bind it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is light; you should put on this powder which heals as soon as the burn is healed.
And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part, dragon's blood two parts, quicklime three parts, and powdered very finely, and employ the wound, and bind it tightly, until it heals well and joins with all its blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it untouched if it doesn't swell; for one removes the medicine only when it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with chalk alone, when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound is moved by the fire.
And if the fire has moved the wound, one should stop it immediately and not put any of this powder on it;
but apply some digestive ointments, or barley flour made with water and honey, until the swelling goes down; then treat other treatments until he is healed.
And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, I will extract it with subtle pincers;
and I will tell you below about fractures of the head.
of the wound on the neck
If a wound occurs on the neck and it is single, then there is no difference between it and one in the head, but if the nerve of the neck or artery is cut.
If it's a nerve, there is nothing else that can be done but to leave the wound untreated and not put anything constricting on it, because it harms the nerves and causes them to withdraw. And do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuations are with the brain, which is the highest member.
But for the medicine underneath, use warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and cooked fennel also washed in warm water, and other damp stones according to this method, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then cut and bind it, then treat it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep, and she has a fever and is swollen and full of pus, then pierce her or cut her lower down.
and if the artery is cut, and bleeding occurs, then ligature it, and cauterize it if necessary;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the food conduit is kept open, through which the food goes, cut the windpipe above the base of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; then stretch it gently, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with purifying ointments until it heals;
and if the wound has caused depression in the bone, then treat it thus; and if there are pieces of bone, pull them out as far as you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave until the wound can heal. and it should be cleaned and aligned at the site of dislocation;
and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have described. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in that chapter.
of the wound of a spear or knife
If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, then examine if there are no windings around the wound: you will therefore know that the wound is deadly;
and if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder on it at the first hour or ligature it because of the blood that will ooze out profusely, and return to the body, and keep the patient warm; but I put on an attractive ointment, and bind it .ii. times a day;
and if you don't have ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture,
and let the patient sleep on the wound for .iii days, or .iv., or more; if a spasm, or trembling of the body, or chills do not come; and when you see good signs, then you know that the wound is healed. Treat it with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, and there is a fistula, then you know that there is a wound; then treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, on the front or back, then treat it as described above;
if it is large, by stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has torn bits, then probe the wound, and pull out the shards if they are loose; and if they are not loose, then let the wound fester, so as to ease the extraction;
and for other wounds in other members, the judgment is as we have said.
from a rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great, medium, and small;
from a large wound, sometimes the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, by which the entrance of air;
and the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes the smaller wound is worse than the larger,
because one puts them in again more easily, if one doesn't put them in hot and cold; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, they contract more with pins.
and for this reason it is useful to move the soft wound, and therefore one must move the intestines to their place more than others .ij.
And know that hernia of the abdomen occurs in .iiij. ways:
the .ij. common hernias occur in the abdominal wall,
and the stitching of other wounds on the body, and two other special stitches are common to other wounds;
nevertheless they are more appropriate with stomach wounds, and I will name and explain each one.
I say that when the wound is small, and something from the intestines protrudes out, and it can be treated by one of two methods: or from the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a way: wet a sponge or soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or you boil in water squinant and cypress and spice, and boil the intestines until the swelling is gone;
and sometimes it makes restraining wine, and the soul is moved away to deflate.
And when you see the swelling go down, then open the intestines with water or old wine are cooked, For by this means the entrance is contracted to a small space.
and if it cannot enter, they make a small cut in the instrument with which they cut hemorrhoids;
and the first cure is bloodletting rather than cutting, which one should not do without great need;
and this is the instrument to split it with:
if cut within the curve and not out, and see here the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out, if he puts it back according to its natural shape in its proper place, if you can, because this is useful.
When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the .ij. parts then put the affected part higher than the other;
and so you should treat those wounds which are large and small.
For small wounds, apply what you have prepared,
then have at hand a minister of pity who will spread ointment over the entire wound with his hand, and bring together the edges of the wound, and this is the common method of sewing.
and this is the common method of sewing. Take a needle or several needles depending on the size of the wound, then leave a distance of half a digit from the edge of the wound, and insert a needle with a strong thread through it; and pierce both sides of the skin with both sides of the edge,
then pierce it with a double thread through the needle in two places, then bring together the two heads of the wound smoothly,
then leave .i. space, and I put another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to how many needles you need, until the entire wound is bound up;
let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and thick, because fine needles pierce all the flesh, and too thick ones cannot pierce well: therefore they should be medium-sized;
and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin,
that they do not cut and open the wound before it is healed.
and then cut the tips of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and put tents or bandages on the needle heads to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
and this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because one or two needles are enough.
The second stitch is common, and it is where you bring together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the wound with one needle and a strong thread; and when you have cut through all four of these bones together,
and when you have cut through all four of these bones together, then reset the needle in the part where you began, in the manner that one sews clothes;
and put a distance between each stitch equal to the thickness of a thumb;
this stitching should be done on a man,
and I sewed up a wound that a man had on his belly,
which he had received from a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in length, and the intestines were protruding more than two palms in length,
and the wound was below his belly. I brought him back the intestines after they had been out for 24 hours.
and the wound was sewed up until the 15th day, and he was healed.
And they had judged him that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment, because I was in a place where there were neither any of these things nor any medicine; and I put cotton wool on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle, and pierce it from the outside just to the inside;
when it has pierced the right heart directly, then lay the end of the siphon or tube on top of where you have inserted the needle
and make it pierce another part of the inside up to the outside;
and the technique for this suturing is that you sew just like a leatherworker sews hides, and leave the siphon once on one side and then pull it through to the other, so that the suturing is all completed.
The second method of sewing, which Galen describes properly,
if it is like how one joins two pieces of wood together naturally, and applies the end of one piece to the other end, in such a way:
push a needle or awl through both pieces near their ends, and only pierce those spots, and leave the two shoulders of the syphyllis; then turn the needle and pierce it from the outside inwards just to the inside, as two shoulders of the syphyllis;
then pierce one and the other from the outside inwards just to the inside, in two other shoulders of the syphyllis that are on the other side;
and this is the better way of sewing and the more common one.
Galen says these words, and some testify to them,
one must sew the belly with .ii. needles, having thread in each;
and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corroded holes;
and know that when the rupture is in the belly, the sutures are more painful than others in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as long as the heat has not moved it, If you reset it to allow the intestine to return, then put on the binding powder over the wound.
If you reset it to allow the intestine to return, then put on the binding powder over the wound. And if it burns, put some ointment on it that is available until the wound heals. And cut the thread and sew up the wound, and use myrrh and honey. Then treat the wound as with other wounds until it is healed.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and if you have no medicine, put on old cotton immediately when it begins to ooze. and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For you don't need any other medicine for various wounds when they are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will affect the principal members, if necessary, you should moisten it with a little warm oil, or rose oil, and put it around the angles and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or swelling in the bowels, and this happens many times, then treat him in the manner that I tell you. If he has dark, watery diarrhea, and especially if the swelling comes just up to the intestine;
and pierces inside, and you can tell when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine that is called "young" cannot heal when it is raw, and it is because of the thinness of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the thread jumps out of the wound, it pulls it back as well as the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and turned white or black, then you must tie the area that has turned black so that blood does not flow into it, because there are veins and arteries in it;
then cut what is between the ligament, and put the two shoulders hanging from the part below the wound until it is released to ease the extraction when the splinters are removed, and the wound is healed.
of the route of the boil
When the intestines are ruptured, and the wound is small, one can restore it in some cases,
because I saw a man who was stabbed in the belly with a lance;he had a small wound and yet he survived.
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became a fistula, and from it issued flatulence and winds;
I treated it with cautery according to what I could do, and did not cease subtilizing until it was healed and the wounds closed.
And when I saw that it was healing, I doubted that the patient had discomfort in his belly; and there was no harm done, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking;
and some experiencers say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a way: take fine thread, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened the mouth, place it above the two lips,
then put another tremor after in the same way, until the wound is completely healed;
and watch the wound. If these parasites are found in the intestines and cause no harm to the patient,
one can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such a way: take the end of this intestinal thread that is very thin, and then tie to the head of this thread a fine, twisted linen thread, then pass the thread through the needle, and sew up the intestine, and relase it in the wound;
and this way of sewing up the intestines is not useless except according to the path of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great intestines, there is no healing without subtlety.
of fistula wherever it may be You should know that any wound or abscess, when it erupts, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is deep and narrow.
A fistula is according to the definition a hard, white nodule without pain, and is as smooth as a bird's feather;
and sometimes it is clear, and sometimes thick; sometimes small, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of it in the section on wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no scabs, these are caused by one of the eight causes;
that is to say, by a little wound or injury; or because of their wickedness; or because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not let the flesh grow; or there is too much bowing; or the skin is loose, and the tissue is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for the treatment; or because the corruption is a form of pestilence; or by the property of the region is delayed digestion, and late health, and swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Now I will tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is done with the hands.
Know that fistulas occur throughout the body's limbs; for there are fistulas that come from large veins and arteries and nerves, or in the syrinx, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some of the sides, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And all the fistulas that are in this way are painful to heal, and there is no benefit but labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the point that I have described, and you are confident in the treatment, and you see it, take a tent of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, so take it;
and if the fistula is crooked, then search for a thin tent of lead, because the lead bends with the crookedness.
And if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot well search it out by tents, then cleanse it through one of its openings,
for moisture quickly runs from one hole to another, and cleanses it;
then you shall let it bleed until you know whether there is bone or nerve involved, and it is deeply pierced;
and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where he feels it most;
and once you truly know the location, whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, or in any of the places I have told you about, according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places I have told you about, according to what I have told you, and remove the dirt and rotten cart-wheels that are inside; and then clean the wound until it is healed,
and if the fistula is quite deep in a straight line, you should cut it open as far as you can, then I wet tents with medicine water, and insert them into the fistula up to its head,
then I wet tents with medicine water, and insert them into the fistula up to its head, until the medicine corrodes the surplus that remains at the bottom;
and then I apply healing ointments to the healthy flesh, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it out. If a vein or nerve afflicts the principal limbs as we have said,
and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and darkness, then treat it until all the corruption is removed, then clean it with things that are soothing until it is healed;
and if he is not cured, and returns as before, know that you have not gone to the source:
uncover and dig as deep as you can, and remove all corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is like this without pain, that is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; if there is no other way, let it heal naturally;
and if there is a small bone that has become corrupt, and you can pull it out with tweezers, if he extracts it with an instrument suitable for this purpose,
and if there are many bones, he should extract them all without leaving any behind;
and if the moisture makes it difficult, and there is no mistake or fear, then cut through flesh and moisture and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place something upon the wound to promote suppuration, and let it remain until pus has formed around the bone,
and then they will have a looser joint;
and if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, if you just treat the infection until all the darkness is gone, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large amount of corruption, and it comes to the bone; if it needs to be cut out and covered up completely until the corruption is reached, then clean the wound until it is healed;
I will tell you of a fistula which happened to a man in his leg; so that you may take example and aid from it in your work.
He was a young man of about 30 years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that arose within the body,
until the matter came out of the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no pus to drain from it;
but they looked at their folly so much that they opened the abscesses and many materials came out and became a fistula, and many openings came from which all pus and moisture flowed from the body;
and many looked for a cure for two years, and there was no wise person in the art of medicine,
as long as I was called there, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what runs through the pores of the body; and the youth's body turned red and had a yellow hue.
I set up a tent at one of these openings, and then I examined all the openings,
and found that they came together from all parts of the leg.
I therefore hurried, and pressed one of the orifices until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone inside;
I removed what appeared to be rotten bone, and believed that there was no other corruption except for that which I removed;
and began to treat the wound with strong medicines for a long time, but it would not heal;
and then begin again, and expose the bone as before,
and I found the corruption continued in the bone, and removed it, and then closed the wound;
but I could not until I split the bone for a palm's width, and I drove it out to all its root, then I restored it with medicine; and it was healed and closed quickly,
and one must not repeat the operation except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and for fear of his death which I had of him. For by the evacuation he often bled, but he was entirely healed,
For by the evacuation he often bled, but he was entirely healed, and there grew in the place of the bone hard flesh, and he was of good disposition and did not have any harm or evil anywhere, nor in going nor coming.
and are the head, so that you draw the corrupted flesh underneath, and uncover the flesh above the area where you see it is swelling, so that the swelling does not spread to the flesh; and place a hot brand or a table under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and one must draw as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and draw again another time.
And if the bone is broken and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part then it discovers all the flesh; then put under it a brand
and then sear from one side of the corruption to the other, and make the blister as long as the corruption, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in a joint, cut open the joint and sear the bone on the other side;
and if the dislocation is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to cover it;
and if the dislocation is at the base of the hand or the foot, it is a very serious matter, but nevertheless you must examine the patient, how it appears to them; and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful not to damage the veins or nerves;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and know that the chisel and the files for covering these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the ears and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason one must prepare for each type of work its own instrument;
and know that the work will show you the tool you need, according to your knowledge of this art, and witness the ways of illnesses; then examine the instrument you need according to what is appropriate.
fire The shoulders may protrude due to internal causes or external causes;
and when you have treated that corrosion with remedies, and they do not help, then you should cover the limb up to where the corrosion is, so that the patient escapes through death, or through the greater evil, from the defect of the limb;
so that the patient escapes through death, or through the greater evil, from the defect of the limb; and the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and then comes darkness, after which the corrosion of the limbs spreads from limb to limb, and throughout the body; so you must hurry to cover it up,
and if it is due to the sting of poisonous beasts, such as scorpions from the sea, vipers, and similar creatures,
if the corrosion is on the head or neck, then cover it, and do not give it any space to reach the hand.
And if it comes to the hand, then grip at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then grip near the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is deadly, and there is no remedy for this except by reducing its power;
and so too when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then grip after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, cut off the entire foot; and if it rises to the leg, cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to kill the patient with a stab to the throat;
and the way of binding the member whether above or below, it should be tied above and below, and one minister stretches one of the strings downstream, and another minister stretches the other string upstream, and you loosen the rope that is between the two strings to a width of one palm, so that the bone is exposed;
then the cord or silk, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the silk does not touch the healthy area, and cause the patient another injury and abscess.
And if there is bleeding when you operate, then cauterize the wound liberally. or apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete,
then bind the wounded member with an appropriate bandage and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what happened to a certain man in a dream:
a darkness resembling a burn from fire occurred to him
and this corrosion first appeared on his toe of the foot, so that it spread all over the foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered his foot and was healed.
and a long time after, the corrosion returned to the toe of the hand, and he came to me,
and I put upon him things that rebound after cleansing of the body, but he could not stop the corrosion;
and he wanted me to cup his hand, and I did not want to, for I had no hope of rebounding the matter; and I doubted that if I cut his hand, that he would die, because the strength of the man was weak; and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land, and he healed his hand;
I have told this story only to show that one should do this, if they need to.
Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it causes great swelling; then they rupture and drain, and the flesh remains, just like vessels; and the skin above is as thin as a loose napkin, and they do not reach to the bone or nerve, and such a malady is called 'healthy',
but if it extends to the bone, then it is called 'fistula'.;
and the cure is to wrap the skin all around it, especially when it is thin, as one would a piece of cloth. and do not worry about its destruction.
And if you are worried that the skin will rot, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then the cure is thus:
Look to see if the breasts are large, and if the bowels within are of foul odor. therefore cleanse them with an Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take asafétida, oil, and quicklime, in equal parts, and mix and cook them in a vessel over fire, until the medicine is red, and as thick as honey;
and then take according to your need, and make it with water and honey, and use it as an enema in the breast, and tighten the orifice; and leave the medicine in for .ij hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this a number of times, until the breast is deflated and the pore is removed;
and sometimes they are blisterized with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you should take ashes of vine wood, and pour water over them,
then strain it and blister with it as much as you know the wound is clean;
and if the patient cannot endure it, nor Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, if he is enema with water and honey or with a little litarge ground. or you can use honey and honeyed wine for the enema; let the honey have the property of cleansing and washing away. and the wine makes the body perspire.
And when you have done this and are sure that the intestines are well cleansed, if they use a cautery on him which produces pus within
and you prepare an ointment with diaphoretic herbs, and apply it with rose oil and wine; or you may cauterize him with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in the section on ointments;
and if the opening of his anus is small, and the tip of the cautery instrument cannot enter, if you enlarge it with an iron a little, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then cut it and leave only enough room for the catheter to enter,
and if the orifice that urinates is above, then the cup or lower down where it is. For when the bow is perfect, one does not allow the arrow to become lodged inside. and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, set up the bow in such a way that it points to the lowest place it can reach,
and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, prepare in such a way: that the bowstring runs smoothly down, and do not leave anything of the bowstring; and take consolidating medicines to put over the breast,
and they are on a linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then press with force the opening of the breast . The hole must be larger than the first . Then there is a soft ointment on another piece of cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and put it on the breast opening to align the bowels, and do not remove the large bandage for several days.
And the one who is on the breast opening, remove often to remove the bowels, and know what flows from the bowels, whether it is poison or little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and be wary if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has spread in such a way, and you see the nature that jumps out of the opening of the breast, if you know that the breast is open, and approaches the saint;
and then loosen it in the morning, or midday, and when you loosen the wound, change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast milk flows in an unripe state after several days, know that the breast will not produce milk. And if subtle poisons flow after a long time, do not despair of health,
because the saints are near. For there are people whose wounds fester for a long time, and those who do the opposite.
and if milk does not flow from the breast after many days, know that the breasts will not open;
and if the breasts are delayed in opening, and are distant, then apply medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, as with diaphoretics, for there is a great part of vitriol in them, and that is the last medicine;
take a definite ointment, and make it with rose oil, and mix in equal amounts of old wine;
then cook it and use it; and with the same mixture, thicken honey. when a definite ointment is not present,
or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them into powder over the honey while it is on the fire; and then they glue a piece of cloth, and press it onto the breast, and sometimes they administer an aromatic poultice, and roots of celestial lily, which is like wheat flour and centaury;
and roots of celestial lily, which is like wheat flour and centaury; and in the use of simple or compound medicines: grind them to a powder and place it on the honey I mentioned earlier and use it; And if the wound is long and not healed by this treatment,
And if the wound is long and not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is complete, and it makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard body, or in the soft tissue. if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the nail
Panarice is an abscess that arises underneath the fingernail of the hand, Or by a stone, or perhaps it sprouts in other parts;
and when it becomes diseased, and no attention is paid, then an abscess forms and bursts; and they run and ooze pus until they reach the root of the nail, and sometimes they even cut all the way through;
and the corrosion reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the shoulder is swollen and the colour is yellow.
When you treat him as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, you must cut away all the excess that has accumulated under the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward. Cautery is a great help if the bone and nail are healthy;
and if the nail presses on the flesh, and begins to push out, and bleeds, you should place a thread under the nail so that it stops pushing against the flesh, and draw it up gently and gently cut the flesh underneath, and place burning and corrosive medications on top to remove everything;
And if the corruption is in the bone, then dig it out and cut it away, because as long as the bone remains corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the tooth decayed, pull it out in the manner previously described, then treat the swelling until it is healed;
and if it is wild, and biting, and it feels great pain, then you must treat it first; then clip the fingernail of the big toe with a diagonal cut from above,
and be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
and if it happens, put something on it to soothe it.
There are two types of warts that grow on people's hands by chance: they can be all fleshy, and sometimes there is bone in them and sometimes nails,
and some grow at the base of the joints, where the growth comes from the knuckles. He who is born with a hernia of the navel should not move, and he who is born at the junction of the navel, by chance moves;
the size of the one who is fleshy is light, in such a way: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Those that grow at the root of the joint are difficult to cure; you must cover them.
For those growing on the back of the neck, you must first shave the hair around it in a circle up to the bone. Then, cut the skin down to the bone with a suitable blade, then cure it until it is healed.
Joints can be united by birth, or by the joining of a wound, or by a burn, or by similar things.
It is fitting that you correct this wound, so that its parts are restored according to their natural forms. then place between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so that they do not adhere. or you place between two pieces of thin plywood, until the wound is closed, as it should be.
If adhesion occurs to one of his hands with the palm, correct that adhesion as it should be.
Of the wicked
Veins are large enveloped vessels filled with melancholy humours that come into various parts of the body;
and it happens more in legs of those who walk and labor and carry things, than in others.
Therefore, you should administer to him some purgative medicine, and then the basil drink.
The treatment with fire can be done in two ways: one is to use a cautery on the head of the wound, drawing out the black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein and draw it all out.
The incision is done in this way: first, heat the leg with very hot water until the large vessels are made subtle, then stretch the leg from the sick person from above the thigh to just below the knee; then open the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide cut,
then squeeze and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient can tolerate;
and then bandage it, and instruct him to drink possets with black wine;
and start the evacuation and bleeding again when the veins are full, which benefits the patient.
The treatment of it is as follows: shave the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put him in a bath and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell;
and if you do not have a bath, then heat it with fire, and then rub the area around the vein from the top of the knee to the foot, or in the part below the ankle;
then open the skin at the vein, and blister it from each side, until it is sore when touched;
and it appears red and black, and when it enters the skin, it looks like a white cord;
then pierce it under the skin, so that it is raised up from the skin, and then it can be easily pulled out at the tip,
then cut into it in another place above it, twice; then scorch the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it up with a pair of tongs, as you have done before, and pull it out with another pair of tongs, as you did before;
then cut another strip, or several if you need them, then lift it, and press it against the bottom of the foot,
then pull and lift it until you reach the second strip; then pull it out, strip by strip, until it is all removed, then press it down;
and if you cannot pull and lift it, then thread a needle with strong, doubled thread, then tie it and pull it out, and insert the needle under a nail, and turn your hand back and forth until it comes out; and make sure it does not break, for if it breaks, then one cannot milk or raise it, and this brings harm to the patient.
And when you have milked it entirely, then place on the site of the wound wool moistened with wine and rose oil; and cure it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, you must split it twistingly, but do not break it; and milk it as we have previously said.
you must split it twistingly, but do not break it; and milk it as we have previously said. The shape of the iron with which one opens the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it opens the vein.
It is of a large curve, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein; but it should be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is found in the legs, in hot places where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land where there is no moisture;
and sometimes it grows elsewhere, and this happens from the scabs that form under the skin,
like serpents and worms that nestle between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this illness are that there is a great swelling in the leg, then change the location, and the illness will begin to emerge, just as a plant's root emerges from the ground.
When the head is exposed, it is necessary to wrap a piece of woolen cloth around it, one and a half yards long, and tie it tightly.
Let the woolen cloth hang down from the head to the leg, and every time he tries to get away, wrap him up in the cloth again, and tie it. If the cloth is too long, cut off a piece and wrap the rest around him, but do not cover his head at all while it is still coming out. Because if you cover him completely, it will go back into the body and cause an abscess and swelling in that place, and a serious illness.
it must be treated slowly and gradually until it reaches the head, and nothing should remain in the body.
And sometimes this vein, when it is opened for five or ten inches, or even more, and once a man came to me whose vein was opened for ten inches, and when you cover it, it makes one hole or aperture, and pierces all the way through,
so that all fluids inside are discharged; and then administer warming medications for several days, then treat it like an abscess.
And sometimes this vein opens on its own, especially when it breaks out at the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and there is a great gushing of blood; treat it as we have said before.
Of worms which grow between skin and flesh:
This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land, because it often happens to oxen,
and there is a small worm that hatches between skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body going up and down, and it can be felt moving from limb to limb, until it breaks through the skin where it goes, and jumps out;
and is caused by the putrefaction of certain humors, like worms and snakes and roundworms and tapeworms in the belly;
and it is feared for its maliciousness, for when it moves through the body, and it rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance re-enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see him being healed and milked, he cannot be restrained except when he wants to:
So you must tie the area above and below with a strong, tight string,
then milk on top of it and if the venom is deep in his body and you do not draw it out, if you cauterize it with fire above, as it dies;
and the greatest harm it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye, then firmly pull the lash out from under the eyelid, and pull upwards.
It is necessary to use a purifying medicine for the body to dissolve the bad humour that has been poured out,
and from eating putrid meats.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "vomiting" in our language, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm;
and soon after, I saw it rise up like a worm at the shoulder, quicker than anything else, as bright as silver when it moves from one place to another;
the pain left that place and settled in the shoulder,
and then a little later it ran through the whole body until it reached the other arm;
then he told me that it turned around the body, just as I saw it.
I was very surprised how it moved from limb to limb like that, because I had never seen this disease progress in that way before. Nevertheless, I had seen many who experienced pain moving from one place to another, but I have not seen this happen to a woman.
and I thought that it was because women's bodies are dry and their veins exposed, and for this reason the wind is confined to a small space;
and it does not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and have moist bodies and covered veins.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, examine it above and below thoroughly, then press upon it until that forced windiness leaves its place. and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it yourself,
if the cure is done by someone who expels windiness, as with foul-smelling pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the part of the body where they strike.
Their diversity lies in that there are those with large points, and small, and barbed, and smooth. and those that have two angles, and of those that have teeth, and of those where there are parts; and it breaks in any limb in two ways: either in a principal limb it breaks,
such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs. When it therefore breaks in any of these limbs, and the signs of death that I will tell you about below appear: you must take care when extracting this arrow, because death comes after in many cases. and if the wound is not completely healed and there are no bad signs, then pull out the arrow and treat the wound.
And when the sign of the brain is seen, the arrow has pierced the bone and passed through to the brain, and the pus that flows out from it, is when there is a cut and bleeding, and blackness and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of blood. and perhaps it is without force from the nose or ears, or perhaps loses speech and voice; and from the wound there issues white moisture resembling pus, and also blood as in an open wound;
and if these signs appear to you, desist from the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not in.
The signs of a wound when it sinks into the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were pierced into a hard object, and not hollow; and if it affects the brain, it silences it like the hair, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting. then know without doubt that death ensues.
And the sign of an arrow that never leaves the lung is that without pain foam comes from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow hits in the covering of the foot, it is between the small ribs; and there is great swelling and great pain and breathing; and all the limbs move from the shoulders.
And if an arrow hits the stomach, perhaps something undigested will jump out of the wound.
And if an arrow hits the belly, and nothing comes out of the bowel but feces, then there is no hope for a cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow hits the bladder, and urine comes out and escapes, and the patient feels great pain, know that this wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and armpit and spine of the back and hip and thigh and leg, and similar limbs, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you can do likewise.
It happened to a certain man that an arrow struck him in the jaw near the ear: I probed it and dislodged it from under the ear lobe, and he was healed without any numbness.
And I extracted an arrow that had struck him under the eyelid, below the eyeball: and the arrow was drawn back, but its tip reached only as far as the shaft. and the arrow was great, from a Turkish bow, to all .I. light metal ears; the game was healthy, and no bad incidents came to him.
And he shot an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
The game was healthy; it was a great discomfort to the Christians. I cut off the beards, and made it subtle until I took it out, and the Christian was healed.
And he drew an arrow out of a man who had it lodged in his head or belly, and I thought he was going to die;
and then after thirty days, his condition did not improve; I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and he had no ill effects.
And if you see a man with an arrow stuck in his back, and the wound is sewn up on top;
and keeps the arrow inside him, and does not change his natural dispositions, and finds no harm in any of his natural actions.
And you will see another man who got an arrow in his face and the wound was sewn up;
and stayed like that without experiencing great pain; and many other similar cases.
And drew an arrow from the head of one of the king's men who had it lodged in his brain, and was slightly bent to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded.
I was called to attend the wound after it had been treated for four days. I found the wound very narrow.
I probed it with a thin needle and felt nothing; and he felt pricking and pain under his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
I placed a cooling and digestive plaster on the area, because the ears were swollen; and I saw the place where the arrow had hit.
and I saw the place where the arrow had hit. I applied the ointment many times, and the wound healed directly, and the patient suffered for a long time.
until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me so. I applied medicine with a corrosive agent to the wound many times until it was open,
and I probed it and felt the tip of the arrow which stuck out in the middle; then I applied the medicine to the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it passed well within four months,
and then I lanced the wound that I had probed with tweezers, and it would not drain;
therefore I did not cease from subtlety and cunning with instruments, until I took it on the first day with well-made tweezers, According to what form it will come out at the end of this chapter, as I have experienced it, and restored the wound.
And the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it therefore, and the wound was sewed up and the patient completely healed.
Now I have told you about the extraction of some arrows, so that you apply your treatment to what I do not say, because books cannot understand everything;
but the wise teacher considers well very little, and what is present and lacking to him, discovers new remedies and instruments, and the descending of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows grow in the members where they are lodged in two ways: or by the place they enter, or by another part;
and that which jumps out through where it entered is an arrow entering their flesh, and sometimes jumps out now.
And if it doesn't jump out now, then leave it as long as the flesh around it becomes putrid and the exit wound heals.
And if it's lodged in the bone and can't be removed, then leave it for several days, moving it slightly each day;
and then it jumps; and if it does not jump, then pierce around with a very fine needle until the hole is enlarged, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged deep within the body and cannot be seen, then cut it off at the tip; and if you feel it, then draw it with an appropriate instrument;
and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein in the way, then open it as widely as possible; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if the arrow has barbs that are holding it in place,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if the arrow has barbs that are holding it in place, if you can, remove the arrow that is stuck in two parts at the wound. and then break or fold the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out;
and then break or fold the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out; and carefully so that you do not break the arrow as you pull it out more forcefully.
And if you cannot remove it in one go, then leave it until the flesh around it is swollen, and then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the bleeding makes it worse, then administer what we have said about its treatment in that chapter;
and beware of cutting into the nerve and opening a vein, and use every means you can to pull out the arrow without danger,
quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and position the patient according to how they were when the arrow struck them, for that is the greatest help, and if you cannot, then position him according to what the signs show you.
Arrows that come from elsewhere, or where something is seen or felt protruding from them, or the skin is swollen in that area:
Then cut above it, as high as the tweezers can reach, and then pull it out; if it does not come out at once,
And if it is caught in the bone, then rotate your hand rapidly, so that it goes into the bone and widens the opening, then pull it out.
And if it cannot be extracted, then leave it for now, and then try again to extract it until it comes out;
and if there is an arrow in it, then it is stuffed with everything.
and if the shaft is broken, and you see to administer a bandage, then it administers an instrument that is chewed, so that the tip of the arrow goes into the gum of the instrument; and then it fills up
and if the arrow is chewed, then it puts an instrument with a point entering in, to ease extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, as much as you can. then clean the wound as necessary.
And if the arrow hits in the buttocks, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the ribs, and it is superficial, and you can cut over it, then cut over it.
and be careful not to cut into the vein and the nerve, and then pull it out, and then sew up the wound if necessary. and the treatment until it is healed.
The shape of tweezers used to treat arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and here is the shape:
There are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
of the common body veins Of the veins from which one heals are 31, from which there are 16 in the head,
that is to say: .xi. parts which are behind the ears, which are called the two "lobes". and the .ii arteries that are visible in each temple; and .ii veins that are in the .ii eyelids, which are called  "lids"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two windpipes which are in the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips at the mouth, and these are the veins called 'augerich'; and 2 veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are 5 in each arm:
There is one of the head, and it is on the left side, and people call it 'vein of the head'. and the middle one is called a 'fast', and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins. and people call it the 'vein of the heart'. And the basilic vein is on the right side; and people call it the 'vein of the belly', and it is above the pubis, and it is the one that heals, which becomes clearly apparent above the scrotum.
And the saving vein is that between the little finger and ring finger, and also has two branches:
and in the leg there are three veins: one is under the bend of the scrotum on the left side, and the second is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called 'nesse', which is at the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg are .iij. veins below them.
The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old cataracts, and with emigrant; and the quality of the bloodletting, as I told you, and it is that you treat the head of the patient,
and the quality of the bloodletting, as I told you, and it is that you treat the head of the patient, and wipe the area around the veins with a rough cloth; then squeeze the patient's neck with a rope, as long as the .ij. veins appear behind the ears, in .ij. depending from the head: tie them therefore at your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, so press in;
then take the lancelet, and pierce it under the vein right up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards, and pierce both skin and vein well through two fingers, and make the blood issue until you see it;
then press and bind it until it is healed;
I have already described incision and cauterization in the first book.
The bleeding of the two arteries in the temples; this is useful for ancient migraines, and for eye pain and tears due to agues;
and the qualities of the surgeon are as I have said: and it is that the patient stretches his neck, so that both veins are clearly visible; and feels pain under your armpit, and then signs in there;
then lightly press the vein near the top of your index finger, and insert the lance underneath, and open the vein at the top, and the vein, as you have done in the .ij. other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then loosen the bandage, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
and then ligate it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their bandaging and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
The bleeding from the vein in the forehead is as effective for old diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness;
and the qualities are such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called a "gouger", which has this shape:
and place the point over the vein, press firmly with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount you want. then loosen the neck of the patient, and tie the vein until it is healed and sometimes use a large flame.
Nevertheless, it is not right that the flames be too sharp; and the sick person should not move about, because the bone is close by, and perhaps the flames will break when they are thin.
They cure two veins which are in two tendons, and they help with tinea, and redness, and oriels in the eye, and illnesses of the face;
and the nature of their cure is that the patient turns his neck by twisting some ligament, as before;
then he heals it, and the healing is through the cross, a little from the long part of the flame, a little wide, because there is no flesh there.
And if the flames are subtle, by chance they may break; then make an incision to draw blood, as much as you need, and then bind it on a cotton pad, and bind it well.
The bleeding from the vein in the nose is good for nose bleeds, and for sudden fainting, and for facial illnesses, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is chronic;
and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient turns his neck, then pulls on his nose with his left hand, and take the thin flame, and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well thus, and the blood will begin to flow now;
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligature it one night, for it is restored very quickly;
The healing of the two wounds aids in the constriction of the throat, and in the beginning of hoarseness, and in many illnesses, and in impetigo, and in ulcers, and in herpes, and in stomachaches;
and the quality of the healing is such that the patient stretches his neck downward on both sides, as we have said. and the master stands above the patient's head, and the patient sits on a chair,
then heal the vein of the long one quite widely, then draw the tempered blood, or as much as is needed.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
then make another cut on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and gently press on both veins. letting the patient breathe, and leave it until morning so that the wound heals.
Of the bleeding of the lips The bleeding of the veins in the lips helps with sores in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and pain in the teeth and gums.
And the qualities of healing are to have the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said. Then look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left; and they are known by their being black, and because around them there are fine black veins; then grip one and the other, and if you do not know them and doubt which is which,
then grip one and the other, and if you do not know them and doubt which is which, take the thickest of each part, and do the same with the two veins above and below, for it is the same technique.
From the bleeding under the tongue: The bleeding of the veins under the tongue helps after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the liver, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the bleeder is that the patient holds his hand in front of the sun, and lifts his tongue, and looks under each side for a black vein:
then cleanse both of them and do not go too deep because underneath are the arteries.
Veins from which blood is commonly drawn can be treated in two ways:
or with a sharp mertin, or olive-wood splinter, very thin, called "anesil." and are wide and thin according to the width and tightness of the veins. The shape of the flame of myrtle is highly renowned, and it is wide as you can see.
And it is necessary to open veins that are smooth and full of visible blood, and contain thick and troubled blood; and that is the shape of the flame of the olive tree:
and it is more pointed and subtle, used for bleeding veins that are fine and contain subtle yellow blood.
The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
and the surgeon should bleed it, and take care of the artery that is underneath. And if he pierces the artery, and there is bleeding, then it must be stanched as I have said. and the flamme should not be pinched but cut so that it does not burn.
And if the basil does not open obviously, then you must stretch it and change to another; or you can take some of it, or you can open the vein in the arm: it will open obviously; and apply the cupping glass to the flame, as we have said.
And if you want to find the place to bleed, you must stretch the arm and feel for the pulse; then sign the site with the point, then tie the arm, and press the vein with the flame of the torch;
and be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the site puff up, for that is the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it bulge upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is blood from the artery: hurry then, and place your finger over it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops, which often happens;
Let the arm be bound, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and let him be on watch, and do not move until he is healed.
And if the blood is not staunched and he bleeds and medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it is open, for that is where the blood comes from; and staunch the blood.
And take a piece of cork, cut it in half, and take one half and bind it on well until the next day.
If the blood is staunched, that is good; if not, then cut it again, as we have said, with powders that stanch blood;
and the bandages are not wrapped in various ways due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
The bleeding from a vein in the middle, if it draws blood from the head above and from the body below, this is because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and the bleeder must be careful not to pierce too deeply, and he should find the nerve, and it swells and the saint is distressed, and perhaps cannot heal;
and this nerve opens in many places, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must heal it with the instrument gently; and avoid the nerve as best you can.
And if it has a vein between the two nerves, they cut it open.
The healing of the cephalic nerve helps, causing blood to be drawn from the head and helps the eyes.
and it is necessary to bleed him with a flame from an olive tree or a myrtle, for that is the safest of all veins, for it has no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Nevertheless, one must seek out the lightest vein, and if one misses it the first time, and begins again; and perhaps they will inflame some people's veins, if one misses the first time, but it does not matter. The quality of the bleeding depends on your thought process.
The first thing you must know about bleeding is that it is not performed unless to maintain health.
and to prevent illnesses from coming; and the bleeding is done in one of the three veins: namely, the cephalic, the fast, and the basilica; and one should bleed in the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
and one must bleed him the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
The bleeding that is administered to the sick has no specific time, but when there is a need during the day or night, at all times and in every season.
and one must not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman carrying a child from the fourth month until the seventh. Nor should the very elderly who have passed 60 years be bled.
And when someone wants to cleanse themselves, in whatever way, they should empty the intestines with a gentle enema, if he has retained feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful excess waste from the intestines to the main organs.
Do not cleanse those who are too full from meat, nor those who are drunk, unless they have fasted for a long time or are suffering from dropsy.
and if they have had diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal discharge, or excessive sexual intercourse, or if they are recovering from surgery, or suffering from a fever, or if they are weak due to illness or injury.
then subtlely draw out the humors if the illness is strong, through meats and drinks and medicine if you have the power.
then into a bath, if nothing else will help, to draw out the blood subtly,
and heal the vein from the bottom up to the third, as we have said;
and keep that day for work, and piercing, and lust, and similar things;
And he is bound and joined, and the surgeon stands above him whom he heals, and rubs the arm ii or iii times.
Then they loosen the ligature above the wound, for when it is too tight or too loose, it cannot heal well.
And then he rubs the area with his hands until the veins swell and they can be felt.
Then he moistens the surgeon's blade with a little old oil, then puts his finger from his left hand on the wound under the place where he wants to heal, that the vein does not burst when being pricked with a needle. For there are veins that flow like cords into the body, and some that are filled with wind, so that when one places it over the flame, it withdraws from the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus is it with some people;
and if he opens the vein, the wound is too tight, so one must be careful with these things.
And if the vein works the first time, that is good; if not, do it again a little lower down on that spot or higher up, if the vein is not swollen.
And if the vein is swollen and the patient feels faint, let him rest for a day or two and do not bind his arm. Perhaps there will be warm abscesses; do not enter the bath, then start bleeding again if she wants to.
And if the hole is small, pierce it with a needle and you suspect that not enough blood will come out as you want, then pierce that same hole directly with a flame.
and work gently, so as not to inflame the wound; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the area is inflamed, do not restart the bleeding and apply a little olive oil, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the oil that is applied is beneficial.
and thus use olive oil in every bleeding that you open veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and this also makes a tourniquet and bandage from cloth, when it is applied to the area; it tightens the blood vessels and reduces the flow of blood when it is too abundant.
And if a large abscess comes, which happens many times, especially when it is not cleansed until after the opening of the vein is small, take an sponge moistened in water and in some little warm vinegar, and apply it to the spot for an hour;
and you must do this after the blood comes from the vein, and if it remains there for a few days, it will not harm him; and if you see anything of aloe or myrrh made into a poultice, a blister, or something similar.
And often there is an abscess and swelling at the exit of the urethra; therefore place your hand upon it, and if you feel the spot soft to the touch under pressure, then that appearance is bad. Therefore avoid putting anything of what we have said upon it, for perhaps it will go away without any artery being involved; but make a dry plaster to harden the spot, then treat the wound with other treatments until it is healed.
And treat each wound according to its quantity and the strength of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for him who is full and bloated, and needs bloodletting, that one makes him a larger wound, and the flames are wider;
and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and he should be bled little and often, and one should bleed him by cutting across, not piercing;
and this method of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and it is better than bleeding the long or the wide vein.
And for him whose body needs bleeding, one should give wet bread in pomegranate juice; if he is burning hot, [bleed him] three or four times.
And if his complexion is cold, let him eat before bleeding soft bread dipped in muzed syrup, or in aromatic honey-syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he faints after the flow of much blood, let him breathe in the scent of warm meat broth and fine scented syrup.
and use the other things that we have mentioned in the section on syncope for opening a vein.
And if he wants to empty his arm and bleed again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by a large bleed, that he bleeds little by little according to the amount of his continued strength.
And whoever wants to open their arm after the first bleeding, and they have a strong body, then heal for .7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, then they should bleed on the second day or the third day.
For there is a lot of blood inside the body that has been heated, and it causes fever; so one must draw out a large quantity, and widen the hole until it bleeds freely; then you must follow all the conditions of bleeding, and put your hand on their pulse while they bleed so that death does not come from the bleeding place, and this happens many times when the doctor is negligent;
and it must not happen that when you see the arm loosening and blood coming out a second time, and the vein is closed, that you press firmly on it; nor if he is bent, that he extends his arm quickly, for that would be bad;
but let him keep it until he heals the second time; or you touch it with the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that is congealed at the opening of the vein comes out, and put on top of it .i. little piece of salt, and press gently.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is reduced.
And if it is necessary to let blood a second time, then bleed in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins in the arm are healthy in the area of the vein in the head because it is composed.
And the method of healing is for the patient to place his hand in hot water until the vein turns red;
then let him be handled gently, so that the vein appears well, then he should be bled gently from across it, not from the top or bottom;
and let the wound be wide, and let him be bled close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot issue from it, then put the hand back in hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
and if it is winter, do not put the hand back in hot water, as one puts more into it in winter than in summer;
and the bleeding from this vein is safer than any other vein as there are no arteries or nerves in it.
The bleeding to save the right hand is useful for all diseases of the liver, and this is how to do it:
Hold the hand, and pour in warm water until the vein is swollen, as much as they see; and if it bleeds across, and if you bandage it from all sides, it will not hurt at all;
and don't go too deep, because the nerves are all stripped of flesh underneath.
and then put your hand in hot water, if the blood has congealed in the wound and cannot flow out.
And when you have stopped the bleeding as much as necessary, then put oil and silk on the wound to heal quickly, and do this for each wound.
The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and do everything just as I told you about the right hand.
The salve of poppies is good for all diseases beneath the skin, such as diseases of the brain, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the intestines, and of the hips and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
And its quality is such that the patient should pour it into hot water and rub it on the wound until it disappears, and if the wound is at the ankle, and if it is on the leg, it will draw out many fluids from the leg;
then cut it at the ankle, or the Achilles tendon, whichever moves more easily.
And if you cut it at the foot, then be careful of the nerves underneath, and cut it across as well as up and down; and let the flames go out.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein bleed well.
And if the cautery fails the first time, then do it a second time higher up, because the place is salty; do not doubt of nerve, as we have said, and likewise do with the other leg similarly.
The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle bone, and its pulsation extends to the pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
And its qualities are such that the patient feels pain between the buttocks and extends above the ankle in twisting .four times.
For otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then you should pulse in all ways that you can, and by passing through; and it is better to cut it, for the nail is safe, and it is very tired from walking on foot.
and it is better to cut it, for the nail is safe, and it is very tired from walking on foot. And if you do not treat it, cut a vein in the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves.
and let the blood flow as you wish, and then untie the ligature, and place cotton on it and compress it; it is now healed.
Bleeding with leeches:
Suction cups are made of horn, or bronze, or glass; and suction is performed in two ways: by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
And this suction without striking is performed in two ways: either with all heat, or without heat;
and 2 others on either side of the neck; and a suction cup under the chin; and a suction cup on the shoulders; and a suction cup above the kidneys; and the suction cups in between the 2 arms; and the suction cups in the 2 legs; and the suction cups on the ankles; and the ventilation does not draw blood, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the body,
and for this reason one weakens it not at all, just as is done with bleeding from a vein; and one must not administer it at all, neither with any fire nor the sense of fire, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
And if from necessity due to illnesses, or because of habits, we administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between each time;
because there are some who, when they need to ventose, have a heavy head;
and if they experience swelling and redness on their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes.
and others who spit up blood, have a swollen tongue, and bleed from their mouth; and if they experience hallucinations, seeing things that are not there, and suffering from fainting, bleeding, and death, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially if it occurs during the night, we instruct them to drink a medicine after three hours.
The bleeding of the nose helps with headaches that come from the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of blood from the body;
and this ventilation is in place of the bleeding of the head,
and it should not be used by those with a cold complexion or a cough, as it does them great harm;
and for this reason, the elderly should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
And those who often heal from it become oblate, and because of this, the cupping glasses should be placed a little lower down due to the risk of oblateness.
The site for cupping is on the neck, at the junction of the head and the basilic vein, and therefore it is useful for constriction of the feet. and for splitting of the canal of the lung, and for coughing, and for repletion;
and it should be applied gently, because if it is pressed too firmly, it can cause oblateness or stomach and heart issues.
Ventilation of the two ribs in the neck is good for headaches, and eye pain, and migraine, and strangulation, and toothache.
It is in the location of the basilic vein; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand upon placing it so that he does not compress the artery, and cause a flow of blood.
Ventilation below the chin is good for mouth diseases, and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; it is in the location of the veins of the two lips.
Ventilation of the armpits is good for a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
The ventilation of the armpits is as much good as three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from those large vessels;
and instruct the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, for beneath is bare bone, and underneath are nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass that is placed on the hip is good for hemorrhoids and diseases underneath; and the cupping glass should be large and made of copper, which it needs to draw well; and by chance, if it were delicate, it would break and make great wounds.
Cupping on the legs heal very well, for they draw blood from throughout the body, and are effective for long-standing pains in the kidneys, and the bladder, and for hernia; and they bring relief to swelling in various conditions.
The method of applying the cupping glass is to first apply it empty, and suck gently, and place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the area red and swollen, and the color of blood appears; then release, and re-apply the cups, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those with thin skin and clear pores: thus one should only pierce once, and make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, one should pierce twice: the first time to subtilize the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, one should pierce a third time; and when we want to draw blood a little at a time, we only pierce once.Et se li sans est maigre, et les porez clers, si covient ferir tres foiz: car il ne peut sortir tout le gros sans que la voie ne soit subtiliée par traison du sang maigre.
And if we want a lot of blood, then we bleed often; and if the blood is thick, then we pierce it with a needle, and when the veins are such that they are suddenly pierced,
it is appropriate for those who have thick and tough skin and have narrow pores that you anoint the places where the leeches will be applied with an opening and dissolving oil. if it is in a state [of being pierced], use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
and if it is in the evening, use watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or similar.
And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or of fennel, and similar oils.
And if the patient has soft flesh with large pores, no oil should be applied to it;
but afterward wash it with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or water of pumpkin, or porcelain water, or similar.
And those who have a lot of moisture should get up from garlic, or myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large swellings should drink old wine or clear water, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or similar.
and it is not good to bleed by cupping before the bath or the steam bath, but one hour or two after; and do not sleep after cupping,
and it is best to keep him warm when he should be bled and when he has been bled. And guard against the patient becoming colic-like, and if his blood is too hot and inflamed; if he should press cool things, like pomegranates and endives and lettuces with garlic, and similar things;
and eat small amounts, and charred food, and moist foods.
And those of a cold complexion should drink honeyed syrup, and moderately aged, fragrant wine, and eat small birds and young pigeons;
and on the day he is bled, he should drink more than he eats;
and it is necessary to give some men sometimes treacle or musk before or after a fart, to comfort the principal members; and make the drink subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
The leeches that are used without bleeding are those that are used on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the goiter, and on the stomach, and the gut, and the hips, because these members do not tolerate being bled on the eyes,
and it is only done to attract blood from one member to another, as we place sucking cups on the breasts when they are healthy to remove the viscousness in the member, as we place sucking cups on the abdomen and buttocks to reduce the swelling of the member.
and removes pain when there is obstruction or stone, and by its attractive power it removes the obstruction or expels the stone from its place.
and so it acts when placed over the liver and over the abdomen when there is retained windiness,
and these cups are administered empty to draw only; and sometimes with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water,
as in the case of diseases where there is phlegm, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with hot water, or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The shape of the cupping glass administered by fire is as follows:
And it has 2 inches in width and half a palm in depth, and on the side near the middle there is a small hole, as well as for pushing through a needle,
and it should be made of copper, smooth in front so that it does not harm the patient when placed on the limb;
and has a rod of iron or steel placed diagonally in the middle, to hold a candle.
and they are both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
because the leeches of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from the fat.
And one should thus place this leech on the member:
take the candle of wax or a lining, and put it inside the suction cup through the tube that is inside the suction cup, so that the flame is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the body part, and your fingers should be on the hole we mentioned so that when you want to, the vapor will go in and out, and you remove the suction cup;
and then apply the lining as before, and repeat it often if necessary.
In the cupping glass which is administered for pneumonia, with all acute diseases, there is no tube or hole, and it is not removed until it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only.
And this is how it works:
Leeches are not removed until they have been applied to parts of the body where cupping glasses cannot be used due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas. And in bare flesh, such as on the tongue or nipples, and other similar areas.
and its quality of use is such that when you find veins that are in clear, still water without any odor, then take them.
and put them in fresh water, until they become familiar and have nothing in their bellies; and then cleanse the vein and bleed it, then rub the member until it turns red, and place the leeches on top;
and when they are full, and they will burst, if it is a place where one can apply a cupping glass, then do so, for it is much better.
If not, then raise the site of the wound, and then with water, very gently, and then express it;
and if the site of the bite is too far from the body's surface, then wet a linen cloth in cold water and place it over the bite until the swelling goes down;
and if the swelling has spread, then apply ground vitriol, or salt, and similar things, until the swelling goes down;
or you can place half a handful of peeled peas on the site and leave them until they cool down, and it will stop swelling;
and if you need more, take other leeches.
And if the leeches will not attach, then wipe the area with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until the leech attaches. Then place them on the wound, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach.
And when you see them defecating, then powder the wound with a mixture of aloe and salt, or ashes, and they will remain in place.
Here begins the book of fractures.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is a cure for fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the foolish people are speaking of this chapter, which they have never seen in any ancient books or letters.
And for this reason, the knowledge is strange in our land, for I have never found any good ones;
and I know nothing about it except from the study of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have gained knowledge from them, and from experience, and from my life's practice;
And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained in it, and summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in the previous two chapters.
Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the subjects of the discussion and the chapters in which the sage sets his understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture, or dislocation, or twisting, or a break occurs in anyone, you must hurry to treat the patient with cauterization from both sides, if nothing else helps, due to weakness of the body, or childhood, or old age;
or if the weather is very hot or very cold; and eat cool foods, that is, cold meat, and chicken and squirrel, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you suspect a hot abscess, or the spreading of matter in the limb; then return the patient to their first course of treatment.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, one must feed the patient foods that promote swelling and stickiness, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, and offal, and fresh fish, and wine, and similar things. For with this swelling the bones will close up and heal more quickly.
And know that broken bones of the old and infirm cannot heal well or knit together according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs, nor can those who are too thin, like the bones of young children.
but have no care, reset the broken bone of the large tendons that extend and join the limb together, as much as it enforced it before; and do not touch any part of its work, and for this one must fatten on large meats, as we have said.
And you should know that there are various types of fractures in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of fracturing. For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in grinding, as with the tip of a quill for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in grinding, as with the tip of a quill for writing. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break all over a small split.
And each manner has its own reason and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes to mind;
and it is known that the fracture of the bone is due to twisting, and it is evident by displacement, and it sounds hollow when pressed with the hand;
and when there is no twisting or sound when pressed, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture;
but there may well be a crookedness, or crack, or small split. You should not move it by hand, but rather apply the remedies that follow, and then hold it firmly in place.
And you should know that for a break in the arm, where the two parts are separated, they must now be put back into place evenly, just as with an abscess;
and if the abscesses drain, he should leave it for a day, until the abscesses are soothed; then reset it to its proper place as quickly and smoothly as possible, knowing that the restoration of the joint is easier than the restoration of one with broken bones; then hold it steady, as described below.
And if there are broken pieces of bone, if it is in two parts, whether hand or foot, or the hand if it is a small member, or with two strings, or with one string and your hand;
and reset the joint according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the bone are brought together, you reset it with all your skill and care, making sure not to cause any further injury or pain to the patient.
and adjust the two ends of the bone according to the best shapes.
And you can feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not right: then dress it nicely, and do not pull or press too hard as those who cause hot abscesses and contraction in the limb by their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the member is healed, then instruct the patient carefully not to move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and be sure that the member is so secure that he feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, then it is not ready, and you should put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
For when it feels no pain, then it is not ready, and you should put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain; and ensure it is placed correctly so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken members vary in smallness and greatness and in form.
For there are small members like fingers, toes, and the like; so one should wrap them in soft, slender linen.
and those who are large, like the thigh and leg: they should be wrapped with a wide and sturdy bandage, for a wide bandage embraces all of the large limb, and constrains it from every side equally, so that there is no swelling.
then tie around it light sponges, 3 or 4 times depending on the limb, and constrict the hand a little at all the bandage, then go above the dislocation and constrict less, so that the dislocation then moves away a little.
and soften the bandage little by little, as you press on most of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wind it around again directly over the dislocated area.
then go to the part below the dislocation and constrict it slightly, not too strong or too weak, as we have said above in the first bandage.
then put between the lines, wads of linen or bandages, until it is all even, then tie it all tightly with a bandage above, and then put your well-made stars on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something hot that soothes the abscess above and reduces the swelling, leave it like this for several days.
Then stretch it over your stars and make them half the width of a large cane, or of wood used to make cleavers, or palm fronds, and arrange them in this shape:
However, it is necessary for the star that one places over the break to be somewhat larger than the others.
and let it be as long as is appropriate for the size of the limb, small or large;
then tighten it over the splints just as you did at first, then tie it firmly with a thread in the same way as before over the fracture.
The tighter it is, the better; and the thread should be medium thickness, not too thin or too thick, and made of soft flax;
because if the thread is thick, as I have seen fools make cords from tightly twisted flax, it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be less than two threads between each splint.
And if the patient is wounded in the head after the stretching of his legs while healthy, then place under them linen pads or other soft cloth so that he does not get hurt.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment for this later.
And know that it is not good to stretch all the broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is large, one should not apply splints until after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on the severity of the swelling and hot abscesses;
and here is the way of the ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations and twists: you take flour that is held on the walls of the mill, and cook it with an egg-abundance, and place this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it; and this is the common way of the plaster restoring fractures in many dispositions, especially women and young children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Another way of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and twist: take 3 barley and ladani and enule and asafetida and gum arabic and mastic, each 10; myrrh and aloes, each 5; alechil 8; and make powder of them, and mix it with egg-abundance; if the complexion of the man is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many people.
Another way of plaster that is useful for twists: take mastic and viscud, each 10; myrrh and aloes, each 8; acacia 6; armenic vitriol 10, and grind well, and cook with water or egg-abundance, and administer it.
Another way of plaster for joints and the bones out of their places, and it soothes the pain thereafter, and reduces the size of the bone, and restores the fracture: take new linen, and moisten it in vinegar and oil, and place it on the area. These plasters do not restore, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses, and removing pains.
Another way of making a plaster that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, crush them together, and make a plaster.
Another way of making a plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to reduce swelling of an abscess: take marshmallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, each one part; crush and cook with wine. If the member is burned, cook it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another way of making a stronger plaster than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member: take marshmallow root, flax seed, borage, milk thistle, and Saint John's wort, and violet and chamomile flowers; take an equal amount of each and crush, and cook with salty water, or sweet water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member and its comfort.
Ypocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to restore it other than a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems according to Galen that one must put on the broken member, to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair cut short, or bird feathers, and bee's wax, and mix them together, and crush them, and make a plaster from it and apply it.
And then loosen it a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor the bone move from its place; if not, loosen it again after several days.
And if pain comes to the area, or itching, loss of appetite or swelling, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster immediately; and take light cloth, and sponge from the sea moistened, and plunge in water, and lift up the area until the itching stops and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry linen moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it to a nut, until you are sure the abscess is hot;
and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and the pain is gone, then start the gentle binding again, and a little ointment, but do not bind it as tightly as before; and gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you need ointment and binding, then do it again, just as you did before.Et se il n’est pas sanez, et il ne te veult bien estraindre, si covient qu’il soit osté dou membre et mis en autrui lieu, et li membre ben liien et ben reposé.
And if it does not heal and the patient refuses to be bound, then it must be removed from the limb and placed in another place, and the limb should be well bound and rested. And sometimes it is left for 20 days or longer, depending on what one observes, until the break has healed and the flesh has grown closer together.et li membre ben liien et reposé selonc la maniere que nous avon dit; car il adest maintes foiz que l’ostement ne s’aert pas tant sobtoit, et il doit demorer longuement.
then restrain it more than before, and increase the amount of food it eats, as I have said earlier; and if you see its place becoming drier than is necessary, know that no healing can come from that. then use hot water to wash it, every time you loosen it, and do this every third day, and leave it for a while.
through this work, the healing of the limb is shortened, and gently eases what the foolish person does, which is to restore the limb that has been tortured: it is malicious, and such work is fearful, and I see no other way but to persevere and do it properly.
of various kinds of fractures: There are many types of fractures, with various shapes, and the causes are distinct.
because there are fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone breaks all the way to the sinus which is under the bone, as in a cut or a blow from a staff; and this type of fracture is called "haichure".
Or the sword cuts the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound from these two types of fractures is large or small.
And if there is a blow with a bladed weapon, or a split or from the collarbone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
And if there is a broken bone piercing through to the membrane below the bone, or on top of the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if there is a wound that is placed in the bone as thin as a hair, and the crack is small, and because of this the break is called "capillary."
and if the wound is made by stone or fall or similar thing, and it drives the bone piece inward, and the place is hollow like a potter when he makes pots on the potter's wheel; then the bone goes inside.
And this happens more to those who have moist bones in their heads, like a child's head;
and it happens with all these types of fractures that small pieces are dislodged as described above; I will speak about them in their place.
And we shall know all kinds of fractures through examination, and through the corruption that is upon them, and through the foulness that is upon them.
The appearance of hair is known when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it, if the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, be wary of the signs of illness, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, fever, eyes bulging and reddening, and other similar things in various dispositions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
And if you do not see a fearful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the patient comes to you first, and it is winter, then you should remove the tooth before the fourteenth day that you can.
And if it is in the spring, then you should hurry to remove the tooth before the seventh day, so that the gum beneath the tooth does not become corrupted, and the accidents we have described occur.
And if the break in the bone comes just to the gum that covers the brain, then you should split the broken part thus: and it is that you press the head of the patient with the navel, and uncover above the bone in all the ways you can, and on top of the wound more gently than you can,
And if blood flows when the bone is exposed, or an abscess drains, help him as it is proper to do, and you must fill the wound with wet rags soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is drained and bleeding stopped; then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done according to two methods of operation: one method is that you cut tightly in front, and it is shaped as follows:
And then make another larger cut than the first.
And the second method is that you have various cuts, some narrow and some wide, and they are pointed and made of iron; and work gently so you do not bleeding the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, you must pierce around it, so that you administer cauteries with needles, not deep enough to pierce through to the other side of the bone, and there should be a rim or circle at the tip, preventing the needle from going beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each one comes in its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have needles for all occasions. And this is the form of cauteries in three ways:
The qualities for piercing around the bone are that you place a needle on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the needle to another spot a little later, and do this all around; then cut into the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this as skillfully and gently as you can, as we have said, so that you draw out the bone with your hand, or with one of the instruments you have, like tongs or pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, it is appropriate that you resect the membrane which is attached to the bone with any similar instrument to an incision, but it must be more flexible and finer than the other incision;
if it dislodges nothing but the small bones and no scales, then gently draw them out with instruments; then treat the wound with tenting and poultices as we have said.
And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is safer; he praises it highly, and his word is final. First, you must expose a part of the bone, at the place where the fracture is open, so that when you have exposed that part, you shall place under the head of this lens-shaped incision, from which the fracture has occurred, in order to cut it.
Do not cut from one side only, as the fracture is on both sides, so that the cutting instrument is directed towards the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet upon it, so that you slightly chip away at the bone all around, taking care to avoid the membrane below.
if it is dislocated at the bone, then the bone must be gently moved, for one can move the bone without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then one must smooth out that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp rasp which you should have in various sizes, in order to adapt it to each location according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Take a large rasp first, and then a finer one afterwards, and do not stop doing this until it is smooth.
In each of the other subtle cuts and fractures, one must adapt it according to its nature; and this is not something that can be easily done by one who has not dedicated their study to this art.
And if the ulcer is exposed, you should take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; Then take another folded cloth in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not burden the ulcer, then apply pressure above with another ligature, and do not tighten it more than is necessary to hold the wound;
and leave it for one or two days until the abscess is soothed, then remove the ligature and apply remedies such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, aristologus, and similar things; and make a powder from these ingredients and place it on the wound, and then apply other remedies that do not cause biting;
and make sure the wound is clean and dry, that you do not leave any ointment on it, or allow any pus to collect, because when pus collects under the membrane of the brain, it causes great harm; for when one applies something biting to the wound, it causes numbness above.
Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if blackness does not come but because of the medicine that has been placed on it, then such virtue has it, you must take a part of honey, and .iiij. parts of rose oil, and glue .i. bandage, and put it on the ulcer; then treat it in ways that are appropriate until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two bones above are broken, either by themselves or with the one below, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should insert your little finger or a needle into the break, and hold it steady with your index finger, until the nail regrows according to its natural shape. do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
And if the break is above the nail, and the fingers cannot reach the spot, then you must use the end of a thick stick.
And if the break is in two parts, do the same, and be quick to restore it on the first day, if you can.
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is healed, then attach to the head of the tent made of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you attach another one on another side, if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the holes of the nose.
And some say that the tents should be moistened in butter, and changed every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but they should be moistened in egg white, and ground flour; then leave the tent, until the bone is healed, and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes they attach goose feathers instead of tents, and around it a thin cloth, and the patient holds the fracture, and breathes in the medicine; do as you wish.
And if hot abscesses come to the nose while you are working on it, then put a poultice of rose oil or in a little diaquilon.
And if hot abscesses don't come, then put a poultice on the nose, made from flour of sisament, and powdered incense, cooked in egg white. Then put it on light sponges and do not bind the nose.
And if the break in the nose is small and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with appropriate instruments for this purpose. Then cut the wound and treat it with healing things made from warm charcoal and plaster, as well as appropriate ointments.
And if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with tents and put in splinters of willow tree, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the jaw
When the jaw is dislocated below and there is no external wound, and the break is only out of place, and not broken in two, so that it curves inside, then one can easily tell.
If the break is in the right part, you should put your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left jaw, then put your index finger from your right hand, and gently push the break back into place, and adjust it with the other hand.
And if the break of the jaw is separated by one-sixth, then you should administer an extension of one-sixth, so that it is even.
And if there is movement in the teeth, or looseness, then they are restrained with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then apply cerotum to the broken jaw and place a double fold of cloth over it; and place a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather the same size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it in place as tightly as possible; and instruct the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
And if you see that the jaw has changed shape, then loosen it on the third day and reset it to its proper position; and apply a poultice over it made of powder from the mill with an abundance of egg or sisamum flour, after having removed the cerotum; and place a light lamb's wool poultice over that, and if the poultices start to rot, and the condition of the patient does not change, then leave them as long as it takes for the patient to recover; many have recovered within three weeks.
And if hot abscesses develop, then administer what we have already said many times.Et se il a contusion sus la mandibule, si met sus cerote, et sus le cerote lainne legiere, et li estele longes; et se li estele s’aert, met ainche sus lainne legiere, si come tu oges li contusions; et adonques covient il que li disloque la mandibule a leu.
If there is a break and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone has been removed; then carefully remove it with suitable instruments for this purpose.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none inside, then stitch up the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it a suitable poultice to promote healing.
of the armpit The collarbone breaks several times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, with pieces, and is the easiest to heal; or there is a break with a wound.
And the procedure is, when there is no wound with the fracture, to have two assistants: one holds the shoulder where the collarbone is broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected side. Then, using your fingers, bring the fracture into alignment so that it is set correctly and there is no displacement or misalignment.
And if you need more extension, place a round pillow made of cloth or wool under the shoulder of the patient; then lift and lower the collarbone, holding the pillow in your hand, so that you set the fracture correctly.
And if you cannot pull the head of the collarbone out of its socket because it is too deep, then the patient should lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder, and the assistants should lift the shoulder from below, so that the collarbone bone is raised.
Then address the fracture with your hands, and if you find it broken, you must split it open; gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined because of an overhang, then use one of the incisions you have made to insert this instrument beneath the bone to push out the splinter:
and is shaped like a spoon, and is not sharp, and is as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has two handles, one wide and the other narrow, depending on the nature of the wound that you have made when you split the bones.
And when you are sure of a hot abscess, close the wound, and if the incision is small, or if you doubt that it is a hot abscess, pack the wound with bandages and dressings according to its size.
And if hot abscesses come, soak a bandage in rose oil, garlic, and wine, and place it over the wound:
The stretching of the bone, when there is no wound or fracture, is to place upon the bone the plaster made from mill-dust and egg white, and place light bandages on top, and insert a sponge under the elbow if necessary. Then take a very wide bandage, about a palm-width, and place two folded pieces of cloth on top of the bandages and plaster; then take a thin strip, three digits in width and length, and wrap it around the bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs loose. and place the strip over the fracture, and wind the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the affected armpit; and adjust it from each side, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture in place satisfactorily, and you clearly see that the strip is not moving over the broken bone, then loosen the ligature and restrain it again.
and have the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the armpit to raise the shoulder, so as to ease the fracture by aligning the shoulder; or bind the arm to the neck, and do not release it unless a bad accident happens, for up to 20 days.
then resume the poultice, if you see that it is needed, and hold it there until he is healed; and she is usually healed within 28 days, but some men recover more quickly.
of a shoulder dislocation
It sometimes happens that the shoulder is broken or dislocated near its joint without being noticed except by touch; then adjust it according to the pattern of the break and reset it according to its natural shape, in every way you can; then put on the wound powder from the mill with an egg white, and apply light dressings, and place over it a double piece of cloth; then put over that a large and thin splint, slightly larger than the shoulder, and if there is swelling anywhere under the shoulder, apply that swelling with linseed poultices so that the splint lies evenly; then bind it firmly with a broad bandage, so that the splint does not move from its position, and check the binding every day. And whenever it becomes loose, rebind it, and adjust the splint if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on his side; the shoulder is usually healed within 20 to 25 days. And when this time is up, remove the binding, and be careful, for it is not a bone that can be reset easily.
And if a piece of the bone has come out in front and is not under the collarbone, cut it away, and do as we have said before about heating the abscess to ease the pain.Et si li espaule est desaloiee par cause de moistor, et on la remet en son leu, et elle ne puet demorer en son leu, si revient adés et desalue par petit mouvement qui avient; si doit on la disloquer premierement, et puis la ramonyer.
of the break of the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but that seldom happens; it more often breaks at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it inclines downward, and causes great pain to the patient, and a deficiency of meat, and vomiting, and perhaps bleeding, and the hair grows in the broken bone, and he feels it very much.
And the treatment is that the patient lies on his back, and puts a pillow between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders together, and brings the ribs together with his hands, and carefully tries to make the bone even in all ways he can, so that the figure of the bone is as it should be; then he applies plasters and poultices made from subtle salt, or other light substance, and wraps it in a cloth, and ties it onto the broken bone, so that it does not move; and winds the bandage around the back again, and tightens it gently, and checks every hour if it has softened, and if so, he tightens it; and if he needs to loosen it for corrosion or itching that comes to the area, or pain, or an abscess, then he should hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and treat what has come from various cures; then he re-applies the plaster and tightens it until it is healed.
of the break of the ribs
Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur except in the large ones after the back, and in the head within, and they only bend because they are slippery; and one feels well on examination at the joints.
And the restoration is that you place the fracture evenly, as it should be. And then apply the ointment and compress it with a bandage, if you need to.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels great pain and stabbing, as well as a feeling of pleurisy, because the bone punctures the membrane; and he has a cough, and is hoarse, and vomits a large amount of blood, and it is a serious illness, and the ancients considered it dangerous.
And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture outward.
We do not make any incision unless an abscess is hot, if it has not become so already. And if it has become so, then we lance it to let out the pus and the unhealthy matter.
And some say that one should place cupping glasses over the affected area to draw out the excess fluids, and this is reasonable; however, there is a risk that the cupping glass may attract unhealthy fluids due to the weakness of the body.
Some say that one should cover the affected area with warm, moist wool and place tenting between the ribs to ensure even pressure all around; then it should be treated with a poultice of pleurisy root, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that pokes through the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then one should split above the location of the broken rib, and one should place underneath a instrument to ward off the syphilis; and then one must split the bone, and gently pull, and then sew together the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat with plasters until it heals. And if hot abscesses come, then moisten cloths in rose oil and place on the location; and while curing the area that needs to be cured for the abscess, let him lie carefully on his side where he should, until he heals.
of the break in the neck
Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and it bends; and also in the spine of the back. If the bones of the neck are broken, then one must split the neck in the break and place an instrument on the break, and go gently if life is at risk. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, pay attention if you see their hands soft and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that there are many dispositions where it is fatal, and if they can move and feel the pain when you stretch them, know that the joint of the bone is saved and that the patient will be healed if proper treatment is given.
And if a similar thing happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, then take note if the feet are numb, and if there are signs of injury in the arms, and when lying on his back he passes wind and evacuates bowels involuntarily; and when he lies on his belly, he also evacuates bowels involuntarily. And when he is laid on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that this is deadly: do not labor over his treatment.
And if this accident does not occur, then the condition is more minor.
And the treatment is that you apply a hot poultice to the spine if there is an abscess, using rose oil or egg yolk until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and he should not sleep on the side where he feels pain until he is healed. And if any bone is exposed, then cover the wound with a bandage; remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a single stitch, and treat it with ointment until it is healed; and if the shoulder bone is broken, which is called the "shoulder blade," place your left hand's thumb in your right hand as tightly as you can, then apply the plaster and bandage it, if necessary; then bind it, and if there are exposed bones, put them back in, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Occasionally, the bone of the hip may fracture, and if it does, there will usually be some shortening at the head; and it feels long, and tilts to the side, causing pain, and puncturing and swelling where it is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over the break, so that it aligns with the fracture; and you identify where the fracture is, and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the head, then you put it back into alignment, so that it has a natural shape again.Et si li brisure est a la queue soulement, et que li chief soit en son leu, si met cele brisure en son leu natureil, tant qu’ele ne se mueve plus; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient dolor al leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.
And if the fracture is long, or it tilts inwards, then have the patient lie on his stomach, so that the restoration of the fracture can be prepared. And when you have put it in its place, then put on the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or horn, and bind the fracture so that it does not move; and apply the poultice under the armpit, until the limb is healed.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or his back.
And if painful bumps appear, do not touch them until the painful bumps are healed, and then apply what we have described earlier; and then return to restoration, and bind it as it should be, if there is no bad incident; and that is the way.
of the shoulder dislocation
The shoulder joint is what is between the armpit and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of two methods. The first is that you take a straight stick of moderate thickness, according to this shape:
Tie the two ends of the stick with strings, and bend them upward, and have the patient sit on a chair; then let him lift his broken arm onto the stick, until it reaches the end, and place a crook on the stick, then lean over some heavy object or have an assistant hold him down; then bring the ends of the broken bone together in alignment with both hands, until the break is set as it should be.
The other method is to have the patient lean forward onto his elbow, and tie his hand to his neck; then instruct two assistants, one to pull upward on what is above the break with both hands, and the other to pull downward at each end of the stick, pulling in opposite directions.
And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, then tighten one string under the break and one above it, pulling in opposite directions. And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you should place one string underneath the socket and one towards the armpit, over the break; and likewise, if the break is towards the armpit, then place a light string gently without exerting force, until the bone is aligned with its joint, and then align the break so that it sits correctly in its socket. If there are no abscesses, then tighten and hold it in place.
And if a deep abscess comes, do not drain it for seven days, and put soft lamb's wool in the hollow, and rose oil, until the deep abscess is soothed; then drain it, and the way to drain it is to put the ointment on the break, then assemble the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and lay a cloth, and drain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in place, unless something dislocates it, or the bone moves.
And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and put a larger and stronger splint over the break, and have two inches of space between each splint, and let each splint be large enough to stick out three inches on either side of the break; then drain over the splints, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter, more strongly and less in distance.
And if you see the position of the splints and the drainage, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the deep abscess, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the bandage every three days, so that itching or swelling does not come to the site, or the pus cannot return to the member because it is too tight. Then loosen it, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then dislocate it after three or more days; and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and place beneath the shoulder a plain woolen cushion evenly, and watch every hour of the day or night that the broken limb's shape does not move or its bandage become loose; then treat him with medicine and give him the meat we mentioned earlier, so that the meat is first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be coarse. It is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset within forty days of each other; then one should dislocate and administer baths and medicated ointments to direct the healing. And if the dislocation is severe and swollen, it should remain dislocated for one day or two months.
Of the break in the arm
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the 'ulna' and the 'radius'. The ulna is smaller and is located near the armpit; the radius is larger and is located below, towards the little finger. Sometimes only the ulna breaks, sometimes only the radius, and sometimes both together.
When the small bones are broken, their restoration and healing are easier; but if the large bones are broken, their healing is more difficult and painful than when they are both broken together. If only a small bone is broken, it should be gently extended and set straight.
And if it is the large bone that is broken, then it must be pulled harder; and extend it over a pillow, and have the wrist of the hand higher than the other fingers, and the little finger lower than the others, and let the patient cross their arms over themselves, and a pillow in front of them so they do not feel any discomfort; then the assistant extends the arm of the minister towards the part underneath his hand, or one minister above, and another minister below. And then set the bones straight according to its best form.
And if there are pieces in the fracture, place each one back in its proper location; and if there is any dislocation, hold the heart, and reset the bone as we have described earlier.
And if the fracture has caused an open wound, I have spoken of it in a separate chapter; so take care with that treatment.
And if in the beginning of the restoration, abscesses occur, then apply .i. cloth of cerotemade of rose oil and white wax, so that it is not too hard or too soft; and bind .i. cloth over it gently, until the abscesses are soothed. And then remove the cerote, and apply the plaster of the mill powder with egg white, then put on the bandages, and let the bandage over the fracture be stronger and a little larger than the others; and know that he must have vi bandages on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or in both; and bind tighter over the fracture than elsewhere, and always looser as time goes on, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths over the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the string with which it is bound be made of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And review the limb and the ligature after a few days. And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should wet the limb with hot water until the itching is soothed; and let the limb rest without being bound. And then restart the binding, and if the ligature becomes loose or the bones slip out of place, then adjust it.
And if you see that the nutrients cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you should loosen it a little and leave it like that for some days, until the nutrients flow, and then bind it again.
And if none of these things we have said happen to the patient, do not release him until .20 days are past, or until he has a fever, then he can put his hands on his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in .30 days or .35, and by chance in .20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that in the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from manyfold folds.
And when the palm of the hand is fractured or folded, one must have the patient stretch his neck and hold it straight in front of him evenly; then he puts his hand on a flat surface, and extends the minister the broken bones, and makes them even with each other, then he puts on a plaster and bandages, if no abscesses come, then he puts on a splint according to the quantity of the break; and it is wrapped in 1 piece of linen.
And if the fracture is in the peritoneum around the abdomen of the plant, then make a ball of rags, and instruct the patient to hold it against their broken plant; and then pull it with a long cloth, and the stamp of wax as big as the palm of the hand, and hold it, as it should be.
And if the fracture is in the forearm, then you should put a splint on top and another underneath the plant, so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
And if the fracture is in any of the fingers of the hand, and it is the knuckle, then hold it even, as it should be; and hold it with the palm, and see if you put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and do not move it; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, like in the index or one of the others, then hold it even, and tie the wounded finger to the healthy one next to it; or tie them all together while holding them, so that they do not move, or put a splint on top, as in the knuckle; and take care in the restoration and in the application of hot abscesses, and treat those that come up, as I have said.
of the broken thigh
The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see it well when they move forward and backward; and their restoration is such that one ties a bandage above the break, and another below. And let the patient lie on his face, then extend each band evenly to its respective part; and this is when the break is within the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one band should be towards the buttock, and the other band below the break. And likewise, if it is near the knee, then the band should be beyond the knee, and the extension should be below; then the physician should bring the bone back to its natural position with his two hands, and then apply the ointment and the bandage, unless an abscess forms.
And if the break is between the bone and the flesh, then the bandage should be above the break, and the extension below; and apply the ointment under the bandage. You should wrap a bandage around the fracture. Take a double-folded, thick bandage and tie it around the leg, leaving some excess material; then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the toe, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, just below the knee, so that the ends of the thread come out at the top. Then wrap the bandage over the leg and thigh, and place a splint on the fracture, and another splint on the shinbone; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft fabric to ensure the pressure is even, then start to tie the bandage firmly in three or four places around the fracture. The tighter you tie it above the fracture, and looser below, the better; then take hold of the two ends of thread that you inserted between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are on top, then go back down to the end of the thread, so that you come just under the foot; tighten it so that it does not move, then leave it as it is until there is no swelling or bruising.
If there is a break in the bone that can be seen, then it should be opened and cleaned as we have said many times before. If there is an impaled object in the wound, then it should be removed if possible; if not, then the area around it should be split open and the object pulled out. The wound should then be treated as we have described, until it is healed.
Sometimes the thighbone can be broken like this when splints are placed on it, as can happen in the shoulder and arm; nonetheless, the patient will not be cured by this treatment alone.
And you shall know that the hip is restored in one day or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
of the groove of the knee
You shall know that there is little fracture in the groove of the knee, but it bends many times. And if it fractures, it is only a single break, and it happens with and without wound, and it feels good to both.
And its restoration is to put it back into place, as much as it can be put back into place, then put on the plaster, and if necessary, put a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar things; then treat each incident as it occurs, so that it heals.
of the fracture of the leg
You should know that in the leg there are two bones; one is properly called the "tibia," and the other is called the "fibula." All types of fractures occur in the leg as they do in the arm, and so the treatment is the same, and the procedures are identical.
And if both bones are fractured together, then the leg will be turned completely inside out.
And if only the small bones are fractured, then it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly; and it turns underneath. Then administer extension, and make it even, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; and ease it according to your skill.
And when you have finished your work, take two wooden splints that cover the leg on both sides, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee down to underneath; then wrap two bands above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this time the leg will not decline to the right or left, and so it is well; and some administer a basket as long as the leg, made of wood, and they place the leg to prevent movement, and properly do they apply this in the fracture where there is injury; and move the leg every day, to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; and treat it until it is healed.
from the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the metatarsal bones there can sometimes be a fracture, and it occurs in various ways.
And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see the bones on top of each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your own foot on top of his, where the bones are raised; then press until they return to their places. Then apply the ointment and bandages, and place a small wooden board under the arch of the foot, then bind it tightly to the foot in the appropriate manner, and then wrap cloth around it, and other things you may need.
And after three or four days have passed, loosen the binding, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
And if one or more of the toes are broken, reset them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be slightly larger; then place under the foot the board I mentioned earlier, and bind it tightly in place. If there is more than one toe that is broken, place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrap each one in a separate piece of linen, and bind the board under the foot. Let the top of the board press firmly against the sole of the foot.
And be sure to remember the other things we have said about other fractures, for each type of fracture requires a different treatment.
of the break in the bone of the elbow
When the woman's natural bone is broken, she should be made to sit up and lean forward, then held from behind. Then fill the vagina with cotton and place a stone as big as an egg inside it; then make the woman stand, and gently lift her back a little at a time, causing the cotton to come out as far as the entrance of the vagina, and the bone will return with the stone. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, put it back again. Do this for seven days; then the break will be restored. If you wish, take a lamb's bladder, attach a tube to the opening, and fill the bladder inside her; then blow into the tube until the bladder is inflated inside her: the bone will return to its place. Then fill her with cotton and leave it there for some days until it heals.
And when the bone of the elbow is broken, in man or woman, it is restored as we have said for the hip bone; and these breaks are not hidden from those who apply themselves to the study of medicine, and understand my book. For the break indicates to them many dispositions toward the right way of restoration: listen to them therefore.
For a broken penis, take a goose's gullet and insert it into the penis; then wrap cloth around it and leave it for three days, and it will heal quickly.
from a break with wound
It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh or shoulder bone or similar, that they be bled immediately, in accordance with the bleeding we have described earlier.
And if the wound bleeds, then resume reducing the dislocation in that same hour or that day, if no abscesses form.
And if abscesses form, then leave it until the third or fourth day, as long as the abscesses are relieved; do not touch it on the second day, nor the third, for you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered chest, you should gently touch it with your hands, making small movements.
And if the extension does not become equal in your hands, then prepare this instrument of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its thickness depends on the size of the wound; and for this, it is necessary to apply it with pressure, three or four times, according to what is needed in each case of a broken bone; and it should be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under the compression on the affected limb due to your work, and it should be sharp at the front, and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called a «paladin», because the curved head of the shoulder should be placed on the visible end of the bone; and press it once, so that it returns to its place and becomes equal. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot hold the bone well, then you should cut the end of the bone so that the instrument can grasp it.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, either an incision or a saw, according to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone of sharpness and small fragments.
And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do this until it is in its proper place, then soak a cloth in black, acidic wine and apply it gently and cleanly to the area; do not put cerot or anything else on the wound that would cause pus and corruption. Then administer leeches once you have reset the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and cover everything around it according to the size of the wound, taking care that the wound is not constricted by the bandage. Many fools have done this and have brought about death or corrosion on the patient; and let the constriction be looser and softer than other bandages.
And if the wound is serious or large and you doubt that an evil accident may occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then do not use leeches on it; but wrap around it, instead of leeches, tough bandages and tie them. And when you see after a day or two pus forming at the wound, remove what you put on it completely and apply healing ointment to the wound, such as tetrafarmaçon and similar ointments.
And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and closed.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly and lightly.
And if they go astray for many days, and it cannot heal but keeps going back and forth, know that there are small pieces of bone, because of which you should probe the wound with a tent and remove all these dislocated pieces that cause the pain.
And if a fistula or other form of corruption occurs, then it should be treated according to what he said in his chapter earlier. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as with the bones of the thigh or shoulder and similar large limbs, do not draw it out, because many die from that; but let it be until it protrudes after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
of bruises that come on the healing site
Many times after the break there comes health to the bone, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the shape of the limb; and by chance the limb cannot perform its natural works.
Take heed therefore when the nose is blocked: let the medicine be astringents such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, and other similar substances, which you grind into a powder with wine, egg white or garlic; put it on the nostril in a bandage, tie it tightly, and leave it for several days; then remove it and start again, until the blockage is gone. You can also use a well-prepared piece of plaster; for the properties of plaster are that it removes all swelling from the limbs; and if the blockage has turned hard like a stone, and you need to remove it, cut it away, and make the surplus skin visible; or have it removed by a surgeon, so that it is healed.
When the bone fracture is healed, and the limb remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and the limb could not receive nourishment; or due to excessive bleeding; or due to too much movement, and not at the right time; or because there is a lack of blood in the body, and so it is weak.
And the treatment is that you cause the patient to eat, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied within him; and administer a bath to him, and give him joy and pleasure; then place pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts the great coldness, and often wet it with warm water, so that the coldness runs into the limb; and return to its natural figure.
the limb bent after health
When the limbs are bent after recovery, and the broken bones appear, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew; many fools have done this in our land, and these actions are blamed, and great harm results, and sometimes death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and torments are recent, then they should be wetted with hot water or herbs that soften them, such as leaves of plantain, and roots, and mallow, and similar medicines that soften quickly. You take the mucilage of plantain, and cook it with tallow or sesame oil, and make an ointment to apply to it; or you take ripe figs, and pound them with colon dung, and similar medicines.
And sometimes the dislocation is cured by rubbing continually and for a long time with wet hands. And movement should be brought to the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosity is awakened and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then one must cut it open to the bone, with a sharp knife lightly; and put cotton wool and study into the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, one must immediately reset it without delay.
For if one delays, the area will swell and, if one tries to reset it, it may cause pain. Therefore, one should not move it when it is swollen, as this can bring on spasms and other pains.
However, when this happens, let the patient bleed, then leave it until the abscesses are drained; then apply warm water and oil to the affected area, gently reset the dislocation, and treat each limb as the healing progresses back to its proper place.
And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
of the jaw
It happens that the jaws become dislocated, and there are two types of double dislocation: they are slightly displaced from their place and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging down towards the feet, causing saliva to flow from the mouth so that it cannot be held closed, and the tongue is wrapped around speech.
When the dislocation is minor, it can be treated with various remedies.
And if it is complete and finished, you must reset it quickly and not delay.
and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if it is a double dislocation; and the other fingers are relaxed, so that they may be equal; and instruct the patient to soften their jaws and move them in all directions.
And he applies the cautery evenly until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is of the two jaws together, treat it with hot water and oil, gently flexing them until they are reset; do not force the reset, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then place wet rags coated in rosin ointment made from oil and wax over it, then bind it gently with soft ligatures.Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.
and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be supported between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left, and do not force him to talk, but give him soft food until the pain is relieved and the jaws are bound together.Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.
and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not bother to open your mouth to eat and drink as long as the jaw is well-bandaged and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour and are not converted to their place, then fevers and usual sores come, and possibly stomach problems, and possibly vomiting clear fluid.
And when you see this, then know that it is deadly; and many times the person to whom it happens dies within eight days.
of the fork
The foreskin cannot be cured by cauterization near the glans or foreskin, and sometimes it is cured by cauterization further away, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply the ointment and bandage, and bind it tight.
And the shoulder which is towards the neck cannot be dislocated; if it can, and if it is dislocated once, then put it back in place as we have said; then apply the ointment and bandage, and bind it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
And in the same way, the shoulder of the spine is returned when it is dislocated from its place.
of shoulder dislocation
You know that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: one is from the part of the axilla below; and the second is from the part of the foot; and occasionally it is dislocated from above, which seldom happens.
And it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the axilla, especially in those who are thin; but in those who are plump, it dislocates at the edges and goes back in at the edges.
And occasionally it happens to some people that they experience a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Then you must test it until you are certain, and then begin the treatment.
And you will know of a dislocation when it is downward towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest difference between them: and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and under the armpit at the top of the shoulder, as though it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way;
and also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you can clearly see it at the touch;
and this method of dislocation is not difficult to correct when it is new, or if the child is ill.
The method is for the assistant to lift the hand of the patient up, then place their fingers under the shoulder, and forcefully lift the joint upwards in its place; while the assistant lifts the hand, and extends it upward, then places it down; this will work quickly.
And if it does not work as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the assistant should apply softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of fennel and fenugreek and marsh-mallow in water, and it should be applied.
Then the assistant should rub the patient's back, and place a soft lamb's wool pad underneath the shoulder, neither too soft nor too hard, then the assistant places their heel on the pad, and lifts the head of the shoulder gently, and pulls the hand of the patient;
and another minister holds the head of the sick person so that it does not move; then the shoulder will return immediately and if you see to reset it according to this method:
and you should have a man present who is taller than the patient; and he should stand straight towards the side of the patient, and press his shoulder under the armpit of the sick person, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the sick person down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, they can hold something heavy with them, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And it is reset in another way too: insert a long rod into the ground, so that the end of the rod is at the same level as a fist, and neither too thick nor too thin; then it should be placed underneath the patient, but with a soft cloth on top, and the patient should be upright and steady; then extend their hand down on the other side, and the joint will return to its place gradually.
and if it does not return due to all the things we have said, then do this cure: take a stick that is two yards long and four digits wide, with a pointed end to pierce through under the shoulder blade, according to this shape:
then tie it to the top of the shoulder with soft cloth so that the shoulder does not hurt the patient; then place it under the shoulder blade of the patient; and extend their arm above the shoulder, and tie the shoulder to the arm, and the arm to the head of the hand; then place the arm on a board that is wide enough, and extend the hand down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in place, however it may be, you should place under the shoulder blade a woolen sphere that is equal in size, then apply the prepared plaster of mill powder with incense and egg white over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the shoulder blade gradually, and tie the string onto the plaster, and hold the hand to their neck, and let the hand remain like this.
And he should eat little, until the limbs are comfortable, for then he will heal faster; and then to eat more after .v. days or .vii., and move it; and if it is stiff and not柔软, then it is healed.
And if the joint has come out of place due to moisture that it acquired, or for any other reason, then you should apply cautery to it in three places, as described earlier in the chapter on cautery.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after .vii. days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are severed or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never return to its place.
Dislocation which is towards the foot, and in the breasts, or behind, is done by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one administers to it otherwise; and treat it until it is healed.Li dislocation qui sont devers lou col, et les mameles, si est faite per impulsion et estendement de mains, et on li met autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
And if after healing there is stiffness in the limb, and with movement it is delayed, then let the patient use the bath many times until that stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
from dislocation of the neck
You know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with pins, and it returns with pins; and if it is dislocated all over, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back, for one can see it well and feel it well; and dislocate according to each figure. And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is crooked, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
And you should reset it as soon as the abscess comes out, because if the abscess comes out, it will be painful to reset it; and by chance it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and it causes more pain, and death may result.
And the restoration, when it can be reset, is to extend his arm with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands turned towards you according to the joint, both inside and outside, and press the joint of his fingers together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and stretches from the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then strong extension is administered; and there are two ministers who extend the arm, and another two ministers who stretch it, so that it does not move during the extension; then the arm is turned from each side after you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it.
and when he puts his hand on the joint, if he anoints it with oil to loosen the joint, then press the joint firmly, until it goes back.
and when it is back in place, put dry plaster on the egg white, and press it firmly, and wind the arm around the neck of the patient, and leave it for a few days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not healing well, then start again with the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for a few days, until it is firmly in place; then release it.
And if he feels stiffness after the joint is put back in place and it moves, then bathe and rub him nicely, and press until he is relieved; then you can put a fat sheep's ice pack on the joint, leave it for a day and a night, then remove it and have him enter the bath. And when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put on the bandage again, and then enter the bath; and do this two or three times, until he is healed; and if you see that, put warm cow's dung with butter on it, and apply it to the area; it will return to its natural state.
dislocation of the hand
When the dislocation of the hand is healed, and the return is easier than other joints, nevertheless, it must be reset gently, at the same time as when it was dislocated, so that the joint is swollen or an abscess forms.
And the reset is that you put the affected hand on a table, and one person extends the hand while another person pulls it gently, so that the palm falls on the appearance of the joint, and they stretch until it returns to place.
Nevertheless, you should check that it is in the right position; then put the patient's hand on a table for extension and flexion. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then put the patient's hand on the table, and the examiner puts his hand over that part of the joint. If it goes back into place now, that is good.
If not, then apply soothing poultices to calm abscesses, and leave it like that without changing anything.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, then the joint will remain misaligned.
and it does not harm the patient before the hand is weakened and unable to grasp anything: then you will know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other remedy except to constrict by fire cautery from the case, and by chance nothing else helps.
And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have described, then constrict it and leave it for .v. days, then loosen it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then wet it with warm water and rub it until it is healed.Et s’il en a une grante, si le remede est que li mains se tienne au chaud sus la grieteit, et qu’il soit eslongeit tant qu’il soit sanez; car li membres longes sont plus tost sanaiz que li courts.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
At times, they are dislocated on either side of the hand, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the palm itself.
Then grab the finger and bend it at the joint until it is reset, then hold the head of the finger and point it towards the affected joint.
Let it be for a day and a night, then straighten it the next day. Tie it up as we have said, and loosen it during the day, and move it, and tie it at night. Do this often until it is healed.
And do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before until it is healed. And do the same if it is dislocated elsewhere.
from the dislocation of the skull from the back
When the skull at the back or neck is dislocated, there are several dislocations, and there is no cure, for death hastens the illness.
And the signs are that the digestive system expels its contents without voluntary effort, and it cannot hold them in, and often a limb is paralyzed, or both legs, or an arm.
And often the skull mutates in four parts; that which mutates at the back is called "gypsy":
the cure if it is that you reward if the disease has come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing from it at all.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancients described great remedies in many words, but they did not always bring much benefit.
But I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the disease that comes from the feet forward, there is no healing or health.
and also one who comes directly to both sides, and cannot be cured unless he comes properly from the back, as I say;
and that the patient be stretched out flat on his face in one place equally, and have a restraint below him so that he does not bleed.
Then thrust a hot iron into the head in the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a string under the armpits of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two servants hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two irons;
and let them be well closed, the embers as we have said, and the mirror should put his palms on the spine, until it regains consciousness.
And if it does not regain consciousness with this treatment, then take a table three yards long, and place it under the wall, and let the patient lie on their side, and place the end of the table under the spine, then put the middle of the table on the spine: and let the mirror put their feet on the other end of the table and press firmly until it regains consciousness; and if you see that it is turning to one side, then turn it back to the center.
And you should insert two embers at the head of the patient's arm, and two more by their feet, with a palm width of space between each ember, both above and below:
and in each stake there is a hole, into which the cord winds, and the stakes are firmly driven into the ground so that they do not move; and between every two stakes there is a winding stake, around which the cord winds, and in every turning stake there are two small stakes of a palm's length, for turning the cord;
and then tie the cord which is between the stakes to the turning stake towards the head, and the other cord towards the feet to the other turning stake, and each of the ministers turns his cord all along the line, and the master straightens the spine evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, then put on a drying plaster with yolk of egg, and then the bandages, and then the splint of a board three digits long, which covers the area of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a cord as we have said, and use the patient's subtle medicine until he is healed;
and if nothing comes of it in the end, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have mentioned earlier; and sometimes one administers a piece of plaster,
and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear vertebra of the back, and one believes it to be a dislocation; and it is the bone that is exposed, so one must not have any presumption about it: by chance it might bring about death.
of dislocations of the hip
You know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder only come about as dislocations, not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and most inside, and a little dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the affected knee appears more than the healthy one, and the affected one cannot bend their knee over fire; and the place that is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes in defense, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of him who happens in front, it is that his leg is well according to the fulfillment; nevertheless, he does not double the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot before, and retains his urine, and the veins swell, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
And the signs of him who happens behind, it is that he cannot extend his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
The remedies for this type of dislocation are that you examine whether the dislocation is old, and it persists according to its nature, then there should be no treatment; and it must not have any presumptuousness.
And for those where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocation, you should quickly return the joint to its place, and stretch it both inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return to its place, and will not need further treatment.
And if it does not return in this way, you should prepare a strong bandage, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with one hand tied above the knee; and another person stretches his hand above it in such a way that he pushes his hands under his armpits, then pulls him with a strong rope above the thigh; and another pulls on his head with a rope;
and extend upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once and remains suspended.
This manner of extension applies to all four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
If not, you must pay attention to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you should support the patient on his healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the thigh, and at the point below the armpit; then extend the bandage upwards towards the armpit and towards the underarm.
Then have another assistant grasp his arms and tightly embrace the large part of the dislocated thigh, and extend it forcefully in the correct direction; then it will return to its place immediately. This manner of dislocation is more gentle than the others.
And if you cannot bind it in this way that we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong leather thong above the heels and above the knees, and let the affected leg be extended two spans more than the other.
Then let him be hung from the end of a pole, with two arm-lengths of distance from the ground; then command one minister to grab the top of the thigh, and another minister hanging with the patient to grab the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
And when the dislocation is healed, then let the patient lie as we have said in the case of those with gout, and tie one bandage on the affected leg properly, and another on the foot.
Then put two embers, one at the head and one at the foot, then thrust an ember between the thighs at the site of the dislocation. and has moistened bandages placed around it so that it does not blister the patient, then extend each limb towards him, and the assistant places their hand flat over the dislocation.
If it goes back into place, that is good. If not, lie the patient on a table and press him as we have said in the case of dislocation, and let him lie on his sound side.
And when the dislocation is in front, one should extend the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and let the assistant put their weight on the painful shoulder, then press with the other hand, and push it down towards the knee.If the limb is not extended, then take a staff and place it under the limb, and lift it up until the dislocation goes back into place. If that does not work, then cut through the clothes and press directly on the joint.
And if the dislocation is in the back, then one should not extend or lift the affected limb upwards, but it should be positioned as if the hip was dislocated backwards, as we have said regarding lying on one's side with both hips. and it is on his face, and the bandage stretched out as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint on the table;
and it will be at a point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the thighs, apply the ointment, and hold them in place with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
and let it rest for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it and apply the ointment again; if you see that they are even, then hold it in place as before and leave it for 3 days; then loosen it and have him walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
On dislocation of the knee:
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to know, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate at all in front.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, then know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight and extend their leg if they can, and put your back against their face, and put their foot on your feet;
Then take their knee in your palms and pull it gently towards you between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee firmly; and have another minister extend their foot while you hold their leg straight, until the knee returns to its place; and the sign is that they straighten their leg at the thigh easily;
and put the plaster on top, and make the leg air out at the thigh, and tie them together tightly for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it; and the patient should not work until the limb is healed.
And if the limb is not straight, then apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
Heels are sometimes smashed, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tender to the touch in the part where it is dislocated.
the return should be gentle, and the shoulder gently extended with the hands when only the shoulder joint is dislocated.
And when it is dislocated from all sides, you should have the patient sit upright and hold him with one hand by the leg above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards and press the foot firmly upwards;
and do this two times as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it goes back in, that's good; if not, then restart the procedure, for it will go back in.
and if he cannot go back in like that, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and press a stick firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and wind cloth around it so that he does not slide;
then one minister pulls the thigh, and another extends the foot with his hands or with a rope, tying it to the neck of the foot; then each minister stretches equally, and the stick is placed between the patient's buttocks to hold him in place when he is stretched;
then let the surgeon hold the dislocation in his hands evenly, and another minister hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return smoothly.
And when it is in place, put the plaster and padding on top, and stretch it firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and be careful of the nerves that are above the ankle at the back, so that the binding is not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, stretch it again; then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and the patient can go about their business in four days.Et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par  .iiij. jors; And if it loosens again, stretch it again; then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and the patient can go about their business in four days; and if he goes before that time, it is not certain that he will not relapse.Et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.
And if a deep abscess forms, you must calm it down as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of the armpit
When the arms are dislocated, they should be stretched without force, and that is a minor matter.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the body below the waist or below the leg, you must make the patient lie on his back on a flat surface or table with his legs straight, and then press firmly on his feet until it pops back into place.
and when it is even, and there is no opening, then place under the sole of the foot a board with two notches, then pull it tightly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it; and let him rest until he is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to act, do not be bold.
and at the beginning of things use hot poultices for abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see hope, then reset the limb in place so that the hot abscesses may heal;
and when the limb is in place, then minister hot poultices for abscesses, and treat the wound as it should be done, with drying ointments;
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small broken bones, then set the bones, and do as we have said in simple diseases;
and beware of entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it will cause you to go astray according to your Creator, and for the sake of your arms and your body. Amen.
