O you, dear sons, I have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, with its explanations and clarifications. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say, surgery.
And because the work of hands is very much practiced in our region and is well known everywhere, it is a perfect science and adequate, and there is nothing to delay it from the forays but the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved. And because of this, error and vanity have come, and intentions are closed, and the science is obscured.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.
Or me seems that I will vivify it together with the order of this doctor according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the iron instruments of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is fitting. And it is necessary that the one who deals with it master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so much that he knows the judgment of the members, and the shapes and connections and separations of the arteries, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of the joints, and the movement and the moving veins and the resting veins, and the place of their exit.
And for this reason that Hipocrates said that nothing is more difficult than to know how to do it and how not to do it, and in the art of hands is most difficult.
We tell you in the introduction to this book that if one is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, he should be careful not to make a mistake or harm others; so that I have repeatedly seen many of those who engage in this science and also abandon themselves to it without knowledge or experience.
For I have seen a foolish man who cut an abscess on the neck of a woman, and also cut the arteries at the base of the neck; so much blood flowed that the woman died in his hands.
And I have seen another foolish man who carried a stone for a man of Eaze, and the stone was large; he brought with him a piece of the bladder, and he died in three days.
And I have also seen one who was called to pull out a stone from a man; and I saw the state of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they had pulled it out, he would surely have died.
And see I. another wonder which took in cure I. duke of our land who had the leg broken, and with the breaking there was a wound. And the miracle plain of ignorance drew out the breaking on the wound as it was healed by strong medicine, and left not at all at the wound no hurt, and so left him 1 . i. finished; and commanded that he should not have taken it off; and delayed so that the leg was all well and his bones came to destruction.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I had dislocated it, he was in peace and felt no pain.
But all ways corruption was confirmed where the member was, and he could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to go through the member until the members were all lost.
And see I. another wonder which took in cure an abscess which was rotten, and then inflamed by the malice of its lordship.
For leprosy, when it is purified of melancholy humor, it only comes about that one touches it with iron if it is not in the right place so that one can completely destroy what is corrupted.
And for this reason, skilled son, you must know that work with hands is divided into .ij. divisions: namely, where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each of these divisions in this book where there is fear and danger.
For so you must keep yourself, lest the foolish man speak ill of you.
Take your weapons in harmony, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that, by the grace of God, you may come to salvation and be loosed; and reject those diseases that cause grief of body; and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galienes warns against such practices: "Do not take on the care of a sick person unless you are called upon to do so out of respect for that person."
I have devised this treatise according to .ii. chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medicine, and the subsequent chapters are ordered from the beginning of the treatment up to the feet; and about the shapes of instruments, the iron tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in this work.
The second chapters are about cutting and drilling, and suction cups for wounds, extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the subsequent chapters are ordered and provide the shapes of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torments and other similar things; and it is ordered to make the joint of the shoulder as long as possible, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus we remind ourselves of the work; it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and the harm of each color.
I say that the quality of the aid and the harm is the longest word and subtle science and the secret answer; and many wise people would speak about it, and agree with what I say; and I am short of words, for I shorten the length.
I say that fire is an aid for all colors or matter, except for two colors: that is to say, color heat matter, and color dry matter.
In hot and dry complexions together matter, they agreed neither and said that cautery is great aid; and the other said the opposite: that cautery does not help in diseases which come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured with heat by heat, nor with dryness by dryness; and he who says the opposite that cautery does great aid to hot and dry disease which comes in courses of men. For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have never found this by experiment.
And any path, doesn't get mixed up except for those who have tried it and who know by long use the cauterizing ointment, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the effects and space of ten; we don't fear others' complexions, however much cold and moist they are. And all this will agree and accord with the cautery.
And know, children, that together fire and cauterization by fire are more effective in cure than medicinal cauterization, and of greater benefit.
For fire is simple, and comes not before than to the limb which is cooked, and does no harm to another member so much as name.
Burning medications come from one member to another by way of distance, and bring about disease in the limb through healing; and perhaps occasion harm to the patient.
Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything except if it is in excess.
And I have found this through experience and by the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it is based on the veracity of things; and because I do not wish to waste words, for fire's secret, which is revealed in action, and the quality of the work - how it cures the diseases of the body - as the philosopher teaches through a demonstration; receive this in your thoughts.
And know, son, that these cauterizations should be made at certain times, and they are to be prayed for.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, since the sudden harm that arises is remedied by the aid of cauterization; and most especially, if the cauterization is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot be put up with until the time when greater harm comes upon the limb.
And do not think at all, son, as some foolish people do; for when a disease is cured by cauterization, there is no return to the illness; and it serves thus: but it is not like that, because cauterization is merely medicine that changes the complexion and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and it is worth more than medicine for its swiftness in effecting a cure, and for its virtue and excellency.
And it is possible that the illness will not return according to the color of the disease and its place and excellence; and superflous things are gathered in it by the acquisition of meat and similar things, unless cauterization is administered at the place where there is little superflidity and moisture, as when cauterization is thick for pain, and similar things, and the illness does not return; but it comes to pass.
And many people do not understand that fire cauterizations are called the derriers of medicine, and this is so; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth anything after medicine, but their understanding is false, and fire cauterizations are the derriers of medicine for this reason that whenever we have administered methods of cure in any disease and they have not been worth anything, then we administer fire cauterization, and it is worth something. Therefore, recognize that fire cauterizations are the derriers of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish people.
Therefore, the ancient ones said that fire cauterizations of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they did not speak of this because of the quality of gold or due to its height; and they said that the heat of a cauterization does not cause ulceration, but this is not true for I have experienced it, and I have found that in certain people it does; and fire cauterizations made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, as they stated.
And in any case when you heat an instrument of gold, you are not like when it is heated by the color of gold, and it often cools down; and if it is too hot; so let it go to fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or you should read this chapter of the book up to here, so that the way may be easier to find.
The olive oil cautery
The olive oil cautery: For olive oil cautery on the scalp, and in it there are two things that are done because of a disease called "soda," and because of various humors that descend from the head to the hair, and to the ears, and for many dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and most importantly for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be cleansed by a medicine that softens the nose .iiij., according to what the virtues and the lightness and the habit of the patient can bear; and then have the nose of the patient removed.
And then place a cross between your hands, and put his hands on your chest; after that, put the root of your thumb on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let the two fingers come together, if it bleeds, then heat the cautery which is called 'oliver', for this is the form:
And then place it on the ink signet, and pull down and extract your hand slowly and carefully in twisting; then release your hand completely, and watch the bone; and if you do not see it, then restart the cautery as soon as you see the bone, as I told you; after that, take 1 handful of silk, and put cotton in it wet and soft, and place it on the spot, and leave it there for 3 days; after that, put cotton soaked in oil on it; and let it be heated until it is stiff; then cure the wound with an ointment called 'tetrafarmacon', as long as it heals.
And say the ancient one that, the longer the wound is left open, the more it will heal; and for this reason, if necessary, apply it.
And none of these said that one should let the cautery burn so much that part of the bone is burned, and then put back what is burned from the bone, and be healed.
And another said that one should let the cautery burn so much on it, and push so hard that part of the bone is burned as well, as women put in their furrows so that humors come out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after which one must heal and bandage.
And these two ways of burning the cautery do not seem to me to be good for anything except in some men where there is a possibility of fear; and it seems to me that I should let it burn because the shoulder is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and even more so when the shoulder of the sick man is weak by nature, and the first appearance of the cautery seems to me to be more safe and mild for me, and from which I use to heal with ease.
of the old pain of the head
When in all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts long, then should use yeris and pills which are called "cochie", and head purging and oils and plasters; and if one makes the fire cautery that we have said before, and it does not work.
Take care that the patient's head is of a strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then cauterize him slightly as we have said above.
After making a fire cautery on each horn of the head, as we have said above, and making a fire cautery where you put the leech; and it is the same with regard to the application of the leeches; and let your hand be so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels too much pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary that the cornes cauteries be thinner than those on which we make a fire cautery on the head, and this is the form:
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. When there is sudden pain in one side of the head, and it extends to the oil, and the jaw is purged with medicinal substances, and other cures have been made as I said in the division of diseases, and none of them benefit: then do the cauterization according to .ij. ways, that is to say, with medicinal water and fire.
When there is sudden pain on one side of the head, and it extends to the oil, and the jaw has been purged with medicinal substances, and other cures have been made as I said in the division of diseases, and none of them benefit: then do the cauterization according to 1.2 ways, that is to say, with medicinal water and fire. For the fire cautery, take a hot stone, and remove the bark and peel 1.2 pieces of wood, and then place it on the temple or where the pain is in such a way that you can pour the hot stone over the skin; and when it has been poured on, let it rest and tighten it well and leave it so for 15 hours; and then take off and treat with fresh garlic, and leave the wound open for 2-3 days, then put cotton soaked in oil in the wound.
After the oil treatment until it is well; and if you see that fire has done any harm, then do one of the treatments with burning substances that I have written or second cure with fiery substances.
The cure of iron if it is according to this way: Heat the iron in such a way:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.
And is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a clo or it has .i. poc of curve, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little lightly, until the half of the keur [knee] be burned; and let go your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is far away, and runs abundance of blood.
de emigrine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nous avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que le cautere devant dis de la médecine et dou fer ne lui soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est appelé "cultellare" tant qu'il soit blans; et signe ainsi sur le leu doillant une ligne de demi doigt de long, et ôte ta main une fois, et l'estrains que tu ne coper l'artere et que ne viennes jusques à l'os; et te wardes de la mandibule qui mute quant on mange, et le ner n'ait regart que la muet et que spasmes ne vienne à la maladie, et te wardes de decorrement de sanc de l'artere lorsqu'elle sera coptée, ou copée ait grand paor et plus souvent à celui que ne s'y connaît, et qui n'est pas étudiants et éprouvés; et laisse l'œuvre en mi voie; mais je vous dirai comment on retient la sanc lorsqu'l'artere est coptée, et je vous montrerai où il afiert en cet livre.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice to the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him with fire in the head as well, as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said, or the chaplete of extraction of the artery, with a cautery that has 19 knives; and this cautery is better than that and more useful.
from the pain in the ears due to cold
When there is pain in the ears due to cold, and one has taken the medicines that we have said in the division on the cure of it, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", from which this form comes:
After heating the tip of the cautery completely around the painful ear, or around both ears if the pain is in both, and moving it away from the root of the ear slightly as you have marked the spot, then place 10 points on each ear; after treating the area until it heals.
of the torture of the mouth
the torture which must be cured by fire is only effective for those that move with fluid, as we have said in the division of diseases; and not to use fire on similar things that come from scabs and lice.
When you cure this torture-like condition that moves with fluid, such as the one caused by ear wax and head washes and gargling, and that is worth a single fire; therefore, you must use three fires: one in the root of the ear, another slightly closer to the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; place the fire in the healthy part, and let it burn until half of the fire is consumed; and this is the form of the fire:
And the shape of the scalpel that we have mentioned before, but it is slightly finer and it is necessary for the blade to be slightly thicker; after curing the area as I said before, until it is healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, it does no good, and the patient has no fever, then make 23 fire cauteries: 19 on the 2 horns of the head, and 1 on the top of the head, and 1 where they call "vesselz" as we have said before, and a fire cautery in the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
of lead
This is a medieval medical text discussing the treatment of a disease with lead, which is given in large doses to the patient and is believed to affect the brain. The text then describes a method of applying a caustic substance, possibly lead or saltpeter, to the top of the head as part of a treatment regimen. The final sentence provides instructions for how to execute this treatment methodology.
If this is effective, it is good; and if not, he makes 23 fire cauteries by cutting the top of the head down to the collarbone, leaving a space of 1/2 inch between each cautery. There are two large ones; and the patient is cured as with the others, and if he appears to be struggling, and the disease is severe, he makes 1 fire cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, 19 more on the 2 horns of the head, and the patient is cured. The cauteries which are called "olive" should also be made as I have said before.
of the cold of the cold
of epilepsy
of epilepsy
Et s'il s'agit d'un enfant qui ne peut pas supporter le feu, on lui fait de la gargarisme et de la mastication avec des viandes dures; après on lui met le chef au milieu, et on fait .i. cautère selon ce que nous avons dit ci-dessus, et .i. cautère sur la nuque, et sur chaque corne ; et s'il est éloigné et souffrant, on lui fait les cautères comme je l'ai dit à celui qui a la paralysie et la mollesse du cou, sur l'épine dorsale et le cou, et on fait les cautères d'olivier selon la manière que j'ai dit.
If the patient is a child, one should make a subtle cauterization according to this method:
When the cause of melancholy is excessive or corrupt moisture and thick fluid, then one should make partial cauterizations as we have said to the patient who has paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy is declining excess in melancholy, and the cou of the patient is moist, then one should give him to drink something so that his brain is purified, according to what it is before in the division.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
Here is the first sentence of the text:
Here is the translation of the provided text: Here is the first sentence of the text:
After he has ordered his head to be cauterized, and it is cauterized, and he makes .ij. cauterizations on the .ij. temples if he loses his hair in spots, or all over, and covers all the cauterization with the veins and arteries that are exposed, so that the cauterization is long according to the width of the temple; and you guard against blood loss, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop pouring it.
And I will teach you how to cauterize and stop the bleeding when extracting the arteries, and how to incise without causing pain; and never cauterize or hem the 2 bones behind.
the two hearts of tears
For when the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or deplete the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outwardly; and one can see that it is superfluous cold phlegmatic, then he makes the fire cautery that I have said at the beginning of the awen that descend upon the tears: 1. cauterization of the head, and 2. cauterizations on the 2 temples, and 3. cauterizations where he hemmed the 2 bones; and if it is necessary more, then he makes the cauterization thoroughly on the skin above all small cauterization.
The eyes
The following is the translation of the provided text: And this is the form of the cautery which is called 'clavis':
When the paper of the oil is softened with disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called 'olive'
And if you see that fire cautery is done on the 19 scabs as long as the scabs are; and do not let go of the hand except that the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
and if he pricks at his base, For the hairs that point to the oil, they are converted into the pardern, and they prick the oil, and one makes fire cautery or medicine that burns according to .ij. ways: that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown long and even, then put the patient on his side; after signing on the paper of the hairs a figure that is also like the feather of the mirth, and is the beginning of the sign with which to cut the hairs; then put cotton wet in wax and musk-root on the oil, then heat up the fire from which this shape comes:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have signed little by little several times, so that the cure is burned in place; and the sign of the work of health is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up at the tip of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for  .iij. days, then put cotton wet in butter until it dries out; after the poultice of wound healing as long as it is healthy.
And after these come the hairs, and the paper is softened then start again the fire on this same middle place, as you have done first; and if the hairs are loose, then cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place, and is even, and do not prick the hair with oil.
The medical heat cautery is that you order the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make of parchment the form of the feather of mirth; then take of French soap and hot water, of each one a .z., and grind them together well; and do it promptly, so that it does not cool down, then in expelling on the form that you have made like the feather of mirth, and put on the paper of the hairs; and if the disease is in only .i. oil, then operate in .i., and also in both; and put cotton wet in wax and musk-root; and the head of the shoulder, which is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. As you have done this for a long time, keep the medicine on your tongue. When the mordication is finished, if the wound has been opened by fire or incision, then it is well; if not, then add more medicine to the area where it has not been opened yet, until your hairs are even and set in place, and then put cotton wetted with oil on top of the wound for as long as the burn is sore, after that, cure the wound that is called "dyafenis" and others, until it heals.
And if you must take great care of your wound with great diligence so that the medicine does not rub on the hairs. And if the paper becomes soft after, and if the hairs are rubbing in the oil, then start again the medicine on that same place that has become soft from the paper properly, just as you did before; after curing it until it heals; and this is the form of the paste with mint:
And know that the hairs of men are different in size and length, and according to what your constraints are; and do not answer the right way to those who have the study of this craft.
of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit them, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and dip the scalp with cotton wicks soaked in oil or wine juice onto an oil; then heat the cauterizing iron which is sharp: and hold it at the top of the scalp as if a feather, together with the tip being the iron; but if you see, if it were from one side of the head to the other, and if not, it should be like a tent; however, whatever the case may be, this that is held over the head will suit for your work.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and treat the porosity, and dry it out; and if it is closed, then work on it, and seal it firmly; after that, place the cauterizing iron sharply, and hold your hand over the iron at the part of the head where the oil is, so that your hands do not go crazy; and place the iron in the oil fat, and corrupt it.
If you come to the cauterization just up to the bone, it would be good. If not, restart the cauterization once more, and if necessary, let it lie .iiij. days; after put cotton wet with oil on it, and cure for drying until it is healthy, and if after .xl. days it is still unhealthy, then put medicine with corrosive water until the bone is uncovered, and treat according to that which has come out in his chapter.
And I have a method of cauterizing a fistula that no one of the ancients has spoken of. Understand fistula, and cut it; after put in the incision .i. small steel wire so as to be the form: and I pour the quantity of a 1/4 of a spoon; and hold your hand or camahan firmly, and do not move the patient at all, that the melted drops do not run to their oil; and it comes that you put on cotton oil wet with oil in a cloth or towel: the drop should be placed artfully at the fistula's opening, and the patient is cured by miracle.
And if the fistula is cured by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer water to the nose, and bring back the fistula to the face of the nose according to what comes out in his own chapter.
of the creases in the lips times, there are creases in the lips which are called "hair", and most commonly in the lips of infants.
When you treat these creases with the method we have described in the divisions, and the cure does not take place, then heat a small surgical blade according to this form:
And place it carefully into the creases as long as it stays in place; after cleaning, apply a paste of saltpetre until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula or in the roots of the teeth, after having made pus and swelled and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we said in the divisions, and it does not benefit: therefore it is necessary that you have .i. fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after having patched or perforation of the fistula, and keep your hand until the iron comes to the well of it, and behind it; and do so once or twice., after the cure of what we said in cures, as long as he is healthy; and if he is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the place and cut off the rotten bone, according to what you will find it in his chapter.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and that does not work, then put the head of the disease in your well; after heat the cautery so that its form will come as you will put a chain on the tooth; and place the cautery hot inside, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after release your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will; after fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let it sit there for an hour and wash it.
And in this way those who were moving are stopped, and the gums are softened and restrained, and the moisture is dried up and corrupted.
of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is coldness or heat, and the medicines do not help, then it is necessary to use cautery according to .ij. ways: and fire cautery and butter cautery.
Butter cautery if it is such that you squeeze butter from a vatche, and the tip in a copper or gold needle; after take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a needle, and moisten it with butter, and put it on the aching tooth carefully, and hold it as long as it cools down; and do this often until the virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and you see if the wool and cotton become wet with the butter, and put it on the tooth that hurts, and put it on 1 copper needle so hot that the fire comes to the jaw.
The fire cautery is complete when the patient bites on a piece of iron or brass, and the heat does not reach his mouth; then warm the cauterizer, so that it takes shape as follows, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be worse the next day or the day after. And it is fitting that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in anticipation of the cauterizer, and then swallow it; and this is the form of the cauterizer:
When the scrofula is of pus and cold dampness, and does not respond to digestion by medicines, then warm the chert tooth that you have, for according to what it is needed, it has 1.3 openings for the fumes to rise from the cauterizer on the other side; and put the cauterizer hot on the abscess once, or as much as it needs to come to the root of the abscess; and leave it there for 1.3 days; and put cotton wet with oil on it until the burning is over; then cure the wound with oregano and bandages until it is well.
When the moisture prevails over the throat, and most certainly when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should be voided first by digestive medicines; after that, the fire cautery is made to the root of the throat, and you must keep back from the throat, and dare not kiss but a little. After that, another fire cautery is made to the joint of the neck at the base of the spine, and let the cauterization be called "clavicle" from which we get the shape before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healthy.
(from the throat) When all illness is from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an old disease, then you make ij cauterizations on the roots of the throat; and another fire cautery between two breasts; and let the cauterization be called  "clavicle" according to the shape which is before said.
And if you see it, make the cautery by piercing all the cauterizations which are called "poins" from which the shape is as said in the disease of the ears; and let the piercing go up to .xxx., or so. After that, cure the place according to what has been said before, and let the cauterization be made with three burns according to this form:
And so this fire cautery is lighter because you have made it.iiij. times.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, the patient should lie down on his back and his chest; then with two fingers of your left hand, gently press in towards the center of the joint that is dislocated; and if it has moved into place, then warm the cautery that has one nail; here is the form:
and cauterize it until he pierces as far as the coast, and comes together with the figure of cauterization the three cauteries; and for this one is made the cautery with the cautery that has three ners, because the figure of cauterization are placed cauteries; and the nerf according to the subtility of a tent and this is the form of the cautery that has three ners:
And never is placed on this one nerf for there are eight cauteries.
After put on the cautery for the neck to grind with salt; after let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comfortable.
And if he is dislocated above, what thing has poked, then make cautery on the thick of the cautery clavicle, or many cauteries in piercing. For the joint is closed, and is osteous the moisture and the patient is healed.
To cure a cough
To cure a cough, they used to say that you should make use of the roots of aristo-logous plants, and in this way: Take a root of aristo-logous plant that is long, the largest you can find, dry it, and also make it as thick and as long as your two hands; then wet it with oil, hold it over the fire, and cauterize. That is to say, cauterize between the neck and the chin, and a few small cauterizations just below the beard; and a few between the fifth rib and the sixth, by lowering a little bit; and one on the breastbone, and another between the shoulders, and a few between the shoulder blades; and one behind the breastbone, and one between the nipples, and one between the two nipples. And do not press your hand tight, but rather open it widely as though you were smelling something.
And no ancient said that any man should use fire cauterization resembling a razor, and scrub and place it between the ribs, until it comes to the aposteme of the liver; and he leaps from the pain, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is doubt and fear, or the patient dies now, or there is a fistula that cannot be healed.
from the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse with the methods we have mentioned for treating divisions, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways to perform cauterization, all of which are good.
Of these three methods, one is that you make 3.iii. cauterizations, or 4.iiii., by lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cauterization we mentioned above; and do not press your hand down on all the cauterization, and let the patient be soothed on his back;
and another method of cauterizing is that you heat the cauterizer which has 10 nails, as we have shown in dislocation of the shoulder; and place the cauterizer where the mouse's hair grows, or where the cut comes from the left side, and let the elevation on which you place the cauterizer be according to the length of the mouse's back, and the cauterization be according to the width of her chest.
After that, with the 10 nails heated, you let them be perceived from the other side, and then trim the cauterizer; and so there are 4.iiii. ways. And if you wish, after having cauterized completely with the 3.iii. cauterizations, you can add a fourth cauterization to complete the treatment. After the cure has taken effect over a long period of time, and this is better than the other cure mentioned above.
Of dropsy
Of dropsy
After leaving the cauterization uncovered for a long time, do not leave the patient's cure without cauterizing; and with the help of God, healing would hurry and both intentions would be fulfilled with the help of God.
The form of the cauterization for the navel is the one that we have in front of us mentioned; and this one for the back is olive, according to what it is mentioned here before.
of swelling of the joints When the joints are swollen in the case of one who is hydropic, and they are purple in color, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the index finger; and lower your hand with the cautery without turning it. And do not go too deep, lest the cauterization cause the purple to turn blue, and make the cauterization according to this form:
After that, make 20 cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the toenail; and let the cauterization be long, one behind the knee and another in front of it, leg by leg; and let the cauterizations remain a while without cleaning, so that the awes are removed; after that, cure the other cures that we have said.
of the mansion
When the solution from the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, as much as the virtues that retain and digest in the stomach are in the intestines are exhausted, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, then do so  .i. great cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken before or cautery of the stomach, with cautery circulating; and  .iiij. cauteries around the navel subtly to all  .i. cautery clawed subtlety, and  .ij. cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, then do cautery on the hand, and   .i. cautery on each finger, and   .ij. small cauteries on the stomach of choice because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are or foundation, or one or more, and are old and are cold and moist corrupt humors, and are cured if as we have said in divisions, and does not benefit, then do   .iij. on the spine of the back, that which is all defuers almecdate poc and poc in triangularizing, and   .i. cautery almecdate boude.  ii. two;
and if you think that his stomach is cool, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swell the cheek, then let there be a great cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and one other on the milk to all the cautery nailed; and let the cautery remain open for a long time. After treat the wound until it is healthy.
of the flesh which is called "thelul"
When you treat the skin, if you heat the cautery that seems sharp, and then put it all on fire on the treated skin; and leave it so that the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, from which it does not move; do this once or twice, and if there is much skin, cauterize each as we have said before; after treat with beneficial ointments until they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the flesh, it will have more help.
of a wound badly treated
When the patient cannot endure a wound or opening, we will tell you in due course what form of illness it is that cannot be healed except by fire cautery.
When there is a fistula and it is swollen and moist with putrid matter, we will show you how to make a tent of fine mesh, and be sure that you know exactly how big the tent needs to be; after that, heat the fire-brand which seems sharpest, and dip it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and begin the brand again as long as the putrid and corroded flesh is burned, once or twice, depending on the quantity of the required mixture; and be careful about the nerves which are in there, and do not make this fire-brand except in a charnel-house, and believe that it is not dangerous; after that, cure the place until it is healed, and if the matter has been expelled, and the bones have been exposed for a long time, then know that the fistula is completely healed; and if the matter has not been expelled, know that the fistula is threefold, and the bone is corroded at its root; and thus as one of these which we will describe in due course.
from kidney disease When pain in the kidneys comes with a strong wind, and does not respond to the use of women, then you must make a fire-brand on both sides of the kidney with the fire-brand which we have described above; and if we make two fire-brands in line, it will be even more helpful.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and prone to water and moisture, so that the patient retened urine, then let a fire cautery be made in the part behind the bladder, where the hair grow from the knuckle, and on the right and left, and such cauteries as long as a fingernail; and make a cautery behind the back, where you need it; and let those cauteries be clamped according to the form mentioned above.
of the kidneys When the kidney is cold and moist, so that it does not allow one to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and late in coming; and when they come, they cause great pain: therefore let three fire cauteries be made around the testicles, as we have said for the bladder, and two behind the back; and let those cauteries be clamped, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moisture descends into the hip box, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the places of the department are found, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip box at.i. a fire cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the place inside the box as it turns, so that the box is inside the circle; and if it is such cauteries as those with which we have cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, then make.iij. cauteries with the large olive, and let the cauterization be perfect as well as all the rest; and the treatment until it is healed.
of the pain of the hip When the pain comes in the chest of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the large humors with foul pills, or other bad pills.
After the fire cautery; and the way of the cautery is according to .ij. ways: that is to say together with fiery medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many ways, from which one is such: that you cauterize on the chest of the hip .iii. cauterizes triangular according to this form, and make it deep and wide, and leave between each cautery the space of a thumb, and make them olive-colored; never do you make cautery in the middle on the top of the hip, for there are .iiij. according to this form:
And if you see, if the cautery at the cautery of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but make it a circular shape so that the circle contains all of the hip, and all the space of the cure is burned.
And this is the way to do it in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach up to the thigh or leg. And if it comes only up to the thigh and leg, then you make  .ij. cauterizes on the side where the patient feels the pain, and 1.3 cauterizes above the ankle 2.iiij. times, at the part where the patient feels the pain, or near the heel, if the pain extends up to there: make cauterize with a knife, and burn the thickness of the cure; and if the patient feels that the pain reaches up to two feet or near the heel, then you make cauterize at these points on the  .ij. side:
And if the profession requires it, do so; and if he feels that the pain is going from the foot to the thigh, perform a fire cautery using a knife or circular tool, and carefully guard all your tools so that you do not let go of any of them while burning the nerves and large arteries, and causing greater damage and contraction to the patient.
And I have seen many who have performed cauterization on the ankle of the foot and let it go so that the leg was completely deformed, as well as the bones, and it became perforate and corrupt throughout the bones. After a treatment of the abdomen which killed him.
And if the pain is in three parts together, perform cauterization on one and then on the other according to this method. // And the wise said about cauterizing the ankle, for this is the way, make a piece of iron and let it be as thick as a finger knuckle or slightly less, and let it be between the chevrons and let it be from one chevrons to another of a space the size of a fingernail; and let the chevrons be covered on both sides, and let them also be like nails, and there should be 24 pieces of iron well made; and this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and giddy, and then put it on the box of the painful ankle, and let it turn on the back of the rib; and make one cauterization once and leave it for three days; and then make plaster with ointment, and leave the open wound long enough to heal.
Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its smell, and few are those who use it; and yet this is a good cautery which can be忍受and used where it afflicts.
of the pain of both
When pain comes to the back, either through eating too much or by impact or by excessive discharge, or by the appearance of expanded cold matter, none of these appearances are worth using cauterizations unless it is from the infusion of cold matter.
It is fitting that after this person has voided any foul pills or other things from their body, that they be applied to their back where the pain is, three lines signed with a knife, and in each line 3 cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and it is done according to the cautery that is called "poins"; and if you see, make 3 cauterizations or 5 at the clavicle cauterization according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l'encomencement si est qu'il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l'apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.
When you see this, and when you have seen it cured, cauterize it with fire according to this form.
So that the fire is equal in color to each part of the spine; and if you see it, cauterize it with a burning cautery at a depth of 1 or 2 lines, and let the points be close together. After you have cured it as we have said, beware that you do not apply fire to gilled flesh, which is in the nervy part.
of joint pain
When the pain of joints is from moisture that is spread to each member of the body, and when the pain comes in pieces, which the doctor calls "podagra" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured with medicines, then it can be cured by cauterization in this way: Make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and make the olive cautery according to this form:
When it is necessary to grasp the foot, make a fire cautery over the entire joint and over each of the toes. .iii. cauteries or .iii. more if necessary, of each part with the olive cautery; and if you need more, do so, but hold your hand firmly only as long as the skin is burning.
If the pain descends to the foot and back, administer the cautery we have described in the chapter of this book. If the pain is in the hands, make an incision 2 inches deep; and if there remains any pain in the two joints or in the hair of the hand, cauterize each joint and the hair of the hand; and if the pain comes to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and govern the patient well with medicines. For if you govern him well and purify the fluids, he will be healed by the grace of God.
of the rupture of the Syphyl
When the rupture comes in anger, and the bile descends to the bowels and is new, so that when you look at him to cure him, he does not hurt him that day; and use things that leave his belly, so that the end descends from his belly; after it sits down on its back between your hands, and orders him to tie his beard as long as the bile is repaired, and bring them to your hands, and sign with one hand the rupture on the bone at the knuckle, and all a sign that is like half a circle above the chest; then heat the cautery where there is this form:
as long as it is white and it pours out. Then bring the balls to their place; and the minister tie his hand so that he does not turn back; and well operate on the legs of the patient, and put there .i. cussin and .i. sergeant on the legs, and .i. other on the foot which ties his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it firm and as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, so start again another time until you reach it; and be careful that the bile does not run when you are making the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or another evil.
And know that when you come up to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cautery of children be delicate according to their measure, and that of the old ones also large according to their measure; after 3 days cure the place of the cautery with oil until it heals; after other remedies until he is well, and lie down the patient for 10 days on his back until the wound is well sealed; and it is necessary that his bandages be relaxed for a long time, so that the bile does not run when he gets up to go to bed.
And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, he should be given a well-made bandage, and have it applied for .xl. other days; and let him have good rest, that he work little and guard against too much drinking and eating, and too much noise; and when he has done this teaching, let him be completely healed. And I will say here after the cure of the tailor in his chaplet. of the rupture from the belly
When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be burned on the third angle according to this shape:
but the first sign is the edge of the belly and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, and join your hands together at all the cauterizes: But the first cauters are lighter and milder.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, or from a fall or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medicine has no effect, then it is necessary to use fire cauterization, which is called "poins", and apply the cauterization according to the length of the limb, its smallness, its feebleness, its virtue, and its location in relation to torments, and its pain. If he is healed after the first cauterization, it is good; but if not, then begin again with another cauterization on top of that one, for this treatment requires that you perform the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
of surgery
Here comes the translated text:
And if the fever is everywhere spread; and it clearly declines, then you must cauterize all these cauteries that we have spoken of at the head, and that is, a cautery in the loins, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and seven cauteries on the spine of the back, and one great one on the skull, and one other delicate, and two on the shoulders, and two on the couting, and two on the tenderloin of the loin, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the pits of the hands; and guard against the knots that are behind the loins, so that you do not burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the knuckle, or another on the bone of the stomach, or another on the liver.
And know that the more cauterizations I make, the more help I give, and it is to my profit; and know that the patient does not feel pain at the cauterization as much as the healthy do, because the body is already corrupted. It is necessary that the cauterizations be great or small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the form of iron. After this, cure him with flour and other cures until he is well.
de enfleurer
Here is the translation of the provided text:
"Of healing wounds."
"When the disease called 'albaras' is present and the medicine does not help, then cauterize with a small fire according to the size of the wound, until the blotch is lifted and the color changes; then heal with flour of times and lentils, mixed with olive oil and plantain leaves, and hawthorn and almond sap, each in part; and mix them together, bind them with a cloth, and apply them to the wound until it heals."
"The cure for leprosy by cauterization:
When the ulcer comes at the beginning, and you stop the vision, if the cautery is made with a ring-like cautery all around the ulcer. And moreover, it is said that the cautery should also be made in the middle of the ulcer; and moreover, I do not think this is good, for I fear that it will become an ulcer and corroded, and I have never wanted to do this before; and a more right thing is that it should be cauterized all around, with the ring-like cautery, as we said in many cauteries.
of the inflammation that cannot die
When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it is slow to die, or because of the excess of blood that it makes, or because of the age of the person when he is very old and has little blood, or because of his tenors (that is to say, his debts); then cauterize him all around with small cauteries, piercing; then let it be. For she will hurry to die.
And if you pierce her all over with the cautery, let the cautery be very hot of which this is the shape:
And place your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauterization has done its work, and make them such cauterizations that the patient feels relief in some way that the course of the putrefaction is chosen. After the cure, as long as he is completely healed.
The cure by fire with iron
Another way of a disease that is called "corrodens", and is nothing but a gangrening of the members, for it gnaws the members as fire dries up wood. If you see this disease in its early stages, which can be cured with fire, then heat the cauterizes carefully, large and small, according to what is suitable for the place where the disease is; after the fire has done its work, leaving no corruption behind, but all that is corrupt has been burned away. Then leave it for .iij. days, and put oil on the cauterized places so that the burns of the fire are healed, and all corruption is gone. After the oil cure, if health does not return after .iij. days, then start the cauterization again on the part that is delayed. And this gangrene is never cured with medicinal ointments in place of fire cauterization; but fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already spoken about the cure of medicinal ointments in the division: take it when you need it.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Mouth times have happened that the pies by defects naist a disease which is called "clos" according to our intent, and it is a great thing fotted which bleces the foot. And the cauterions of this disease so are according to .ij. manners. That is to say cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water. Cautery with fire if you heat .i. cautery also like a quill of vaulting, and is made of good iron at the measure that he may porpenre the nail from all sides, and that there are subtle margins; after it puts all hot on the nail, and turns your hand all around the nail as long as it comes to the bottom of the nail; and leaves it thus .iij. days until it begins to move putritude; then he makes a plaster with wild mallows crushed with water, and leaves the plaster on all night, and nails cherra and will be rooted from its roots. Then cure the wound with char so much as it is healthy.
And if the heart is converted by defects, and many times come and go in hands and pies, it comes that you bring cautery with hot water; and it is a half way manner: take a string of rain or iron, or a quill of vaulting, and put on the nail and the althelma, that is to say porrelz verrues; and puts the string on so that it porpreignes all around, then you put a little hot water, and holds your hand well, and presses your hand turning so that the margin of the string comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water way deep until the root; and lets the patient a little the mordication of the hot water for an hour; then leaves it, and will be rooted from all its roots. So you do one after another, as long as you have dried up all these that are in the heart, then cure them with char that generate pain.
Then cure the trembling
If some shiver of cold or fever or other, it is necessary that you make .iiij. cauterizes or .iv. on the spine of the back, 1. cauterize between each spine; and 1. cauterize at the feet, and 1. to the olive-colored cauterize in the stomach, so he will leave him trembling, and hasten the cure for the cold disease.
with pus
For any time the body bathes in defuses the cors, or pustules pus, that come from large corrupted matters: it is necessary at the first when they appear that you make cauterize on each head of the pustule: a subtle cauterize of fust of mirth, so the point is taken to the fire, or of root of aristologe far away, or to the lenticular cauterize. And no time are the cauterizes done at the beginning when it appears in this way, and they do not grow anymore, but are broken up from the surplus that comes out, and they are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut off Maitres, let us speak of the great dangers of blood flowing from an artery that is cut at the edge of a wound or incised at an abscess or cauterized limb, and similar things; for it is a terrible thing to smell bad.
Many times there are great dangers of blood from the artery that is cut at the edge of a wound or incised at an abscess or burned limb, and similar things; for it is a terrible thing to smell bad. And wherever this happens, if you quickly place your index finger on the vein of the wound, and strain it so much that the pain subsides from your index, and no more drops come out; then put fire on olive oil, small or large drops according to the wound and its location, considering that the artery is blocked, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery in place until the blood stops.
If he starts to run when you lift your finger off the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take another cautery that is on fire quickly.
And do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is stopped; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is delicate, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when the artery is cut, it cannot be well stopped unless by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cauterizing, or by extraction if it has not yet been treated, or by tightly winding a thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to stop blood; and be tied and held firmly.
Who will treat with strict care of the cloth or place things burning on, or other similar things, if not, then it is useless to try.
And if this should come to anyone and he has neither seen nor heard of medicine, then he must put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and hold it there for a long time so that the blood stops; and don't move the finger, but moisten it often with cold water until the blood is frozen and thick and stopped; and make an incision in advance at the place where he needs to cauterize and apply medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which fire cautery, burning medicine, and the ingredients and forms of cauterization are necessary; and I have placed that chapter from the beginning to the end, and I will go on in this chapter by the same path for those who want to try it more lightly than those who wish to hurry.
And so, since I have begun to talk about this, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapters of the treatises on cauterization, and therefore it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to take any foolish risks. For such people come in whom, because of the great severity of their disease and the magnitude of their evil, they die easily through their own foolishness, and so they should be feared. And of such people one can get the wrong idea, and say: "Wait, I am going to die"; and the disease is evilly disposed. It is not right that you should consent to such people who come to you with this manner, but rather put greater trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not open widely but carefully and wisely in regard to those of whom you are certain, and from whom you could have gotten (a reputation for) good name, glory, and memory; and if such a one helps you to obtain these things, he will be blessed with good reputation, glory, and memory.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
I have ordered you this chapter in dividing it into chapters, according to that which is before you, that is the cauterization, that I have devised for you from the top down to the tip, so that you may find it more easily than that for which you will need.
the head full of water
I know that this disease often comes to children from suckling, and when the baby spits too much water out of his head; and there is never a reply for this reason that one does not know.
And I have never seen this disease in adults except for those that I have seen die; and therefore, it seems to me that I should ease the treatment with a view to curing them.
And I saw one child where the shoulder was swollen with water, and the head turned in every direction until he could no longer hold it up; and he believed so much of the moisture that he died, and this moisture seemed to be gathered around the bone on top of the shoulder, between the collarbone and the bone; and the treatment seemed so bad that the moisture was gathered between the collarbone and the bone, and the abscesses were small, that you should make a large incision at the top of the head; and go also as far as possible, so that the moisture runs; and see the form of the sputum:
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross according to this form:
If the moisture is under the bone, and the signs you see are that the head of the shoulder is bent in both directions, and water jumps out when you press it with your hand, and it does not return to its place: then make three incisions according to this form:
And after the incision draw out all the moisture. Then remove the bandages and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it there until the fifth day; then remove it, and heal the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head be drawn out in equal parts, and give the patient dry meat for a little while until the limb is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at the opening of the abscess, and the angle of the blade; for it is never forward, never behind, never to the right, and never to the left.
So cut at the opening of the abscess and the angle of the blade, and shape it according to your ability; and be careful not to block the artery; and let blood flow from the wound, so that the patient dies with pain from the blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
In summary:
When there is a disease that is called "catarrh" in the eyes or in the nose, and the disease is old, and medicine does not benefit, then the following remedy is good: cauterize with what one covers the .ij. arteries.
Then, after you have covered the eyes, let the patient rub his forehead with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then extract the patient's tongue completely; then look where the vein bites, and the two lines are after the ears, and they are well-defined; then mark the lines on both sides, and cut each one with an agaricle of 2 parts. as long as the saw comes to the bone, and that is done by the large side of the head.
And if you see it, pour out the agaricle on the artery and cover it up, cutting it also as 2 parts. above.
And when the vein is covered, so let it spring up continually without ceasing.
And if the artery does not open at the touch, then measure the quantity of space for iiij to iij, and sign with your hand and feel to the bone; and that which must be put out of blood is vj c/, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the refilling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone free from syphac, then strain the wound and bind, and the cure of ointment until it is healed.
de migraine
For an ancient migraine, and catarrh, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and old sore eyes and similar things; and it is medicinal by ways of medicine cures and all that does not benefit him, let us strain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
And the way of extracting them is that the patient should let grow the hair of his temples, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little refilled unless in some men who are too cold; and if it is refilled, then the patient's hair is torn from some drapels, and he rubs the place with any sharp drapel, and raises the place of warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatumile whereof this is the form:
Then peel the skin lightly until you reach the artery, and then draw it upwards towards the pincers, and remove all the threads that are attached to each part; and if the artery is thin, then cut it with the point of the hook according to the quantity of 70 pins. For if it is not cut, then neither does it hold together in any way.
Then draw the blood from the 70 pins up until 30; and if the artery is thick, then tie it with 2 strong threads of silk, so that the blood does not come out in front of the wound's healing, but goes away from the wound; and then cut off the excess between the 2 threads at that moment as well, and then, if you see it, let the cauterization be done with a knife until the bone is reached when the pins are cut; and this is the work of cauterization, if the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion.
For the cautery is an aid to finish off the moisture: for this is a greater aid than the moisture itself. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that you fill up the place with fine cotton and put on tents made well; and when you remove them, let there be a cure of dry medicines that make a new birth of char, and of the tents, as much as it is healthy; and if without doubt of the artery so long as you work, then you cover it by cautery, or you employ the leach of vitriole and extract it with your hand until the stain comes out; and if you do not have this present, then put on the leach your hand until the stain is frozen, and raise the leach of cold water until the stain stops, and is extracted as it should; and that which is muedre and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with a sharp knife of 70 parts, but let the knife be well sharpened to keep it longer hot. For when the instrument is too soft, so does its heat. For when the instrument is too soft, so does its heat. And it must have between the .ij. tools 1 should of space, and then when you have cut off 2 of them, and you put on a sharp fire as long as it comes to the bone, and chop the vein in 2 of them; and are kept apart between the 2 chins because it is not welded by this cautery all over; and this is the form of the cautery:
tears
For when the tears of the eyes are flowing out from the veins that are under the brow of the head, and it does not profit much to make medicine thereon, and you see the face of the sick person turn pale, and feel a fever come on as if it were chills; and the hair of the papers is lost, and the papers are burned by the heat of the tears, so that there is a need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;
from the first incision which is on the temple until the second incision; and peel off all the skin that is between the two incisions up to the bone, then do the same thing from the middle incision until the other second one, and then remove the mixture completely.
If you bottle up the first cut of the instrument called a "culteller", and it is very well sharpened on one side, and on the other side is not sharpened at all, and this is its shape: And place the edge of the cutting tool called a "culteller" facing towards the back at the top, and the edge is smooth towards the bone, and you bottle it up until it reaches the middle cut. And chop all the vessels that descend from the top to the incision so that it continues all the way down to where it opens at the bottom, and then the other way around in the middle cut all the way down; and then remove the blood evenly, and squeeze out the vein; and then put a piece of thin cotton cloth in each cut, and cover with wet linens soaked in wine and oil and honey, and let the abscesses not come; and on the third day take off the bandages, and apply a great deal of cool water, then the cure with basilicon ointment made with oil of roses, and other cures for wounds as needed until it is healed.
to chop
When there is a catarrh that has become accustomed to it, and you see the hairs hanging down and thin, and the vision blurs, and the papers burn; and the hair falls out, and where the head hurts most, it makes one sneeze; then know from these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come from a few veins, and the cure for which one has is good if it causes this.
And is that you command the patient to scratch his forehead, then make a large cut in front of it, and another from side to side. 1.. And start from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, and cut down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples that move when he yawns; and when the bone is exposed, so soak all the blood with a sponge, and then tie cotton wool and linen over it; then put dried leaves in wine and oil on top of it, and take care not to burn the abscess; when he has been cut, then you must rub the bone until charred bones begin to come out, then cure them with drying things, which cause charring.
In this manner: take .ij. parts of wheat flower, and .iiij. parts of colophony, and make an ointment; and administer it to these wounds in order to cause charring everywhere.
for the stiltiness of the ears
All that grows in ears is one of the .iiij. things: or grain, or beast, or stone or similar thing such as iron; or seed, if like oats, beans, peas; or flowing thing if like water and similar things.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
If it comes out with the needles, that's good; if not, instil extraction with very fine needles from a small double-edged instrument; and if it doesn't come out with those, make an air pipe and put the end of the pipe or the ear passage way firmly, and stop what is inside the pipe with soft wax so that it can't enter with the pipe; then try again, because many times it comes out like we have said; and if it doesn't come out in any way, take the gland as you take the hairs, and put some cotton inside; then press the gland on the stone or whatever it is, and try again. If it doesn't come out with any of these things we have said, then quickly split the ear so that hot water comes out and spasms; and the way to split it is such that you make the first incision on the headache, and extract the blood according to its measure of virtue, then sit the headache between your hands and turn the ear up, and split a small split at the root of the ear on the grease or depending on it; and let the split be like a moon, until you feel the stone, then split it according to your power, and suck it gently into your mouth; and the cure as long as it is healthy. And if it is grain that is stuck and swells, then extract it; and if it cannot come out, then make use of .i. a sputamile of thin substance according to this form:
and make an incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think the grain is moist because of the moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with thin tweezers and on a piece of cotton, as we have said, so that the extractions are orderly.
In the water, therefore, that you pour into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use an expectorant of first order, and widely wisp the ear with old cotton. And let it sit in the ear where the fluid is. If it drips, it is good. If not, take many small stones according to the length of your finger toward the tip, and heat them slightly at the fire; and put one into the patient’s ear, and chop on another stone from the other side, and make a sound with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to make a stone sound after another as long as the fluid comes out completely, and thus it should come out completely; and if you see, take 1.i. a piece of wood, and pour one of the chiefs into the ear, and the other chief take from the fire until the more burning piece is burned; then make another with others until the fluid comes out completely, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the best, if it is a small worm, as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large one that you can feel, then make use of extraction with tweezers; and this is the lighter thing to extract that is in the ear.
When extracting worms from the ears, if the cure does not take place as we have described in the section on division and treatment of distillations, and if there are no worms to be seen, examine the ear towards the sun; if there are no worms, hold the ear with your finger so that you can see its shape.
And make it tight at the bottom and wide at the top. Pour in the smallest amount of oil or medicine into the ear according to how much pain the patient is in; then suck out the liquid with the whole canal; do this often until all the worms have come out. And if they do not want to come out, cut through the wax with cotton as I said in the section on cutting into stones; and if they do not rise up as we have described, administer distillations which the earlier ones have proved effective in worm extraction, and you will find them or know of them from our description of the distillation process; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear with this instrument, it will reveal its shape to you as you see.
And make the earplugs small at the bottom and large at the top; and for distillation, use an instrument of silver or gold; and to press the liquid down into the ear, use a silver instrument well made for this purpose, and if you have a razor, wrap cotton around its tip; then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever medicines you have in the canal, and let the canal be in the ear; then pour the liquid into the cotton, and press your hand gently to speed up the distillation from the ear; and smell the patient's breath, and let the distillation be heated over a fire as you would do for an ear extraction; but keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
Of the support of the ears
No child is born who does not have a piercing in the ears; and this same thing happens to men due to an ear wound or a chariot falling inside the ear, and this piercing sometimes comes out completely from the ear, so that one cannot see it; and it never comes out a little, but it comes out all at once, and one sees it well.
That which comes out completely, so that one cannot see it, is of great benefit in many dispositions, and in this it is that you should put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the operation has completed all this spittle of which this is the form:
And let it be before and behind all plain, so that it does not blister the ear; if the operation is a chariot or a horn of the ear, if it holds the pinches finely, and covers it lightly, until the whole horn is osseous.
And if the ear is completely blocked, then take a very fine, light razor and heat it slightly, then put it at the corer of the ear. If you feel the obstruction that the patient feels grating when he hears, pierce lightly, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to its width from the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
If the wound is closed, or if you take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder it with vitriolic broilt; and if you see that the ear has drained, then cover so that you take out the tent and move another tent wet with rosin made of rose oil and wax, until the drain is removed; then treat it until it is healed.
And if the discharge of blood comes from it, then dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that are made by distillation to stop the discharge of blood which are or treat with distilleries.
of the paper
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
If they are not peeled, then the fire cautery with the small, sharp cauterizer, and the cauterizer after incision is mues; and many times they return, because nothing stays in its roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and never come back.
from the gristle
Many times come in sheets things that seem gristle in form and hardness, and for this reason is called "grandine", and is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; The ovraiges are these: take care if the grandine mutates from one side to another, and this is a light thing to know; make it large, then scorch each part lightly, then take it to the scissors, and the handle. Unless you can't cover it without piercing the paper, don't worry about the patient; and if the break is great, if the assembly has a seam, and treat it until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not use force, because the oilmens soon restore it and cause harm.
And if the earache is going down towards the inside of the ear towards the top, then turn the eardrum, and the wax is at two points, and the wax and the scale are on one side and the other; and if the eardrum is sliced, it does not cause any harm; and when the earache is scraped, let the salty water oil be applied, and treat the area where the pain comes from until the patient is well.
of the fat of the hairs
is made from the fat of the hairs
And the way to treat this is that the patient puts his or her head down on your lap; then take a sheet of linen, and set up a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity of exirnach contained in each part, then put it over him; and press with your fingers from one side and the other, so that the exirnach is gathered into the circle; then make a cut of the right size in the middle of the skin, and do not make it larger than the wound at the back of the ear; and trim the skin perfectly until you come to the exirnach; and in several positions bring out the exirnach from the cut, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Take then a whole piece of linen cloth between your two hands at the end, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as it is spread out; and be careful not to stir in the split, lest you come to all the sputum up to the oil, lest you spoil it.
And if the extraction does not take place in the closing of the split, so that with an ease a little split is made until it appears; then extract as we have said, then moisten the cloth and dip it in water, and put it on its place, and extract from the bend.
And if such men broil silk and put it on for to corrupt that moisture which is delayed. Then the cure until it is sound. And if it comes to the base of the aposteme hot, so the cure with ointments soothing until it is sound.
the hairs of paper
When hairs grow on paper other than nature, and are dried, if they harm the eyes, and cause ways of diseases as tears used to do and softens of papers and albugine, until it is the cause of destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to .iiij. ways: either by fire cautery together, or by medicine according to what it is before, or by chapistry of cautery, and is done or by incision and suturing or by caines, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the paper of the oil to your left hand; if it is twisted, it is good; if not, pour an needle on all the .i. thread above; and let the hair be twisted the edge of the paper or the hairs grow out from these hairs, and tie one thread above to all the paper, and turn it with the razor; then cut in the part of the paper, removing the hairs, at the whole larmier until the small one; then remove the thread, and put the paper a little cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper a figure of an eye, as the fülle of myrtle, and all it is necessary that the figure is according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised for all.
And if there is a lot of quantity of the paper necessary according to what the paper is softened; then cut on all the spatumile above the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the great larmier until the small one; and let it be a split near the natural hairs in the size of a root, then pour the oil in one of the two angles of the cure, then burn it all; then assemble the two lips to a stitch of an needle on all the fine thread, and wash the blood, and make air to the superfluity of the threads above the two sorcilz on all glues things, if you see to do this; and if not, if you have no cure, then leave the stitch and the threads until 1.3 days or 2.3; then treat the wound without stitch of drying and constricting things, for the paper relaxes at the burning of the wound and its gathering, but the stitch is wet (if they would say the ancient), and this is workings without fear;
and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper of a figure which is so like to the fennel of myrrh, as we have told, at .iiij. times you shall reverse according to the form which is here:
then cut who rises up little by little evenly according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the thing is not even, take an awl or there is .i. thread, and the bottle the figure; and bottle another .i. thread of fine thread, and the second small, and assemble between your two threads evenly; then lift up your hand evenly, and lift up all the leather where you have signed, as we have told, then assemble the 2 lips of the wound by suture, and calm it with cerotic and similar emollients;
and no time passes that the hair of the paper are converted: so it is that you use what we have said about the incision; but the suture in one and another is more artificial.
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
"If it delays, if the copes force, then cure it as long as it is healthy; and when the wound is sealed, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the  .ij. bites that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:"
"The ovraiges are such that you squeeze out a fine needle, and bottle  1 fil of silk and fine thread; then join the ends and tie them finely, and make the length of the threads a palm long; then order in the chase 1 other fil of fine silk, and tie the ends together; then put the patient's chief in your hand; and be careful to shade the ovraiges from the sun, for they are very fine ovraiges, then bottle the needle in all the chase at the root of the hair as it is drawn out on top of the natural hair; then pull out the hair until it reaches the chase, and bottle that hair in the chase, if there is 1 or 2 or more; then pull your hand until the hairs come out entirely in the paper with the natural hair."
And if it is chased, treat and let the hairs grow out with it; pull the chase all along that you have ordered, until the chase comes out of the pit above and you see it by the vision of oil; then if you pull the chase and the thread, and close the oil and leave it closed 18 or 20 days, until the hair is rooted in its place and grows out; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from nature, and let them be lifted with that or leave them, until they are stretched and then let them down.
of the oil
When this disease, called "aleacrati" or porritus, comes in the oil, it has two ways: one is natural and the other is un-natural. It comes through sudden wound, or scar, or cauterization, and similar things.
And the way to work on this disease is that you split that wound, and free the lips of it, and put linen inside, and leave it until it heals; and do not use anything in its cure that dries and constricts. For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before; but use things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the water or wine of ale and linseed are cooked, and olive oil is added to it, and wrap it up, and cure it like this.
And the treasures of your cure, if you keep it in mind that she does not harden according to the form that she was before; and the remedies that we have said are only good for a while after this disease, that she does not return according to the form that she was before.
the oil
This disease, which is called "axacrati", is natural and accidental. The accidental part comes from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things; and the path of the ovraige in this case is that you should take an awl, with its double point, and pierce it through the left temple as far as possible, so that the point goes into 1/4 of the char (skull); then place the char on top of the awl, and a large chisel-shaped cope.
And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is necessary, it is good; but if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper back on, and make 1/4 of cuts or costings within the paper; and let the chisels of the 1/4 cuts come out of the angles of the incision that you have copped, and let be made one angle so that when they are put together, that the figure is like the figure of a letter that has none "griesche" (cross); then put back this char, according to the quantity that its costes are agus desoz, from that which ensueth the paper, then add the 1/4 parts of the cut, and join them together with a thread of wool; then make the cure of what we have said about medicines that soften, and of tents, until he is healthy.
Et si la maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, il convient que tu fendes une fendure plaine entre les poils des papieres, et selon ce qui est ci-devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j'ai dit; et doit on faire l'ovraige selon la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres apparelle engien de tout son pooir comment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et le malade meisme, selon ceu qu'il i convient d'ovraige et d'estrumens em plusors dispositions.
And if the disease comes from a wound or a stitch or a cauterization, it is necessary that you make a clear incision between the hairs of paper, and according to what is said above; then deseve between the 19 leathers of a tent, as I have said; and it must be done according to the form of the disease, because it is very diverse in shape, and the master healers apparelle without limit of all their power how to restore the figure to its natural shape; and the sick man himself, according to what he is convenient for ovraige and instruments in several dispositions.
And if the wound comes in such a way that the paper above it is sewn with oil white, and cannot move or make its ovraige naturely, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers, as long as you cut what is at the tip of the subtile spatumil, which should not be too sharp or too thin, so that the patient does not suffer from the too sharp spatumil that bleeds the oil; and let your incision, from which you strip the assembled paper, be light, so that the paper revives according to its natural shape; and all that is assembled is healed, and never uses in acidic salt water, and soft water, and colier; then put between the paper and the oil a tent of flax, and put wool soaked in abundance of ale on the oil; and after three days use of the colier and things that mend it as long as it is healed.
of the nail of the oil
Saiches that the nail is according to 1.3 ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard dry syphill, and another that is not nervous but resembles white congelate moisture, which, when touched with iron and rubbed with pinches, cannot be moved; and both appearances begin to grow towards the great tear, and increase little by little until it covers all the vision, all the light, and the movement of the oil.
And the way of the incision is that the patient places his head in your hand, then he opens the nails; and lift the paper to your hand, then coil the nail with small twists, and place it above; then take a needle, and put on it 1.1 hair of horse, or of she-goat, or of bull, and 1.1 strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and pierce it through the nail, and tie the nail with a thread and place it above, and peel off at all the nail the skin which comes out to the prunella and the silk on the nail jusc'up to the head, then cut away the remaining in the root of the tear with the subtle tear of nature, so that by the incision does not come the blood as is usually custom; and never are the nails tied with a single knot and thread, as we have said; then peel off all the skin and the silk which comes out with the hair.
And keep that the skin does not touch the wool and tear it, and that the prunella is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little oil of olive, and of colier made of alum, and leave it until the other day; then cure him of what he needs until he is healthy.
And if the nail is not nerved, and you cannot put in the needle, and the uncing will not enter, this form of uncing with medicines is often cured; and they are born as I have told you in the division, and if you see it covered, so do the oil of the sick, and take the light powder according to this form:
And pull the nail up slowly, and if you see that it is not diminishing at all and the pain increases, then distill from your mouth into the oil of the collar made of slate and red oil and seaweeds, and stop the oil until the next day; then begin again with this same work, as long as it is whole.
If nothing is opposed to you in the oil, as if it were an abscess, then take milk, and first cure the abscess as healthy as possible, and then begin again with this same work, as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the armpit is opposed to you in the oil by great harm, if it is suspended on the neck, and you take a part of it and not all of it, so that tears do not come; then distill into the oil of the collar made of slate.
of the horse which was born from the eye of the apricot tree
of the horse which was born red from the eye of an apricot and wrapped in paper and restrained at the back and seemed like a rose of a baobab; and the work is such that the patient puts his head on your shoulder, then he twists the hairs, and twists all of them like the hooks suitable for this, and holds it firmly; then chop off the first hair, and go all the way to the razor blade until the end, and be careful not to cut oil into the work; and let the incision with the spatumil that we have said in the incision of the nail and small forces by which one rubs the foot, as the form after this chapter shows.
and when the incision is completed and all the hair has been removed, then employ the oil of sesame or you distill red wine and similar medicines that are corrosive, and put cotton thread over the oil at the back with abnin of ufe, so that it is assured against an abscess; and if it does not wait, and the horse mounts you without shoes, and you doubt about an abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with soothing medicines for an abscess; then return to your work until it is healthy, and in this way make the hair fit into the oil by this appearance.
But it is necessary that you adapt the cure of each weak oil of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that the limbs are suffering from this work.
the hairs of the eyes
the hairs of the eyelids are red because they are covered with oil, and it is through this oil that the eyelid's work and its power to keep the eye strong decrease day by day. It is therefore necessary that at the first sign you look at the eyelid, so that you can see whether it is swollen or not, and there is no other disease in the eye apart from the eyelid; therefore, here is how to treat it: instruct the patient to place his or her brow in your hand, then gently lift up the eyelids completely according to his or her wisdom, and make each lid twice as long according to this shape:
And let there be two eyelids by degrees in one course according to this form:
then carefully stretch out the eyelids slightly, and rinse the oil with cold water after another hour, until you see the eyelids move away from the oil; and be careful not to splatter the oil on the tips of the eyelids, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you don't split the oil; and when you have done this, let it be distilled into oil with green and red wine so that it corrupts what is delayed by the sebel.
And if you have no power to bind all this together in that hour, then make a paste on oil of things which calm the pain of the hairs and leave it for some days as long as the pain is calmed and secured by an abscess of heat, then begin again according to this way which is above until he is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the fistula of oil
The mirrour says so alone: 'Arising' fistula: when you cure it by cautery and medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then cut on the abscess, where it must die, and carry out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see corruption and blackness, then reset all the instruments where it is; and is called 'aspre chief', and shall be made from a chief of fire to another chief of fire, and shall be pointed so as a file so that it is in the present form:
And put it on the place of the bone that has decayed, and turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so that you know that corruption is removed; and do this not again, then restore the place of drying medicine.
If the bone is souded and does not respond to heat, and if the shell of the bow is souded, and remains so for ten days, and it does not improve and there are no bad accidents; then know that he is well, except for a fistula, which must be brought to the surface according to this method: therefore you uncover the bone the second time with fire, and with medicines, and when it is uncovered, then take it. If it was a case of fire, then make the head of the shoulder three angles wide, and let the edge be blunted until it reaches the top as you see here.
Then put the fire on the bone with the knife, and keep your hand away from the oil a little, then turn all the fire over until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels pain at this place if he holds his hand over his nose; and then restore the place of drying medicines, as I have taught you, and when the heat has come and hardened the bone, if the matter goes to the nose; so is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the issue of oil
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Here is the translation of the text:
"For when the hairs are completely removed, and there is no risk that it will move or get caught, then you may trim the hair; if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow."
And if the hairs have a good appearance, then pierce them with a very thin spike that comes out perfectly from the oil, and run the moisture-white algue and cut the hairs, and come in so often; then extract them until they are well.
from the bowl of oil
This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is only due to the bowl that is mixed with oil, resembling water descending, and yet is not water; and the manner of its appearance in the ovary so that you place the patient on it in a sitting position and straight, then take the chief between your hands from both sides, and move it up and down while you see the oil come to the top of your hairs; then remove it until it is completely dry, and do not run water over it, or it will become wet again; and if it does not come off, know that it is water, and the removal of the bowl is done as we have said. If you place the patient in a sitting position between your hands, then take the very thin spike and pierce it into the scalp so that it comes out perfectly from the oil, and run the moisture-white algue and cut the hairs, and come often; then extract them until they are well.
from the oil
Here is the translation of the text:
After a short rest, and when the second stream of oil rises again, apply the instrument with force, and when it is firmly in place and does not rise anymore, gently remove 'almagda' by turning your hand from side to side; and then put a little gem-oil into the hole, and leave it there. Then put some dried oil or water into a bowl, and dip the oil into it, and mix with healthy oil. We, and those who are with us, shall throw dust with much powder.
If 'almagda' cannot enter the oil due to its thickness, as there are some people whose hairs are too thick, then you must use the instrument called "alberit", which has this form:
And so, here is the translation of the text:
"Here is the next sentence:
"Here is the next sentence:
And these are the appearances of the shapes of the alchimiest, so that he who knows them not may see them; and let them be of pure brass.
And let the head of this middle substance be of water, and the behind in three angles dry.
of the earth under the sky
There are various types of horses or donkeys that seem to be scorpions at the feet of the stars; and if there is one of such a horse or donkey that has a strong scent, and if it has a black color, then you should make the sick person sit between your hands towards the sun; and open his nostrils, and sprinkle this subtile essence on those horses, and force them; then take what you can bear at the sputum of the subtle substance from one side, as long as you know that this horse is all bone.
And if there is nothing left that cannot be covered, if the opening is completely open.i. of the instruments that are subtle and light, so that nothing remains; and without you go up, or an abscess foot, if the secort it is as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them until the sin is dried up and all the pus has been expelled, then get water or wine.
If the sore is opened and moisture comes out, knowing that it is well; and if the moisture does not perforate as it should, knowing that there is pus in the bone above, so that the instrument does not cut it: then it is necessary that you put a piece of linen thread a little thick, and tie it with hands, and space it 1/4 inch or less between each; and make the patient insert the thread into his nose at power, and pull it out smelling it frequently until it comes out through his nose into his mouth; and many times do this to the child in school, and it is a light thing for him who does it; then hold the thread that comes out of the nose with one hand, and the other thread that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and cut them off together while holding them as we are doing with the thread; do this as long as you know that the thread has corrupted that pus, then pull the thread, wash the blood, and dip it in Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the nose as before; do this for 3 days or more, as long as the ointment corrupts what is delayed of pus; and then put a cord of plonk on the nose for some days until he is well, and if there is need of dried medicines, use them; and that is the form of the instrument to purge the nose, whereon we distil oils and medicines or nasas:
And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, as a cord; and if you see, then make a closed cord, and let the instrument rest in the nose; and if you see, then make 1/4 inch long pieces of cord, and tie them at each end so that they do not slip; and hold them both together while you heat the oil or any liquid.
of the shoulder pain over the neck
of the shoulder pain over the neck Many times the chief of the neck causes a disease called "telul", and grows and becomes very large, so much so that it is visible to the eye; and for this it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and burn all the bone, then put fire on it; and if one delays to cover it so long as it is large, see if it is hard, of pale color, of poor feeling: if not touch it with iron because it is an abscess engorged, for when one covers it once, much harm comes to the patient; and the abscess is of soft touching, not of pale color, and you see that one can cover it all, if he cuts it without fear, and cures the place with dry and binding things.
when the neck is cut and cured
when solutions of continuation come in one of these ovraige cartilages, he profited little, rather than in some men. It is necessary therefore that when this happens to any man, if he sees that the wound is fresh, and regards it; and then ajoste the iij. lips at a joint, and then cures him as long as he remains sane; and if the lips are cut on one side or the other, so that you scorch all the parts of their flesh as long as they heal, then assemble the iij. lips at a joint, and binds them, and grinds dragon's blood and incense, and puts it on powder after powder of dragon's blood, and incense broied; and lays on the powders a piece of plaster of fer or other plaster then lets it drip as long as it oozes, and cures it with ointment as long as it is sane.
The way to stitch together a wound so that you join the solution together: or by needles, as we have said in stitching up the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
the lips
the lips become hard, resembling grain of sand, smaller and larger; then cover them, and split each one, and pick it up with tweezers and place it in a container; then employ the vitriolic poultice at that place after the wound has been cleaned, until the blisters have dried out; and then remove them.
the gums
Maitres naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent albulus; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restaignans et desiccatives; et s'celle char retourne aprés l'incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne retourne mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens pour coper.
Here is the translated text:
"Many times, are assembled at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, teeth that are ugly and rough; and many times are the tooth black and yellow and rotten, until the corruption comes to the gum, and are the teeth stinking; if it seems right that you should hold the bad one between your hands, and its roots are in your hand, and remove the teeth or the escarres that appear, as long as it does not stay anything; and thus do of blackness and whiteness, and of yellowness and other stains, until they are all gone; and if one that is pulled begins again to grow on the second day and third, as long as you have them all removed; and know that the teeth must be re-planted with different shapes of instruments according to what the work demonstrates, for what the razors that remove the teeth from between them have other shapes than those with which they are planted between the gums; and these shapes and others be prepared with you."
It is necessary for you to treat a toothache as soon as possible because it should not be delayed at all; for this is a very high-quality substance up to the point where there is no excuse for not drawing it out. So it is when the patient is forced to draw out the tooth that you must be certain of the painful tooth; often the pain ends in the healthy tooth, and one thinks that it is the healthy tooth which needs to be drawn out; and yet, we have often done this for those gentlemen; and when you are certain about the painful tooth, so it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on all sides with a sharp instrument; then place it in your hand or with fine pliers at one hole after another until it is well loosened, then tighten the pliers well; and let the patient's jaw rest between your knees, and hold it firmly.
Then draw out the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take any of these instruments and push it in from all sides lightly, and move it as you did before; and if the tooth is stuck and hurts, so it is necessary that you fill it with strips, where the break is; and if it is pulled gently with pliers, so it is necessary to pull it out slowly; and it is necessary to cut carefully around the tooth.
And do well to take care that you do not break it, and if a part remains, and leave it to the patient by the malice of the root with greater pains than in the first. And take care that you do not do this as does that ignorant doctor, who, through his haste and arrogance, often breaks the carriage without any consideration; but instead, bring it about by the cause of that great disease at the roots or by the carriage which he breaks, just as we have often done; and when the tooth is drawn out, so wash the place with wine or astringent and water; and remove the pain with cold water, for often this comes. And if this does not work, cauterize it.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
And be of thick limbs so that they do not bend when drawn, and be of good iron made, and have teeth for holding fast.
of the root of the teeth When the root of the tooth moves when drawn, so that you put cotton and oil in the socket for a day or two until the roots are smooth, then squeeze the pliers which are called "algefri", whereof the head looks like an adz; and be made inside as a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then you must take off the whole hook around the root, and put the instrument that is called "al-thalī", that is to say, a mallet, of which this is the form:
And be far and large so that it does not break, and the root jumps out through it, this is good; if not, then help yourself with all the tools, of which the shapes come here after:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument that has .ij. rains, of which this is the form:
and other tools that are in front in the reasoning of the dens, and of this instrument which seems like a great pair of pliers, whose form is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu'il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d'estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d'autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n'enseignerent point d'estrument por la diversiteit d'aus et s'om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu'il i covient, que je t'ai dit, et t'aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme: And let it be sturdy and good for holding the bone, so that it does not escape but can hold and remove it; and then return it to its place with medicines that are suitable for him, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, then the surgery has all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not in accordance with nature and its form is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know whether the root of the tooth is beyond the tooth, and is not in its right place, and cannot be sewn or filed; then cut it out, and if it is attached to the tooth, take this instrument whose form is as follows: It is made of iron and is shaped like a small knife.
And cut the meat and cut it little by little because of the pain in the teeth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it is seen that we can grind it, we should grind it like this:
And is also like the grinding of which we make needles; and grind the tooth little by little gently so that it does not move until it breaks; then, at the end, very lightly with any rasp, and the hard part is too sharp and bleeds the tongue, so we should grind the grit so that it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or destroy speech.
When the tooth breaks
When the tooth breaks, either by pounding or by pulling, and the patient cannot press upon anything he chews, and you have cured them with restringent medicines, but it does not help; then, to restrain it with a gold thread, because silver wire turns green and rusts, but gold never moves; and take the wire thin or thick enough according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice any pain on one side, take the file and double it between the 16 teeth on that side, then put the file between the 16th tooth and the sound tooth next to it, and fit it so that it does not bleed the tongue; and then, keep your hand steady and carefully cover it until it is tight; and if it looses, or the thread rips, take another thread. If it holds for a long time, and serves in this way throughout its length, and is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the file when the 16 teeth are fitted together, as you see:
And when the tooth is loose, if one puts it back in its place little by little, as we have said; and let no one meddle in this who is not skilled and suffering, and never make the shape of a tooth of bone, and put it back in its place where it fails, and hold it fast as we have said, and delay and maintain thus for a long time.
to take away the copper from the tongue
No one should remove the copper from the tongue or nature it out, for it is not good to do so; or, by accident of a sore sore, and the work is such that you open the mouth of the sick person and place his head in your lap, and take the tongue; then take away the nerves of the large, as much as the tongue is loosened from its place, and if there is pain or no, it is from the wound of a sore, so you bite it with a hook and take away the nerves; and watch that the cut is not too perfect, lest the artery be stopped. And when night comes, let the leech take care of the sore, so that the leach does not stick to it.
And if you see any black or dark color or hard place on it, so that the patient does not smell it, nor touch it, for it is a cancer; and if it declines to blench, and there is moisture, then pour the water, and make a fine paste, and deliver it from both sides; and if he comes to your work, put him on the vitriolic broil as long as it is dry, then return to your work until you have done all of it; then lift the leach of water and tar, and cure of other cures as long as he is healthy.
from the abscess of the throat
from the abscess of the throat come what are called "godath", and they are called properly the .ij. mandrels, and when you cure them, as we said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and red color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is big, do not touch it with iron for fear of bloodshed; but leave it until it dies, and then you will remove it, or it would burst by itself; and if it is a pale color, and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover it, but first look to see if the abscess is hot and calm. Then make the sick person sit in front of the sun, and his shoulders be in your hand, and let him press the tongue against all the instrument, so that this is the form; and be of silver or fine gold as our knives:
Then make the patient press his or her tongue against all of the instrument, and see if you can feel the abscess; then take the oar and put it in the mandrel, and lift it up higher than you can; and do not tie anything with it, but cover the instrument, from which this is the form, which looks like a strong bar; and yet the head is curved, and one end above the other, and are very sharp, and are made of iron or an oar:
And if you do not have this instrument, if you cover it with pliers, from which this is the form:
And be careful on one side and the other; and when you have chopped one of the Mandragoras, chop the other according to this same method, and after incision gargarize the patient with hot, sharp, and easy water, and let go if there is any pain, if gargarism with water, or with cooked pomegranate juice, or with fern leaves, and similar things, until the wound is healed; then cure him as long as he is well; and never give him other abscesses in the throat than the .ij. Mandragoras, if they are chopped in the same way as these.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, that is to say, one small abscess; and I closed the whole throat very well so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was stopped up, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she had stayed like this for even one day or two; and the abscess was so high that it had risen 1.5 inches on either side of the throat openings where they were swollen. So I waited a little while, and then put a tiny piece of sharp stone in one of the openings, then drew it out quickly, and put another piece of stone in another opening, and pressed the woman's tongue; after that I put the sharp stone in those abscesses, and some of them was cut off, and only a little pain came; so the passage in the woman's throat was unblocked, and she began to drink water and wine, and did not stop cutting that abscess for a long time; and the abscesses were beginning to heal again, and filled up the place that I had emptied before, until it was very big; then I bound it and cauterized it inside her throat: so the pain stopped; and I left those parts, and there is nothing but God did for me afterwards.
from the wine
When the head is numb and cold, and it is dislocated and far away, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called an "eye". When it has been treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the chaps of the abscesses are calm and thin, so it is necessary that you cut them; and those who are round and rounded and not too far away; and they are bloody or a certain color or black, so it is necessary that you avoid cutting. For there is great danger in this disease. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, that it is numb and far away, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument which we have spoken of above; then stick the oncose in the eye, and twist it, and cover it with .i. 12 instruments that I have said in the incision of .i. 10 Mandors. And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, it hurts the voice and the word; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of .i. 10 Mandors, and heal until he is well. And if the patient has a fear of covering, it is necessary that you use an instrument for cauterizing him when he feels pain. The way to cauterize is sharp water. And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then presses his tongue against the instrument which we have spoken of, or the fire-cauterizer, and mixes with sharp water so that it is not too thick or too thin; and use the handle of this instrument, from which this form comes:
And let the head have a hair that the medicine is put on, as if with a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine on the eye; and let the patient lie on his side, so that he swallows and his saliva runs into the medicine from his mouth, so that it does not go down the throat and the wound; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the eye for half an hour, as much as you see him grow weak and the medicine's bites are calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument full of cotton at the back of the nose, as long as the cotton dries on the eye; and do this often until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and wash after 2 or 5 days. And if you need to refresh the cauterization of the medicine, let it be refreshed, and after the cauterization rinse with cold water until he is well.
This treatment is safer than the incision or cauterization. If it has been treated by smoking according to this manner, take calamus and ysop and oregano and rue and chamomile and awern and similar herbs, and put them all together in a pot, and pour water into it easily, and let it boil; and the pot is well sealed with strong clay, and place the pot on 1 instrument like this: And be of silver or gold, and be one of the heads crushed in the mouth of the patient until the vapour rises to the vein through the vein, until the vein is hardened; then it begins again, often, until the vein dries, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the coming of the abscess, for many things have happened; and do not make this but at the decline of the abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a vein and put a hook of urine in it, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; because the hook of urine does not burden the vapour in the mouth, and this is good treatment together for salvation.
Many times there comes to the throat bone or spine of fish, or nothing; so it is necessary that you draw what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun on all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and if it does not open for you and is put back in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if this thing comes out by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of bread-crust; and fasten the sponge with a string, and then swallow it; and when she comes to the place, if she squeaks, pull hard; and if she does not come hard from this that we have said, take a plunger according to this form:
And be the instrument curved at the end so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and has the end raised higher; and keep that you do not touch the epiglotte, that all does not come out to her, nor push the bone in; and move that the patient swallows the instrument, because he will move or the thing comes out; if she swallows it, or pulls it hard with all the instrument, as long as she is pulled.
of the blood from the throat
Here is the first sentence of the text translated into English:
Here is the translated text:
Here is the first sentence of the text translated into English:
the cauterization of abscesses
The passage mentions two methods of treating abscesses: one involves piercing and the other involves cutting. The first method is applied when the abscess is in the center of an area, while the second is used for those located at the edges or in joints. Each method has its own specific approach based on the nature and location of the abscess.
If an abscess needs to be pierced without causing pain, it should be left until it has completely healed; and if it is a case of an abscess that needs to be pierced when it is still painful, it should be done carefully so as not to damage the surrounding areas or the nerves. For if an abscess is located in a joint and left untreated, there is a risk of the joint becoming damaged and deformed. On the other hand, if an abscess is located in a primary limb, piercing it before it has completely healed may cause damage to that limb. Similarly, if an abscess is located in a fundament - a supporting structure - and is pierced without allowing for complete healing, it may become chronic and form a fistula; this could lead to long-term issues and prevent proper healing. Therefore, it is important to wait until the abscess has healed completely before piercing it to ensure optimal outcomes and minimize potential complications.
It is important to consider the timing of piercing an abscess to ensure optimal patient care. The ideal time for piercing an abscess is when the pain has subsided, there is a decrease in fever, and the redness, swelling, and itching have diminished; when there are no more boils or pustules, and the lump has become less tender and smaller in size; and when there is no longer any discharge or pus. The perforation should be performed at the preferred location for the abscess, whether it is on the surface or deeper, at the site of its opening, and along the long axis of the abscess, whether it is on the hand, foot, or other body part, including joints and nerves.
In cases of pain, following the order of the limb. And when abscesses are in their natural position, as it has been said, if you pierce them before they are completely digested, as we have said. For if you pierce them before this, if you pull along the course of its coming out, and there is much dirt; and perhaps the lips harden and its bottom hardens. And if any abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs need. And it is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many wounds according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if such abscesses need to be sewed up and covered up, as we have said, and when they have become as hard as a .i. drapelz, and are softened, it is necessary to do as one does with bubles: and if there are any that are split in .iij. angles, and if there are any that one covers like the skin of myrrh, as abscesses of the legs; and if there are any that one makes into a circular shape, and other shapes and apparently covered.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
And if there is a burning of the skin due to sanc, let there be cold water and quickly, and dip 1.i. drapes, and put them over the burning place many times. And if the burning persisten
And this is what it means:
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Here is the translated text:
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like  "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like,  "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
of scrofula
of scrofula
And if you cut into the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put vinegar broth or some powder that stops up blood on it, and strain the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and you begin to rot. And when the scrofula at the root has healed somewhat, if there are any small scrophulas, then cut them off and clean them out. And if there is a large root of a scrofula in the vein, it only needs that you cut the scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double knot, and let it hang by it, without causing any harm; then bind the wound with cotton dipped in ointment.
And if you cut off all the scrofula, then you should gather the two lips of the wound and sew them together now, without letting there be any excess by the size of the scrofula. If it needs that you tie the root tightly, and draw it hard, and sew it as we have said above. Those scrophulas that hold excess, pierce where it opens; and pierce it in this way, and then put in its place with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is delayed from corruption; and when the wound has been well washed, then heal it with ointment with a patch.
de squinance
the ancient ones said and spoke of the lengthening of the throat; but I never saw it done in our land, and that is the scriptural word of their speech.
To those who have squinance, it is necessary that the fending of the throat which is called "epiglotte" be taken out; and one should not seek help from anyone for this, since all the veins and the membrane of the disease are in the mouth or in the throat or in 1.2 amandres. When the disease is in the channel of the membrane, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte so that the obstruction which comes from strangulation does not occur.
It is therefore when we want to split the epiglottis that we do it desoz.iij. circles or iiij. a small split across, between the iij. circles or by the quantity of the split through the syringeum, not in the cartilage;
and if they are suitable for cutting the epiglottis then there is no need for a chisel, and the vessel is long for this;
And if the master is afraid, so that he extends the skin of the throat to its entire length, then split the meat as far as it comes to the windpipe; and avoid the vessels of blood, because you see nothing, and then cut through the syringeum, as we have said;
and it is shown by the section of the windpipe that jumps out by the place that has been broken, and by the loss of voice;
and leave the wound open a piece.
And when the hour has passed by when one doubts about strangulation, join the .ij. lips of the wound around both sides of the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause a good flow, until he is healed.
Albucasis says: Don't do this just yet, until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect disappears. And then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through the wound, and thus is kept from dying; and in this way.
and so the elder should let the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has not passed, and it has passed in iii days or in iiij. And then they commanded to stitch the wound and heal, until she was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw; I saw that a damsel took .i. knife, and put it in her throat, and went into the woods by the pond;
and I was called to cure him, and I found him also as dead.
I discovered the wound, and I found the blood that had issued from it, and I saw that it had not yet broken a vein but had run only into the throat, and the venes were running with blood through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and cured it as well as I could;
and the young woman had only a red throat, and returned to her usual self.
for if I had known that in the surgery of the epiglottis there would be fear.
of the large throat
is called "hernias of the throat", and is a great apoplexy in the color of a yellow, and is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; or naturally there is no trouble.
And these accidents occur according to two ways, of which one is similar to fat coming from us, and the other way is similar to an abscess coming from us due to arteriovenous fistula. and there is fear, and it is not good to operate fire on one who has little fever, but he proves and seeks all the external matter: if you recognize it as well as fat comes to us, and does not help at all, if it is cut, as we cut ourselves, and treat it with all its hair, if there is any: and search well everywhere, and treat it as needed, until it is completely healed.
of the
There are many ways to do this, all of which I will describe.
and it is necessary that I say the whole difference that exists between "us" and "it".
I say that  "it" is hot and fiery, until the沸騰 has passed, and is completed; then rest the fever and the heat.
With the new nostrum there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains .i. syrup, which is its own sack and according to the color of the flesh, and begins also like a nut, and becomes large;
and are according to their appearances, or fat, or moist, and most of all in color as I said in the division.
When you come to the cure of the nostrum, you must first test and inquire about all the instrument that is called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or the paste which follows it.
And the method of the examination of abscesses is that you squeeze or the moistest part that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has penetrated into the pus, then it should be according to the size of the abscess;
Then remove the instrument for inser
If the moisture runs quickly, that it be colored, then do as I said about other abscesses;
and if after the instrument there is no moisture, know that it is fat, then do so in a cross shape, and take it between the pincers, and skin it lightly on each side and watch where it lies, so you get it healthy with the note;
and if you cannot get it healthy, take it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if I do not delay, it returns to us again and again;
and if it takes a little time, and without causing you any grief, so employ the wound with some corrosive water, and draw out the wound, and put on things that soothe the wound, and treat it with other treatments until it is well;
and if we take a lot of time, so cut the wound with the 3 fingers, and treat it with that which causes pain;
and if we are in a hurry and employ the place of vitriole with broyment, and let it stay there 3 or 4 days as long as the wound pus, and then return to the copper which has been delayed with fire;
See here the forms of intruding instruments, and there are three kinds: large and medium and small; and there are three quarters which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistula.
And they are also like the needles used for sorcery, and they are of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those which are white are more proven in soundness than the black ones to surround the cavities of fistula.
And they are of three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the opening.
The shapes of the needles are of various sizes, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are also needles with three quarters of different sizes.
and if one has three coronets, and are also of three ways; and if one has two coronets, and one corona only, and are of three ways; and all these are necessary in their places.
The chief of these is to be sharp, and of such I have who only cut from one side, so that we scorch the nose, so that we do not chop the vein or the nerve.
and of these insertions are the alems replied in many, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses.
and they are of three ways: great, small, and medium, as you see them.
and do not use one more than one part because it is in place, as legs, arms, breasts, and hands, and similar parts;
and never make another instrument small, resembling to knots of fists, according to this form, so that it is burned with fire:
and put it never in the place that heals well next to veins, and arteries, and never according to this great form:
and never inflame the breasts of some men when they become corrupted, as much as they seem to be breasts of a woman;
and they will remain laid up and swollen, and those who will cure them, if it is necessary according to this form from this line b. until: then peel the fat, and apply medicine to the wound with char, then sew together the 19 lips of the wound, and cure it until it is healed;
and then let it suck up a little milk, and make it soft by its size, so that it looks like women's breasts, and cut them into 19 pieces above, with 19 similar cuts; of which one is held to the other at the end of the first and of the second, so that the longer line contains the shorter according to this form, from this line b. until the line g.; Then scrape the skin that is between the 19th and 20th lips, and remove the fat, and I will add what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not yet completely made, so that the patient does not rest, or because of the evacuation of blood, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton swabs dipped in a corrosive ointment. and leave it until the remnant and fat are dry, then treat it until it is healed.
of the ankles
The pustules that come from hard sores or it has ribs, and there are some that contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G: . . . And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are empty, if he employes wet cotton and leaves it there for another day, then remove all the cotton, and cure with an ointment appropriate to it until it is healed.
And if the abscess has appearances of sores, if he does as we have said before in cutting sores, and if the wound is a bowel, then apply the fire cautery as we have described.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is torn and the flesh above it is tight, then many abscesses form, as well as an abscess coming to the surface and an abscess
and if one digs into it early when it is for the artery, then the abscesses are long and complete. and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel stretching; and when it is for the vein, if you feel pain suddenly.
and that is a folly to burn this abscess, and most when it is dislocated the elbows and at the neck and in mouth of others and is very big. It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and that which is at the head also needs to be avoided, and in that which swells an artery cut the skin from above long;
It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and that which is at the head also needs to be avoided, and in that which swells an artery cut the skin from above long; then work on the waist as one would on a horse, and separate the artery from the tissue carefully, until it is uncovered;
then pull out a needle and make it go through almost to the other side of the coast, and hold the artery with a double thread of thread in  .ij. lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the .ij. arteries that are in the temples;
Then point out the place that is between the 17th rib of an intramuscular injection until the sinning comes out from it, and release the abscess.
And provide care with a bow until the sinew swells. And treat what comes with what is used for it until it is well.
and if the abscess is at the base of the neck, then you should hold it with your hand so that you can touch it to all the skin, and Then pour the wine from the skin that you hold in your hand, and let it flow out, and there is .i. thread of two twists, so that you pull it from the other side; Then bind the abscess, as I have told you, with a thread of one of the two sides to the two threads;
and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, then put another needle on all of the thread at the incision of the first needle, and strip the threads in four lengths;
Then cut the excess off of the apotheosis as much as possible, then cut the surplus of the two and leave what remains tied;
and then cover it with wet cloth in wine and oil, and then bring him remedies for tents and onions until he is well.
of the abscesses of the nerves
And so do the abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, they come to the nerves when they are injured, or by too much work, and similar things.
And this often happens in the joints and the limbs, and the two are joined, and their color seems to be the color of the flesh, and they are in many conditions without pain;
and when they are held in place, if the patient feels pain, and is not fully cured of the course, but goes back to the cure.
and be well sealed from all sides, and not go forward or backward, nor above nor below, and that which is in joints does not come together with iron: perhaps it will contract.
and that which is at the top or at the front, make the skin with the spatule. If the apoptesis is small, if it has one tenaille, and copes it by its root;
and if it is large, if the hang-up is at the root, and the scorching, then the bone is broken and the wound is sewn up, and let it be healed until it is healthy.
large mouths hanging down No time comes in belly and not another place thelulu, and is a disease that is called "fungus" by appearance of mold, and is the subtle root, and the large tree; and there are small and many big ones;
and I saw. There was one home who had 1 . i . or stomachs that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split open, and ran with moisture.
I measured them and found one to be 25.8 ounces heavy, and the other 6.9 ounces, and the work of the incision is such that you see that the patient is moistened, and the color of the articu
if it copes with the spatemile wide, and are in your presence the fire cautery. For in the surgeon there is often too great a loss of blood, and he goes away from you, so hurry then to cauterize;
and if you see the patient in anticipation and afraid of the iron incision, so take a well-made string of ply, and tie the artikul as we have said, and leave it for .i. days;
and then the restraint, and do not cease to remove the string of ply as long as it copes with the artikul, and cut through it; and if the roots are thick, so have fear at the copery itself for the belly, but you please well copery the half,
Then cauterize it so it does not return; then cure the wound, and keep from covering the frothy blood that is poor in sense and rich in milk.
For this is an abscess that has become infected, and I will come to the cure for leprosy below.
how much the sweat is
For the appearance of sweat comes from a fire cautery or an incision in a sore or wound, and it is on the belly and there are some of the sweats, as it happens in other wounds, or from blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or from windiness;
and if it is by the rupture of the syrup and by the issue of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and is a light thing without pain, and opening of various issues. And if it is by the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when it is pressed to its two sides so that it turns, and then returns, and perhaps it is caught, and grows larger at the entrance of the bath, and for great labor.
And if it is by moisture, then it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without restraint; and if it is by blood, then open it according to a quantity.
And if it is by wind, then it is at the top of the thigh, and the work is that you look at its appearance, whether it is from the artery, or the vein, or wind. If it is necessary that you let the cure take place. For there is doubt and fear, if as I have said, you coat the abscesses with this paste, for the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, if it is necessary that you instruct the patient to dye his hair, and be stretched out completely flat, then sign all around the bowels. then instruct him to go slowly between your hands, then go into the place that you have signed with all of your skin, then are the half of the aposteme on top of all the long nail.
Then extend the half of the aposteme over the thread, and put your index finger on it, and feel the intestine; If you feel that it is caught in the thread, and if it comes loose, then feel the intestine at the far end of the abdomen;
and if you find the boil, if it takes hold of the skin, and cut off the surplus.
and if the artery hurts or bleeds, go inside and take .iij. needles, and thread .iij. fils, and tie the needles around what you have made to pierce;
then stretch out the abscess over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave it to fester until it is rotten, and cut off what is dead from itself; or cut when it is thin and rotten, then treat what needs to be treated, and shave the abscess as we have said;
or cut when it is thin and rotten, then treat what needs to be treated, and shave the abscess as we have said; and remove the blood or moisture that you find then cure the joint of what it touches, and weld the joint.
the gangrene
We have spoken in the division of the appearances of gangrene, and how one should act with medicines, and how one should treat with iron; and we say that gangrene is found in the breast and in the loins, and great care must be taken in its treatment, and the ancient one says that when gangrene is in a good place where it can be cut like gangrene in melons, and in the curry, and in similar places, it should all be cut off when it is small; and when it is large and old, then it should not be approached, for I have never found one who has been cured of it; nor has anyone ever been cured of it before me.
And the overtures, when they are in a place where they can be cut, as we have said, is that you never purge the black bile; then make it healthy if it has manifest repletion, then afaited the bile.i. good place for making the overture; then throw your scabs or gangrene, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood run freely, and squeeze the juice well in your hand or in any thing, and if it comes to an incision of an artery or a vein, cauterize until the blood is stopped; then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
about dropsey about dropsey give the patient a good deal of water, and press it into his belly at the lowest part of the loins, then take the spatulum with thorns according to this form: And let it be pointed in two parts, and let it not be so deep that it can come to the intestine when it is inserted, and cannot cut it;
then look to see if the dropsy is passing into the intestines: it is necessary that you split it up to the bottom of the loins on both sides straight with your finger; and if the dropsy is by disease of the liver, then is your split at the left side of the loins; and if it is by pus, then at the right side, and it is only necessary that the patient lie down upon the split so that the surplus may not run to that weak leath:
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and draw your hand back from all the spatula between the skin and the medicine as when scraping off a quantity of wax or resin; then pierce the medicine until the spatula comes to rest on the wet surface, and this is the place of the water, then polish it well, and pour this instrument out of which there is the shape: And it seems like an agile silver wire, and is made of bronze or light copper, and has in the center .i. a small hole; and costs one part, .iij. holes on one side; two parts, and one on the other; and the head is cut so as to form a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes use to make their feathers:
At the top is the alemel, so that when the instrument comes to the water, now pour it into the instrument; empty half or one-third of it, for if you empty more than this at that time, perhaps the patient will die because of the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will hit his palm, or approach death;
but pour the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease and its pouls mean; then polish the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the kernel that stops up the hole on the medicine, of which I have spoken, so that you pierce according to this way; then restart the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and pour a small quantity of water:
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.
Do not cut off the foreskin of the penis Do not cut off the foreskin of the penis, or if there is a small foreskin, or it is not in its place: If it comes to do so that it does not pierce at all, make a very thin cap out of this form: then put on the cap and fasten it with 2 or 3 knots, and leave it for 2 or 3 days, as urine flows through it, and then remove it; and by chance there is no covering at all, because the urine that comes out is not enough to cover it. Do not cut off the foreskin of the penis if it is small, or if it is not in its place: If it comes to do so that it does not pierce at all, make a very thin cap out of this form: then put on the cap and fasten it with 2 or 3 knots, and leave it for 2 or 3 days, as urine flows through it, and then remove it; and if there is no covering at all, because the urine that comes out is not enough to cover it. If the foreskin is small, it will become larger, as we have said, if it is tied up. Those who do not have the foreskin in its place are burned, for no child has the foreskin on the tip of the penis, since he cannot urinate until his penis is raised; and he cannot impregnate a woman unless the material comes out between her legs.
Et li maniere de l'ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d'une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s'il avient, si l'estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu'il soit sanez.
And the manner of this operation is that the patient lies down on his back, then the head of the penis and the scrotum are to be made as thin as the width of a feather, so that when the penis enters it does so easily; and beware of the escape of blood, which often happens, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with the same substance, and cure the wound until it is healed. Many times a kind of itch comes in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance; and there are bad and good things; so that you should extract them with a fine hook, and cut and clean them well, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on it; then cure it with diafinicon until it is healed. And if the itch is malicious, of color and putrid, then you should extract it with a hook; when you have cut it, and the itch is in the peirce of the penis, and part of it is inside the flesh and part outside, then you should take out the itch that is inside first; and when it is closed, then cure it from the outside. For when you cure it all together, unless it is securely sewed up, then blackness and corruption come to its penis and where it goes; so you should extract all that is black and corrupted, then put it on a plaster of honey and flour which has been made of the skin of pomegranates and times, and then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And when blood runs away, if you apply the lunar cautery as follows: The cauteries should assist in these two dispositions together: that is, with the running of blood and corruption; and if the foreskin is corrupted and withdrawn, then it is appropriate that you either stick or conduct a cord of pluck on the foreskin, and make the patient urinate; and when the hair rises on the head of the foreskin to those who have not yet been circumcised, or where there is an injury or abscess, then it is appropriate that you scald it with one instrument as much as the ligaments are loosed, and the foreskin is completely released from all sides;
And if it is a difficult thing to devise this, then it is appropriate that you scald with one spittle at the top of the foreskin and the skin; then loosen very well between 1 and 2, and put a thin linen cloth dampened in cold water, so that it does not rise again.
of circumcision
is not dislocated by continuing if it is like the other wounds; However, when we do this work of our own will, and especially on infants, it is appropriate that we do the best work and the lightest work for salvation.
I say that the old people did not speak about circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I have heard the greatest part of the masters and the worthy men who did circumcision upon me. They were strong and had all kinds of novelties; but perhaps if one should cut it off, he would hurt himself, because there are 1.2 threads, and by chance if one cuts him on top and delays it
Or if he recovers it, the pain is double, and the washing that comes from the member is not completely assured; and by chance the nail falls off, and corrupts the work, and many times it happens that one does not need washing and I have wanted it.
Of the washing that is done to all the threads I have found the goodness of experience, for the strength cuts just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut it evenly all around; but let the thread be well-made around the skin; and so let the manner of the first work be that you make the child think, if he hears it, that you are not making him tightly tied to the pole as much as possible, and then please him in all ways that you can. then lay it straight between your hands, and pull the threads together between your hands so that the child does not see them, neither any of the instruments; then put your hand to the pole and blow or curry, and turn it upside down as much as the pole's joint is in place; then clean it well of the filth which is gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie again 1 .i. another thread; and hold it at the second knot to the thong and little finger, and tie between the two threads, then lift up the curry gently and turn the head of the pole;
then lay it straight between your hands, and pull the threads together between your hands so that the child does not see them, neither any of the instruments; then put your hand to the pole and blow or curry, and turn it upside down as much as the pole's joint is in place; then clean it well of the filth which is gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie again 1 .i. another thread; and hold it at the second knot to the thong and little finger, and tie between the two threads, then lift up the curry gently and turn the head of the pole; then let it run little by little, for that is the way of healing; and put powder on and above the powder 1  .i. a cloth dipped in a mixture of dried rosewater, mixed with good oil and fresh butter, and leave it there until the next day, and cure it with other cures as long as it is healthy.
The form of the force in cleaning is this: the two joints should be loose and well-cut, and the joints should be as even as possible;
Here is the translation of the text:
If it is three days and the swelling of the foreskin is still present, if you let the skin around it heal, and then lightly peel it off; if you can move it, and keep away from the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him.
For external wounds, we have described a treatment for powders in the treatment of powders, and if applied excessively, it may go up; but it will not harm him; treat him then, as we have said, until he is well.
To treat dou retention of urine:
The retened urine is of stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or chaff, or similar things, which we have said in the division;
If the urine is not passed, and you see that the stone is in the neck or base of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent on his knees; let them put the foot on their back, and extend their belly from above their back, and restrain the patient so that he can sit as well as he can; and then the base of the bladder is constrained to express the stone above, so that the urine passes.
If it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should bring an instrument called a "syringe", which has this shape: and it should be of fine lightweight silver, like the feathers of an owl; and its pipe should be a palm long and half wide, and fine at the end.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the end of a piece of wool or cotton yarn, and bottle the end of the thread inside the syringe; and cut off the surplus of the wool and bottle it up to the end of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and vagina with oil moistened with olive oil and water.
And then lightly insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the base of the penis, and then double the penis over against the bowel; then pour the syringe up to just before the bladder, and let the urine go out to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order except that it goes where it wants to twist; and then take the thread and tie it around all the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out and make the urine run.
and start the syringe again as soon as the bladder is empty, and let the patient remain still.
for diseases of the bladder
When bladder itch or scabies comes about, and the urine is mixed with urushiol, then you should distill water and medicine there, if done in all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and this is the form:
It is closed, and if there are 2.iij. punctures: 2.i. on one side, and 1. on the other, as you see; and let his hair grow by which the medicine can be well stopped up without addition, if we may draw out the moisture, and squeeze when it is necessary;
and when you see to remove your medicines out of the bladder, put the chief doctor into the moisture, and draw while you are drawing, which is following; if you draw the moisture out of the doctor, and then squeeze it back hard, there will go in the moisture again, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient shall feel it;
and this is the form of a subtle clister which one makes for the bladder: if there is:
And it is of silver or of oak, and this is the head above; and take a sheep bladder and i put the moisture which you see to clisterize the bladder, then tie it between the 2.iij. bladders with a good double thread, and heat the moist bladder on the fire; then squeeze the chief of the clister in the bladder, then draw your hand over the bladder all the moisture coming, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment paper, and make it into a circle, and pierce it roundly; then insert a strong thread in these perforations, then join the circle as one would join a door, and place inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing it against your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of stone
We have already spoken about the types of stone and their extraction methods in general terms, and we have distinguished between stones in the kidneys from those in the bladder, and also between the various types of stone; and I will now briefly explain each type of stone and its treatment.
I say that the stone in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, which is a sign that water has separated from the urine in its fineness; and if it is not treated, it will grow smaller and then larger again; and its roots run deep; and it is lighter to treat children up until they are 20 years old, whereas older people suffer more and feel pain in the middle; and the treatment for those who are between these two ages is less effective. The cure for those with large stones is easier than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary to first clean up the patient with an enema, to drain out all the matter that is in the intestines. For he often tries to get to the stones.
Then take the patient by the legs and move them up and down until the stone comes out at the bottom of the bladder, and never go higher; then make him sit with your hands under his thighs, so that the bladder hangs down; then examine and feel from the back.
If you feel the stone in your space, hurry now to cut it off on top of the stone. And if it doesn't come out with the touch, then moisten your index finger of your left hand with oil, for the patient is old and completed; and pour it into its foundation, and examine the stone, and when you feel it with your second finger, see if it goes to the neck of the bladder; then press it with your second finger, and pour it out at the end where you can feel it being cut.
And command the minister to press the bladder in his hand, and command him that he extends at his right hand the testicles above, and at his left hand he presses the skin that is behind the testicles in the part where one cuts; then pour out the semen copiously, from which this form comes.
And make a notch between those who are between the coions and the foundation, not in the middle but on the coast of the left side; and be right on the stone, and your two are together or at the foundation, and let the saw cut so that it is wide from behind and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big.
for fear that the press should go off without work; and know that there is part of the stone where there are angles and edges: so it is easy to extract; and if there is part that is rough, resembling a spike, and round, whose exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li 1.i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge li 1.i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;
and if there is more than one stone, put the largest first at the collar of the bladder, then cope on top, then cut further, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are any. And if it is very large, then you should make a small hole; for 15 things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out by itself because the leech cannot hold it; but nevertheless you must try to extract it in pieces with the tweezers, as long as you are able to.
and when you have finished your work, if the wound is hot, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood and bandage it, and put a damp cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water to calm the abscess; then tie the patient by the neck, and do not release the bandage until three days have passed.
And when you remove it, if the oil and water are well raised, then treat the wound with saffron poultice and basil poultice until it is well.
And if hot abscesses come into the wound and frosts of blood in the bladder, and if this [urine] is not removed in a certain way so that it does not flow with urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will freeze the bladder, and burn it.
and then raise the wound with water and herbs and salt, and help it in all ways that you can until it is well; and it is necessary that you bind the thighs for all the times that you cure it, and arrange the medicines on top.
And if the stone is small, and it is where he is conducted by the penis, and inserted therein, and the urine cannot come out; if the cure of what I said above, that you cut him many times, is excused by this cure. I have already tried it in this way.
Take. i. piece of iron according to this form, and be made into ii. angles, i. with the edge turned in.
Then take a thin metal wire and put it into the edge of the stone, so that it does not come out again in the bladder; then push the wire lightly into the edge of the stone, and turn the wire slightly so as to cut the stone from all sides; if the urine comes out soon afterwards, then press your hand on the one who is delayed by the stone inside the penis. If it is broken soon afterwards, and jumps with the urine, and heals the patient;
and if you cannot do this for any reason, then take a thin wire and put it into the stone, and another above it; then pass the wire between the ii. threads, then pull it out sharply, and loosen one of the threads, and clear the frozen blood that is in the wound; and cure as long as it is healthy.
of the woman's stone
There comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation," don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like  "Here is the translation," don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Here is the translated text:
and look well whether her wife is a virgin: then it comes to put his finger or foundation and seek the stone; and if he la trueve, so he binds his finger, and recommends that she puts his finger or with the disease, and wants and presses her left hand over the bladder shape.
If he la trueve, so it comes that she moves from greit to greit from the entry of the bladder until he reaches desoz, as much as she comes to the root of the thigh; then cope up on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle dou con, where it is mues apparilliet, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move his finger above the stone or desoz, and make the cut at the first little one;
Then bottle the cut in the middle, if you feel the stone so much to the wound that the stone can come out, and know that there are many ways of stones: it is to say, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and which have rains. If you know these appearances to know the outcome.
And if the sin does not go away, put vitriole broiet in it, and keep it for an hour until the sin is stained; then return to your work, as long as the stone is out, and have instruments that I told you in the extraction of the stone from men to help you with your work;
and if he does not wait for it, and this is the artery that has been cut off, put the powder on the place and strain out the blood and fat, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not draw it out, but only in case the patient dies; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of blood has subsided, and the veins have opened, if he returns to your work, until the stone is far away.
of hernial pain
of hernial pain
And the procreation of this ramose thing is so feeble that it comes to unions, and that material is spread out.
And there is no time when it comes to the unions due to percussion, and this moisture has many colors: or it declines to yellow, or it lacks red, or black, or watery white, and that happens more.
and this is the sign of conoistre this assembled thing, for if it is as white as we have said, it is the reons of the apostemes, i.e. short and like the figure of an ox, and does not open the unions, because it has moisture all around it.
And if there is moisture in the proper toil, it is the reons of the apostemes with a part of the uief, and for this one thinks that it is another uief;
and if moisture is between the skin of the coccyx and the white fat, then it smells good; so when you see to know the color of the moisture, try all the inner part because its form is as follows: According to this, who comes after the inner part, judge what is inside it.
According to this, who comes after the inner part, judge what is inside it. And when we heal him with fire, if it is appropriate that the patient be made well according to his strength and the fulfillment of his body; then let him lie on his back, on something a little high, and cover him with blankets.
then sit down on the left side, and instruct the minister to sit down on the right side, and extend the staff to one of the two ribs at the back of the coccyx;
and take the spatula, and scrape the skin of the cow among its long until it reaches the hand's knuckle, and let your cut be all straight by separating the skin of the cow up to its white sinew, and the bark lightly according to Tom's advice.
then pierce the sinew of water 1 inch large and clean cut, and extract all the water, and then put your fingers, and pull the sinew up; and do not touch the skin of the cow but only the sinew; and carefully scrape it off by piece, so that if you do not scrape it well, the water will return;
and if the glue should fall on your work, then put it back in its place when you have finished working on the sinew; and join the 21 pieces of the cow's skin with a seam, then treat it as you do the other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find that the glue is corrupted by some other disease, then you must lay the vials that are suspended there, in doubt of the corruption of blood; then take the cow's skin and scrape it off the vial, and treat it as we have said.
And if the water is assembled in two parts together, knowing that these are two branches; then chop the other part as you did the first evenly, and wash the blood, and put into the wound another wet one with oil drops.
and put elsewhere another wet lambs' wool with wine and oil, and put on the two branches, and put over them double sheets, and lay it up all along this form:
Then take 2 sheets of cloth, and fill them with wool according to this appearance and join them together by stitching around the neck of the shirt, and let one of the shoulders rest on the ground up to the back, and the other at the shoulder part; and the other two chief ones on the two arms, and is all joined together in the loop of the shirt;
and there is no times this medicine of the ramice of cautery in place of a size of iron, and it is that you press 1 cautery chisel delicate, and chop the leather of the branches, and is heated as we have said, so that the white syfac that contains the water comes out;
If you apply this fire cautery according to this form, and pierce that which is syphilic with it, and scorch it with this fine cautery:
And cover it in all ways that you can, until you have scorched everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the uvula; and know that this work is safer; and be careful of blood loss and of the wounds caused by cutting.
and if anything makes you oppose it, or an abscess or blood loss or something else, if what opposes you is removed, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this treatment because of its horror, then you must cut it open, as I have said before, and when you are certain by the signs that we have spoken about that the ramie has come out, then:
If he is sitting on the bed, then lift him up; then pierce the abscess in the part of the buttocks to all the wide skin, and place the hole of the long spine; and let the pores be large so that all the water runs out.
Then put cotton in the hole, and wrap it up, and leave so that the remaining water runs out, then heal the wound until the wound is healed;
and if the bleached cloth leaves water to run out of the wound's mouth, then you must put a pen or instrument used to drain the water from the hydropic into it, so that its shape is as described above; and enlarge the wound, and know that the water returns, and is gathered together after 25 days or so, and when it has been gathered together as before, and like that the patient's days will pass.
from the abscess of the crotch
It is known that with this ramie treatment there are many different conditions to which one must be attentive, so I think it would be best to leave it.
and I will tell you the work and the appearances of an abscess.
I say, then, that many aphes come from the crotch, and most often; and this is due to various causes.
This is known by bitter and sour excess, which expands towards the crotch or is spread by impact or percussion; or
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the chest; and do not piercing for pain, and the abscess is grief;
and sometimes an abscess is gray and piercing and of a pusy color, and never comes from a vein, or swelling of a vein.
When it is from an artery, if it is by the disposition of the abscess that you press it with your fingers; and it does not come except that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d'enflure de veine est connu par sa disposition à l'expression du toucher des deux.
and can do well the size on this appearance, and on the other characters; and is that you cut the curls of the hair, then the hair is on top, and the trail is white clean, and deliver the suspender from all sides of the hair.
For if the hair is already sored with these curls made, then it is necessary that you bring the hair, and the curl.
and if it is air-dried, or in those who are within the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all of this held, and the cover reverberates.
And if the birth of the child is behind, then it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the placenta, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, then employ the wound with wet wool soaked in oil and wine, and then use other remedies until it is healed.
of the appendix of the testicles
This is the translation of the provided Old French text line by line into English: and the patient grumbles when he goes;
and the treatment for this disease is well known to be fearful as described above;
and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the old ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient lie down on .i. a makeshift bed, then the bottle of the suspender of the testicles is taken down to your two sides, to all the vessel which are near to the penis, and make them wet, and spread them out flatly.
then cut the scrotum with a sharp instrument in a slanting way in the area of the vessels, as long as they are uncovered,
and then peel off each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
And I take an awl where it has .i. a double thread, and tie it to the first place where his vision came, and quickly to the other head; Then wrap the wound tightly according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moisture;
then treat the wound as you would any other with a bow, so that no part of the joint hurts;
For by this there comes no harm, and all the servants come forward, so that they may be led away from all the joints; So that he does not lose his hair due to the cutting of the vessels, and dry up and cannot help themselves.
of the rupture of the syphic The symptoms of this disease are: if it is due to section, that is, cutting, so that the syphic comes out, or extension along the abdomen in the region of the entrails, because the intestines descend from that section into one of the loins.
and this section is where the syphic comes out, or from the extension of it, and these .ij. ways arise from causes: from percussion, from jumping, from braying, from lifting a heavy burden, and from similar things;
and the signs when it is from an extension of the medicine, if it happens little by little, for a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are even until almost to the end, so that the medicine hurries up the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the section of the medicine, that it brings about sudden pain, and the abscesses appear different, especially around the skin, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body away from the medicine.
And there is no time when the loop with the intestine comes out, and it is held back, and causes great suffering to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these treatments with fire for fear, because it is necessary to avoid them.
And the manner of the ovraige is that you command the patient that he keep the intestine in his hand within the wound if it can be re-entered; then let him sigh upon his neck between your hands, and open the belly;
then take off the skin from above, and cut through all the skin of the loins; then pour into the scabbard of the sword according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the blade can be drawn out;
then peel off the skin of the cow so that the bone is exposed on all sides;
then dip your second finger in what will serve to open the cow's belly, in that which is exposed between the skin and the bone, and between the second which is exposed;
and then dip your first finger in what will serve to open the cow's belly, and between the second which is exposed; and then dip your first finger in what will serve to open the cow's belly, and between the second which is exposed; and then dip your third finger in what will serve to open the cow's belly, and between the fourth which is exposed; and then dip your left hand between the skin of the cow and its udder, and hold the white skin towards your right hand, and hold the udder to one side; and command to the minister that he extends the staff above, and from this who is higher behind the binding.
and examine your two sides if there is any wrapped or white intestinal stuff, and if you do not find anything, pour it into the belly.
then take a needle or there is a thick thread made of 3 lines, and pour it into the behind part of the syfac, which is after the skin of the scrotum; then cut the strings that appear from the threads, until there are 4 lines; then put one above the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the syfac, which we have said is tied to the skin of the scrotum with a strong thread of i lines; and wrap the heads of the silk, and join them with half-parts, so that no one of the lords who feed them can come in our eyes, for the eye does not come. and place therefor the line according to the first long half of that, and after those two lines leave a space which is twice the length of one line;
and after all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the eggs, so much so that it does not break, and the bow, as we have said before;
and then put the wet wool in oil, and put on the plies, and then put the line that we have said. And never is the white blood cauterized which we have said, after the incision, from fear of the decay of blood.
For this often happens, and leaves the ligature as long as it seizes itself; and if it delays in the seizure, let there be raised of warm water, and put on that which we have said, as long as it seizes itself;
then treat the wound with other treatment until it is completely healed.
from a hernia of the flesh
In this recipe I have never seen anyone dare to try to heal with fire.
And the ancient one said that it is made in this way: as you tie together the pieces of a ram's leg, so you must join together the bones, after cutting them very lightly at the joint;
Then chop it up, and cure the abscess of he who is affected by it, until the bones are free to move again; and treat it as we have said, until it is well.
No wound should be sutured except in the way we have said, and the incisions made; and if there is any exit of the bowels, it is little, and repair every hour; and if there be an exit of wind, let it out, for it is but a small exit; and li malade ne deve adoucir ni peller, mais li doiz avoir sa meure.
and whenever he lingers too long on this point, believes that there is a wound or pustule as far as the intestines go.
and this happens because of the extension of the pus which is in the cheeks, as we have said, for it is extended, then becomes softened and swollen, and its openings enlarged.
and the cure is by cauterization, as we have previously said; and it is never cured with iron in this way:
and the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then cover the wound with a lint wet with the quantity of two drops:
and then remove the medicine which is on the skin that is swollen, and then take the poultice and place it over the visible part of the medicine.
and then press down on the abdomen completely, and cut the .iij. visible parts of the medicine on top of the poultice head, and cut both.
and then remove the head of the poultice, and do not cover the medicine or extend any other thing, so that you know how to treat the entrails ramie.
and then cure by curing wounds. And when you cut the hairs, if the wound is clean and healed, do so until it is completely healed.
The medicine is difficult, and has no appearance in the cut, and the cauterizations are soft in this place, and are closer to salvation.
of the hardening of the skin of the anus
Several times the skin of the anus is softened in some men, because the matter that is within them is softened, and can be seen; and it is necessary, when you clean it, to make a cut at the base where the hair grows, and then to pull out the hair that is on the natural skin; then join the 2 lips together with one stitch or 3 stitches tightly; then cover them up, and clean as for other wounds, until they are healed, and tie off the thread.
with fire
Saiches that chastement is prescribed in our law, and for this reason I wish that I did not speak of it in this book; and it is necessary to speak of it only in two ways: one is that the mare in hand should reply when she is asked and be cured by the method of chastisement; and the other, because we have often had to chastise some animals for our benefit, such as goats and sheep and hares and others. I say then that chastement is done according to two ways: either by attraction or by slitting open. In the one in which we do it by attraction, we make the mare sit in warm water until her genitals are soft and relaxed; then grasp them with your hand until they are quiet and you can no longer feel them. From castration by cutting: you must first dye the animal, and press the skin of the genitals into your left hand, then tie the suspender, and wrap it around each testicle one at a time as you have well scalded them; and leave no little piece of the suturing thread and subcutaneous fat which is on the scrotum; and this method of chastisement is milder than that which is done by attraction, because by attraction something may remain of the genitals, through which the animal desires luxury; then cure the wound until it has healed.
of hermaphrodites
Here is the translation of the provided text:
of the tetanus
Tentigene is a char placed on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and also women have done it very well like a hand, and this is the cure. It is necessary that you take off the excess of the tentigene from your hand or fingers, and wash it lightly; and do not go too much in detail, lest blood come out, then the other cure until he is well; and at another char that comes out at the mouth of the marris, and use it, and perhaps jump up, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this they called it the old "cow disease". If you take off the excess, as we have said about the tentigene, and cure it until it is well.
of the errant
Here is the translation of the text:
of hemorrhoids
Here is the translation of the text into English:
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Many kinds of abscesses arise in the chest, as in the case of tuberculosis and pus-forming abscesses and herpes and estiomenes and fistules and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. Therefore, it is necessary that in this treatise I speak about the hot abscess that arises in the chest, which is not a kind of abscess but a boil; and if you know the work of iron, then consider that the abscesses are hot at their beginning, full of heat and fever, and if they turn red, then you can see them. Therefore, do not hurry to pierce it, but let it die while the pain is relieved; and then put the patient on a .i. chair, and place .ij. small chairs where he leans, and support his back and join his feet away from the leg; and let his knees be wide apart, and put his arms out of his knees, and tie them firmly with a good rope; then suck his breath towards his left side, and introduce the instrument that is used to open the mouth of the abscess, through which the form appears afterwards; and it is necessary that when you introduce this instrument, you insert the raker first to determine the depth of the abscess so that what enters the instrument does not enter more perfectly than it should, and does not wound the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then cover the depth of the abscess with cloth, so that the instrument does not hurt it; and it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument on top of it, and darken the instrument. And when the boil opens, and the hand is soft, then cover it with a sponge, and when the bowels are empty, then put in the wound wet tents made with oil rosin or green oil; and place the tent outside the wound at the perfect depth of the abscess, and put them on both sides of the wound clean wet with water or mallows are boiled; then cure it after .ij. days of ointment coming before it, until it is healed; and do not lift up the wound and the abscess by the use of water and honey, and then only by water or roots of licorice and aristolochia are boiled; then remind him of the ointment. And if the wound has closed in the chest, then be careful not to use iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth
Here is the next sentence to translate:
If the baby comes out naturally up top, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and her virtue is weak, then let her sit on a saddle, or let the women hold it; and let them cook its oil or fenugreek, and then pour the balm between her two little breasts whose shape this is. And split the second, and wrap up his nail as much as the moisture that is in it runs; and squeeze the woman's belly until the baby drops, and if it doesn't drop, then you should clisterize the woman with fenugreek musk with oil of sisament; then make her squeeze and shake for an hour: then now the baby.And if his two hands come out, then you should pull them lightly back and forth; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a .i. seat, and let her support her feet up; then remove the seat from the ground, and wrap her, so that she doesn't stand up; and if his hands cannot enter, and the baby dies, then wrap his hands with the knife that is here before it is placed, and pull out the child, and pull them evenly.
of the issue of the child on its feet When the baby comes out on its feet, if it is to be lifted up; and then turn it little by little until it is even;
then stretch a piece and then little by little.
As it jumps just as it is stretched, if it is commanded to be stretched, and makes it vibrate from its condition; if it jumps, let God see you.
And if it does not become smaller and smaller as we have said, so that it is according to the natural shape. For then it becomes lighter quickly.
And if it does not become smaller and smaller as we have said, so that take musk of the earth, and oil of sesame, and gum melted, and grind all up in a mortar; and put on the woman's nature in it, and let it sit. And then put her on the fire of tepid water until it is cold over the ribs.
and when she is wet, she makes a necklace of honey and puts it on her and leaves it for an hour; Then put her on a seat, then make her sneeze and strain her mouth and nose, and squeeze her belly lightly, for the baby is coming now. of the birth of the child between her knees When the baby arrives in this way, if he puts his hands on it little by little.
the birth of the child who comes from a large wound one hand at a time during I come to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, if the woman stands and walks;
s’elle ne peut aller, si la fais gesir sur .i. lit, et le déboute les jambes forment ;
and then bring the muscle to the surface that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, if you make her sit on  .i. chair, then study to bring the hand back; and shape the child according to nature, and make her shake it, and command her to stretch as far as she can while the child is inside her.
of the delivery of the child from her head, and had spread its hands, and his face turned towards the mother's back. Come the bailiff held his hand, then he turned it little by little and gently;
and when it is even, put on the nature of oil and vinegar as we have said, then tell her to move little by little;
and when you have done this, if the face sits on .I. seat, and tell it to stretch; and the face shakes. of this method for all of the second part
of this method for all of the second part When it comes in this way to all of the second part, if it is dry enough so that there is no moisture;
and if he pinches himself on his face and on his neck, and the fire goes out, so that it is not held, and the pincher dies;
then place the child inside, as far as you have put it, and instruct the woman that she not stretch herself:
of the union of twins, Says that twins are often born, and rarely born one at a time; and that is not an unusual thing, and it did not happen suddenly. Two are strange things, and do not live, if they were named.
I know you, that they are many, and are cured by the medicine that devises them, which is tied to the bad.
and never come naturally as all of us do, as we have said.
And if it grieves, and if the cure is as we have said, and let the doctor be subtle and make quickly and lightly that which he does. and do so as well as you can for salvation. of many children
of many children Many times are formed in the mare (mare, i.e., mare). Or 1. Or 2. Or 3. Or 4. or 5. or 6. or more up to 15., and all are formed by a measure of sage glory,
and cover so that the bailif knows all of this, because by chance similar things happen to him; so make according to what is necessary.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman with a stillbirth or an abdominal condition, as I mentioned in the division, and it does not respond, and you are forced to use your hands; if it is appropriate for you to know if the woman is of sound health, and she does not fear death because of an accident;
if it is appropriate for the woman to be bent over her back, and her legs raised, and her feet turned towards the sky;
and the minister the scabs of .ij. parts, where it lies in bed so that it is not treated for the decline of the child;
then rub the mouth of the woman with oil made from musk and althaea and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these muskellaiges; then pour into the woman slightly, then add .i. drops or so that she pours the wine which is suitable for this,
and take care if it is cold that it does not freeze on her head; If he inserts thorns into his eyes or into his throat or into his mouth or into the palate or shaves off his beard or cuts near his ribs,
and if he falls on his face, if he inserts or pricks and they are in motion;
and it is necessary that he hold the thorn in his right hand and place the cup between his two left-hand fingers, and gently hold the thorn against any one of these places until it comes out;
Then find another piece of wood, or if you need to, cut it so that the extractions are even;
and then extend it evenly from one side to the other, so that it can be moved, and hold the tooth in place with it, like this:
If one part stops moving, then grease some oil on its two sides and push it in that direction, and pull the other part;
and if one doesn't move at all, then put this piece of wood higher up or lower down, and do so until it moves completely;
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back by constriction, then you must wrap him in a blanket, until he stops moving;
then place the cloth at the joint of the foot or the wrist, and in the other hand, do likewise to the other foot.
And if the child's head is large and it is stuck at the birth, or it has a sharp head, If it is necessary for you to pour the spiny sputum between your two hands, and move the head back and forth, and draw out the sharp liquid. Or take it with the instrument which is called an “almidah,” from which the form comes with the instruments or paste that follows this one;
and in this way I make it come out with a great natural movement; and then draw out the bones with nails,
and if the shoulder bone is forced out, so that it is split, as long as the moisture which is at the tip moves out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces so that you can move it.
and if it is swollen in the belly or between the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
And if it is swollen on its sides, then the mild pull will move it, and the treatment of the mouth with mild treatments is light.
And if it is stuck in the belly or the breast, then know that you should extract it with a towel wrapped around your hand; and making the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture that is there;
and if the other member is dislocated and the head stays put, then take the hand of the patient perfectly by the palm, and pull it out to the mouth of the arm. and pour upon it .I. an ounce of wine, and make it fume;
and if the mouth is tight from an abscess that has come up, so that it cannot be worked, then provide wet and greasy things; and provide plasters, and cut in aqua molis et umida;
And if it is stuck on his ribcage, and you can put it back in place, then apply what we said about the live child;
and if we do not have the power, so that they are taken apart, and leave nothing of the second one.
And when you have done this, apply what we said about the feet that come in the mare (sea);
and if they come from the sea, so that it is dried out and restrained, and apply other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose belly had one child dead, then another on top of it, and another that would die. After a long time, the twenty-one apothecaries in the pot, increased so much that it burst open and began to emit a great stench.
I was called to treat it, and I stayed for a long time, but I couldn't hold back the wound.
I put on a strong poultice, and in it put a bone, and after a few days another one. I was amazed, for this child's belly does not have any bones.
If I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I wanted to heal the wound, and with great care, as long as the woman's condition did not improve; and waited for a long time until she finally arrived, and there was a little bow at her place;
and I have recorded this chapter of the medicine only because that, when the master discovers a strange thing, he may know how to help it.
how to put back in place
Here follows the form of pressing, where one sets the bones; and at the two turns to the two shoulders. Nevertheless, the horns should be slightly thinner than the mandible, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let his mouth be two fingers wide, and the rim of the tree should be a finger wide, and long a palm and a half; and the three lines be two joints of this same stuff, which are joined together in one and in the other, a palm and a half long or a little more;
and these two joints are pushed into the mouth of the mandible to open when the two corners turn.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of the teeth; and there are .iij. shoulders of the shoulder, if you see, of a palm long, and .iij. wide;
and when you see open the mare with all the instrument, if so sit the woman on 1 bed, the legs during and the legs open, then bottle the .iij. shoulders attach together in the mare, and hold the head of the instrument between his breasts; then open your hand to all the instrument, if you have done it like claws evenly, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the mare, until the ball makes what she wants.
All these instruments are all mounted, and multiplied for their appearances; and when you look at them, the operation is more quick and greater in quantity.
Do not despair of the instrument unless you have equipped it, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the second one is retained for birth, command the patient to hold her hair back, and then cause her to sneeze, and hold your hands to her mouth and nose; and and if she sneezes because of it, that's good.
If he does not, if he can, and make a hole or lid, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the wound, as chamomile, fennel, anise, yarrow, camiline and centaurium.
all these herbs, or some of them, are boiled in water on the fire; then put a plug or lid into the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the wound,
and let the vapor come out of the wound; then make him cough, as we have said. If he does not, if he can, and make a hole or lid, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the wound, as chamomile, fennel, anise, yarrow, camiline and centaurium. And if it remains after this treatment and does not heal, instruct the midwife to soak her left hand in oil of seed or in musk from the mountain, and then let it dry naturally.
and wants the second; and when she has found it, if she pinches it and extends it little by little correctly, so that the marriage does not crack at extraction; but must move lightly from side to side, and then draw; but it will come loose and fall out.
And if the mouth of the marriage is tight, we have said the treatment of swallowing, and of steam from herbs;
and if it is not of all those we have said, so that you do not follow at all in the treatment.
but it is necessary that he who is in the mouth of the mare, you tie him to the cunt of the woman, then the cauterize with ointment tetrafarmacon;
so that she who has put it in the mare, and then sets it on fire, and comes again; but nevertheless, when she puts it in, if it comes with a bad smell to the stomach and to the head, and bleeds the patient.
So that the smoke of certain things is useful for this; none of the ancient ones have tried smoking with watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument is such that when the woman is to be sterilized with smoke, this is how it should be used.
And it resembles a dog's head, and the thin end is placed in the nature, and the broad ends are on the fire;
and let the smoke be over the coals, and the hair be completely burned, and start another one.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who have not yet had the foundation pierced, but it is stopped with a subtle medicine. So that the doctor who has the foundation pierced at his right hand may not pierce it with a needle and wound, and keep the wound from being infected.
then put on a wet cloth of wine and oil, then the ointment cure as long as it is healthy.
And if you doubt that he will not recover, then put on a piece of leather and let his hands hang down, and be crushed when the child walks in bed.
And there is no need for sudden swelling of a wound or an abscess; if it is necessary to cover the sudden swelling: if you treat it as we said of the wine of plum.
of the fistula from the foundation Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodular and more painful than those that come from the fundament deflowered, or in the space between the iij parts,
if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, if it breaks open, and with a moist hot poultice or a subtle boil,
and never do these fistulas persist; and they are known by whom it is or excretion or wind when the patient has an excretion, and sometimes in a leap.
and if the fistulas perforate only to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and they come up to the joint of the scrotum, and up to the tip of the knee.
and so you know if the fistula perforates down to the perineum, and not down to the anus. and so you should stick your little finger or perineum, and stick a thin needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if he has tortuosity, if I but put a little string of horsehair, or .i. horse hair, as far as you feel the string or hair in your mouth;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no difficulty in passing wind or vomiting, as we have said: be aware that it does not pierce; if you hurry to cure.
And when the fistula is persisting up to the bladder or up to the urinary tract, if in jumping the urine, and cannot be treated by medicines.
If it is pierced just up to the hip joint, then he must be taken by the hand up to his full length. If it does not have any twists and the pain is continuous, then it is already bad, and it has not yet been treated by medicine or sudden remedy by feeling;
And in these persistent fistulas there is no cure but hard work, and the vain pursuits of foolish people who meddle with them.
In that which is not persistent and not old, there is hope for health by fire, as I have experienced,
and he leans down his legs until his knees, and has his knees bent toward his belly; then put a tent of rain, or of mud if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes from.
So that the patient feels the ground underneath, if it is convenient you put your two fingers there,
then feel that the tent has been picked up; and if it is uncovered or you feel between your thumb and finger the syringe or the cane, then you know that it is effective; if he does not work then he cannot be healed.
One should use the fire cautery to heal some people well, but this is not often done; however, it can be.
and the aid that can be given, if one does this, is that the fire cautery should be heated according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said above; and the bottle should be heated in the fistula until it comes out clean; and do this 19 times or 23 times until you are sure that these charred feathers are burned, which look like an owl's feather;
and then the doctor of the tent of water will saturate it, as long as that does not burn, and then the doctor of ointment will rub it while soaking and binding.
If this is healthy, it is good. But if not, otherwise it cannot be healthy;
and if this is between the two and does not pierce up to the top which is at the base, and in front of the two there is a thick covering of wax or resin, and you see the fistula on that which lies under the covering of resin; if the wax of the encumbrance of the fistula, and pour on before the tent, and then apply the cauterization after, as long as it comes to the head of the tent;
and will be delivered the test, and cherrie; then world-forsaken those cars faultrees that seem a quill of an oisel, and remain not one.
And if the sun does not go out, and wind between you and the work, if the fire cautery or medicine astringent.
For the fire cautery gathers 2. things: that is to say, the burning of these dislocated joints, and the drawing out of blood and drying up of moisture.
then the treatment of wet tents with milk or bread, until the liquid leaves, and seethes these dislocated joints in the liquid.
Then heal the wound with herbs that dry out the hard core, and are the dried medicines.
For when it is reset, then is healed and does not return again.
And if a fistula comes from the very foundation, and is separated from the body, it pulls at the root, and inquiries about that.
If you feel the tent, and enter. If it is the toe or the syphillus or char, where it is about to pierce, there is only one way of hope and faith, through the administration of one of the three ways:
Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
And do not cut it too deep, so that you do not hurt the foundation, and let the excretion come out voluntarily through one side. then treat it, as we have said.
then treat it, as we have said. In case it is cured, or you remove the covering and clean up carefully the area where it has been cut, removing all traces of the wound, or using a sharp instrument. and then my Lord's good will come upon the wound, as well as you can.
and then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part further from the foundation: this is a lighter thing for the patient.
And no fistula is made in this way; and it is when you patch the tent onto the fistula, and she is or costs from the foundation of leather above, that if a tent is torn at the top according to this form: And I put .ij. of a tort in it, and bottle the tent to all the thread in the fistula as long as it is at the head.
If it is persistant in the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the thread of that torn, so that you bottle your two or foundation;
and train the head of the thread and assemble the .ij. shoulders together, and extract one from another, and leave it .i. day or .ij.;
and restrain it not at all, until the thread holds these shoulders that are between two, and they grind;
Then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, if you can pierce it in all ways that you can, if it is not too completely enclosed.
For it does not suit to make the lacing cover completely, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spikelet from which one makes the fistula if it is sharp and pointed, part and trenches; and on the other hand no, for this reason one doesn't chop what one shouldn't chop, as you see here:
are in two ways: either they are deep within the fundament, as grains of resin, and small and large ones arise therefrom, and cut short there; or, and if one or more are there, and are far from the fundament and at the top of the fundament; but those that are far away have little moisture, and
and now again, where there is a little water of yellow color or a little blood, and they have the color of the flesh.
and the cure for those who have them in the foundation, so that you command the patient that he should sweat in bed, as long as the foundations are removed and the hair comes out. if you hurry, and hold it like a claw, or if you hold it with your nail, then cut it by its roots;
and if they cannot hold them because of their moisture, if they take them by the drapes, or by the cotton, or by a piece of cambric; and pull them with your two hands, then chop them up, and powder them on top of any hot powders that are in the place of cautery. or you cauterize them as said above with fire cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;
and if the foundation cannot come out, then cauterize the patient with a sharp and biting cautery to wash out what is in the foundation, so that it can come out openly;
and if the patient is pregnant, and their cord is very tight at the fundus, then the treatment is light; and are to be pressed with your fingernail or tweezers, and then are to be extracted, then are to be cured as we have said, until they are sound, and fear incisions made with iron.
If it is necessary to introduce the stitch according to this method: take a twisted thread, and put it in a needle, then bring the thread over and under the needle several times, and pierce the needle through from the other side, and tie the two ends of the thread together tightly. and if it is thick; and stretch the thread out, then tie it, and remove the needle, and do the same for all of them, and leave behind one [thread] to control the blood.
then put on the foundation .i. cloth dampened with oil or resin, and put on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then let it rest until it has recovered, and when it is healed, if the wound is treated with ointment and other treatment, until it is well.
do carefully at the end of its foundation. For many times, the end of its foundation is dry in the intestines, and by nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is no good.
If you want to remove it at the root of a scalpel or your nail on top, which does not leave it wet; then treat so long as he is soft, as it suits him.
and if he cannot harden, then begin to shave more forcefully than before, until the hair grows out, and is scorched; then treat so long as he is sound
and then the fire will stop. Fire is a small appearance of skin before the body, and it grows completely.
And no time does the wound hurt, and one can feel it like death throes, and it comes all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
And the cure is that you take a feather from an owl or a very strong vulture, and put that feather on the wound, until the purple circle covers the whole wound. Then turn your hand over all the feather as much as you can cover the whole wound, and make it completely smooth, and wash the wound from its roots.
And if you see, then do this of a dog's skull or iron according to this form, and be careful not to cut into it and run over it.
do not cut it, so that you keep the two together, and press them. And if you see, then cauterize the inflammation, as it is before or with the fire cautery of the chapter.
of the shape of the blister No one should make blisters of silver or brass, or melted gold or lead; and no one should use these small or large instruments according to the purpose for which they are intended.
These children who are weak and suffering are small.
The shape of the clister is small and large above, or the belly is tied according to this way:
and there is a gap or the belly is tied, so that you see it, and the chest is pierced at one end, and open at the other.
and the belly or the ommet puts the medicines in a bladder of best or parchment, and pierces all around the little hole,
and place between each hole i.e. must of space, then pour in these holes a strong thread of twisted cord in 10 or 12, and join the belly together as if it were a sheep; and when the medicine is inside, if the instrument lies before a strong thread, then cauterize; and this is the form of a circle:
And be the medicine not too hot or too cold, and oil or ointment of lamb's fat or some other thing, then pour it lightly;
then squeeze the ministers together with his two hands until it is completely full, then remove the cloth, and place the patient's legs against the wall,
and if he has medicine made, as much as he can; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is greater help.
And if you cauterize him with the disease of decay from the belly, and the medicine is hastening to come out, if he renews it as long as he is well.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation or abscess, so too is the cauterization as subtle as for a .i. child;
and this is the form of the cauterization subtlety where the skin is held back:
of wounds
We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the chapter on division; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicines, according to fulfillment.
I say that wounds are various according to what they are, and according to the places where they are made, and because of what causes them.
The things that cause wounds are from a stone, or an axe, or a knife, or a spear, or a club, or similar things.
ou that are done according to the rules of the body, such as a wound on the neck, or on the head, or the breast, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds, because the remedy will come in its own chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, if it is due to falling from a rock or similar things, and the skin is split but the flesh is not hurt, then you must first treat the wound with oil, and bandage it well. and you gently cut the aposteme: if it is a little wound on the head that has come from the sanc of the wound itself, and not the opposite way around, then you must carefully
and have the patient abstain from wine and fattening meat.
If he does not eat, if his flesh is diminished, and does not drink wine or eat cheese, nor any other meat.
and apply to the wound, if there is an abscess, cotton dipped in oil and applied directly, or in wine that constricts;
and if there is no abscess, if the wound is fresh and not moved by the air, powder which I will speak about a little later on;
and if it burns, put on some ointments, until he is healthy.
And if the wound is large as from a sword and similar things, and the lips cannot be put together by tension, so they are put together by縫ing, like I say in the wounds of the belly, from the縫ing.
For if the wound is exposed to the bone, and it is open, and only held by a little, so the patch; then heal the wound with medication, and return it to hard leather in place of skin. And instruct the patient to eat large meats, like tests and wheat cake, as well as poultry, and similar things.
And if you find a boil that doesn't touch the bone, cut it all out, and then treat it.
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein from which blood cannot be stopped by cutting it, then seek to find the artery, and if you find it dislocated, let it be as a thread. and if that doesn't help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then a light treatment is appropriate: and that you put this powder that hardens so that the fire moves it.
And the way of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood seven parts; live chalk three parts, and the powder finely. and apply the wound, and the bandage form, until it is well dried and joins to all its blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it not loosened, if it swells; for one should not wrap up the medicine until it is healed.
And never make a paste of chalk alone; when you have neither incense nor dragon's blood, but the armpit has moved the wound.
And if it has burned, it will have moved the wound, most certainly it is so, unless I put this powder on it.
but put on some digestive ointments, or balls of flour made from water and honey until it is dry; then treat with other treatments as long as he is healthy.
And if there is a fracture of the bones along with the wound, and it is small, then extract with careful pinches;
and I will tell you here after about the breaking of the head.
of the wound on the neck.
If the wound is on the throat and it is simple, there is no difference between that and a wound on the head, but if the artery is cut at the throat.
If it is the neck, if there is no other device to keep the wound open and prevent it from closing, for it will heal itself and close up. But if you put something in the way, it will delay healing and increase pain. and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the circulation of the blood goes with the brain, which is the highest limb.
but let the medicine be made up, as if it were hot water washed in with oil of rose, and dipped also in warm water; and other stones according to this method, and wetting with moist oils.
And if the wound is large, so that it bleeds and needs binding, then heal as long as it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and she is full of bowels, so that it pierces or lower down;
And if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes from it, so that she faints, and falls, and the fire cautery should be used in this case;
And if the windpipe is cut, or the throat, and the voice is lost, and the sound of the voice is changed, because the meat goes; So that the taste does not touch on the tongue of the throat, and does not touch the throat but sets it according to its natural shape; and then he comes back forward, and leaves it for a few days, then he cures with garlic until he is healthy;
if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then let him want; and if there are pieces of bone, and if you can't hold them all together, and those that you cannot hold, let it be as long as the wound festers; and be careful and strict with the dressing;
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I have said. If there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then heal it as I said in my chapter on the ointment.
with a lance or a knife wound
If it is a cut from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then look at the wound and see if the patient's breath smells bad: know that the wound is deadly.
and if it is not poured, and it is fresh to all of its blood, then I do not put the powder there at first hour, nor bind the blood so that it does not go on completely, and recover to the heart, and close up the wound; but I put a healing ointment on it, and bind it 21 times a day;
and if you have no ointment, then put wet cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture,
and let the patient sleep on the wound .iij. days, or .iiij., or more often; if there is no spasm, nor bad trembling of the body or strange movements; and when you see the good conditions, know that the wound is saved. Cure it with remedies and other cures, as long as it is healthy;
and if it cannot heal, then operate so that there is a fistula; if the cure is as it should be.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife blade and it is simple, or deep or on the back, then the cure of that which is in front;
if it is great, of stitching; and if it is small, of powder, and if it has broken into the bone, and has made pieces, then examine the wound, and the deep wounds if they are unhealed; and if they are not unhealed, then let the wound heal, and then perform the extractions;
and for other wounds to other limbs, it is the same judgment as we have said.
and for the rupture of the abdomen
is great and mild and small;
causing a great wound, sometimes the intestines break, or the intestines tear, because of the impact of the bowels;
and the stitch is more difficult, and there is no time worse than the little wound that the big one.
for if you do not put the intestines back in place, step by step, if you do not put them back in place from warm to warm; because the intestines swell up so much that they feel cold, if you do not put them back in place;
and for the little wound, for if you leave the intestine in its place more than others;
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to .iiij. ways:
The common two seams in the belly seam
and the seam of the other wounds of the body and .ii. other proper seams are common to other wounds;
and all of them are more proper with the belly seam, and I will say each one and I will declare:
I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine out. and a good thing is to put it back, this is done by one of the two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen by cold.
And when he is fevered, heat him with some such method: moistening a sponge or .i. a napkin very well in warm water, or you boil water with squinant and cumin and spice, and raise the intestine until it swells;
and never done this with this vin, and is it not hot enough that you feel pain when you breathe.
And when you see the swelling go away, if you moisten the intestines with water or salt and cook them well, for by this is the entrance closed to a little thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small hole in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
and the first cure is to make him sleep. that we do not cut him unless there is great necessity;
and this is the instrument for splitting it:
if you cut into the core and leave it outside, and see the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the entrails are protruding, if it is reset according to its natural form in its proper place, If you can do this, for it is a difficult thing.
And when the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, If you make the sick person walk on their two feet, and keep his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part of the body called the belly,
and if there is a rupture from the belly, it is in one of the .ij. parts if you are aware that the navel part is higher than the other part;
and thus it is necessary to treat what I say about large and small wounds.
For small wounds, however, the equipment should be
Then put your hands .i. minister of mercy who seeth all the injury to his hand, and bring together the lips; this is the common way of sewing,
this is the common way of sewing, and it is that you squeeze a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, and leave from the top of the wound 1.2 inches, and stick a needle where it has 1.2 inches of good strong thread. and pierce the 1.2 inches of skin with the 1.2 inches of thread.
then the pulling out of a doubled thread goes through the needle from .ij. parts then put together the .ij. pieces of the wound in advance,
and then leave 1 or 2 spaces, and then stick another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and never cease to do this according to what you need to do with needles. while all the wound is restricted;
and the needles are small, between thin and thick, for the small needles fill all the space, and the too large ones cannot enter well: for this is convenient that they are moist.
and do not want to put the needles too far from the shoulder of the hide and the leather,
for they do not want to cut and open the wound in front of the seam;
and then close the head of the needle, so that it does not hurt the patient when sleeping; and I put tents or tarps on the shoulder of the needle so that it stays in place. and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this method of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, for it requires a needle or a pair of needles.
The second stitch is common, and you join the .ij. shoulders of leather and the .ij. shoulders of syrup together with one strong thread; and when you have pierced these shoulders all together,
and when you have pierced these shoulders all together, if you wind the thread around the needle in the manner in which we weave threads;
and set aside space between each seam the thickness of a small finger;
this stitch is seven inches long,
and I sewed up an wound or abdomen,
which was torn by a knife, and this wound was more than a palm in length, and there were also intestines of good length.
and the wound was on the belly. I brought back the intestine; then it was eight hours old.
and the wound was healed just after .xv. days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
And the miracle was that they said he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment, because I was in .i. days where there is no ointment or medicine; and I put on a lot of honey on the wound every day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.;
And I will tell you the seven proper ways of sewing.
Take the needle, and dip it in the thread from the outside to the inside;
When she has pierced the thread with the right thread from the right side, if you have dipped the needle in the dye or thread from the outside to the inside;
and let her pierce it from the other side from the inside to the outside;
and the meaning of this passage is that you should sew it as well as the skin-worker sews fur, and leave the suturing of one side, and take up that of the other, until the sewing is all done.
The second method of sewing, which Galiens describes properly,
is if if anyone does so, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the heads to the other head, like this:
file an awl or head of the needle nearest, and pierce that one only, and leave the .ij. heads of the shoulder; then turn the awl, and pierce it from the outside part only up to that one inside, As the head of the shoulder...
And then pierce each and every part of the outside until you reach the center in 12 other shoulder chisels that are on the opposite side;
and this is the method of sewing and it is the most common.
Galen, then, thus speaks, and no one contradicts him,
c’on doit coudre le ventre à .ij. aiguilles, ou il ait fils en chacune ;
and one needle from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew with knots;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, if it is a stitch in the middle of the belly,
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds.
and when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the flesh has been moved. if you remove the intestine and the cut, then put powder on it, rubbing it in;
if you remove the intestine and the cut, then put powder on it, rubbing it in; and if the flesh has been moved, then put any ointment that is present on it, as long as the wound boils; and cut the child, and let the milk flow, and the mirth. then heal the wound as with others, until it is well;
and if you do not have medicine, put on it, soon that it begins to come out, cotton wool, and stir it .ij. times a day until it is well.
For you have no need of other medicines in many cases when wounds are simple.
and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the main members, if it is appropriate for you to soak another light part in hot oil or rose oil, and place it between the arms, and release the joints;
and if it causes pain or swelling in the belly, and often happens. if the black wine enema soothes, and rarely does the inflammation come up to the intestine;
and it perforates within, and knows that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
the intestine called "jeun" cannot heal if it is torn, and this is because of the opening of veins, and the subtlety of all the body, and the approach to its nature of fire.
And if the arrow flies out of the wound, if he puts it back as well as the intestines, while it is fresh;
and if it becomes yellow and brown, if you find the place that is black, that blood does not come from there; For there are veins and arteries;
and take out who is between the thread, and place the two heads hanging from the side of the wound to the end so as to facilitate the extraction when the joints creak, and the wound is closed.
of the cut of the boil
When the intestines are runny, and the wound is small, If so, can he be restored to health in some homes?
because I see that a noble man was pierced or wounded by a lance.
and the wound was on the right side of the abdomen. and it became a fistula and there was effusion and windiness;
I will treat you as well as I can, and will not stop applying the treatment until you are well, and will bind up your wounds.
And when I saw that the wound was healing, I doubted that the patient had ill in his belly; and he had no evil, but delayed in good health, eating and drinking;
and they said that when one has a small wound in the intestines, one should bind it in some way: Take some tongs from a large testicle, then spread the lips of the wound apart. and when the tongs have opened the mouth, place it on the 1/2 lips,
and so on. I. another will moan after in this way that before, until the wound is completely closed;
and measure the wound. For if it burns in the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient,
and can be tied with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
in this way: take the head of this intestine thread that is moult dismembered, and then tie to the head of this thread .i. a fine linen thread twisted, then thread the needle, and sew the intestine, and turn it back in the cut;
and this way of suturing wounds is not strong except according to the road of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, most especially when it is in one of the internal grooves, then there is no healing without subtlety.
from fistula or whatever says that any wound or abscess, once it has healed, is called a "fistula" universally. and most certainly when she is riding and running around.
And the fistula is according to the green doctrine hard and white, where there is no pain, and is also chewed like the feathers of an owl;
and at times clearly in the clear sky, and at other times thickly in the thick sky. not at all times, and another time enough.
and I have spoken about the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed and there is no pain, is only by one of the eight-and-thirty causes:
that is to say, by smallness of age or of wound; For his malady. For if he has a hard growth within him, and on the lips, so that it does not grow forth. Or if there is too much bowels. Or his loins are weakened, and the matter is of bad quality. where the medicine does not help in the treatment; where for fear that the corruption is a sign of plague; where in the area there is late digestion, and late health, and by nature; where there are veins or organs:
and I have most thoroughly discussed all these causes, and signs, and remedies of medicine in the division.
It is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of fistula which is made by work of hands.
Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body. For there are fistulas which come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu'il laisse les poilz tant qu'il soient lons et igals; et s'il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu'il ne se muevent tant qu'il naissent. For the spine of the back, or for any joint in the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this way are great sanitation, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
and if there is no fistula so that it does not come to light until I have said so, and you are engaged in the cure, and if you can see it clearly, then take a tent of rain or iron, that the fistula is straight if you seek it.
and if the fistula is twisted, then seek it with a subtle tent of water. for the plonk will bend within the tortuosity.
and if it pricks his palm, you cannot well search for it with your fingers. if the blister is on one of the hands,
for if the moisture comes from one hole to another, and cleanses it;
then search for it with your power, that you know if there are bones or nerves, and chop it completely,
and ask the patient well of the pain that he feels when you squeeze his hand, and the place where he feels it.
and when you know truly the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in some of the places that I have told you, if the wound is along the line of the joint, or of a nerve, or an artery, or a vein,
or in some of the places that I have told you, if the wound is along the line of the joint, or of a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, and the bones are broken and the corroded chips that are within them; and then the treatment until he is well.
and if his fistula is very deep from the right place, it is necessary that you cut it perfectly, as well as you can, then dip them in medicinal water, and pour them up to the base of the fistula,
then dip them in medicinal water, and pour them up to the base of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that is reserved at the bottom.
and then put oil on the sick horse as long as it is healthy;
if it is not cured by this, then let him be cauterized as we have said;
and if his nose is corrupted by the fistula, then let him be mended; If a vein or nerve is injured in the main members, as we have said;
And if his nose is open, and there is corruption and blackness, let him wait until the whole bone is corrupted. then heal him of things that cause trouble as long as he remains healthy;
and if he is not healed, and his bowels are upset as before, So that you are not troubled any more than necessary:
If you see it, and wait as long as you can. and bone all the corruption, then restore the place;
if it is thus healthy, it is good. if not, know that the corruption is too perfect, that you cannot come there; if there is no other cure except to ease the pain by nature;
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with pliers, if the extraction is done with the right tool for this purpose,
and if there are several bones, and if you pull them out one by one, do not leave more than one exposed.
and if moisture makes him opposite, and there is no mistake or fear, if it is cold and wet and hot, and delivers the bones.
And if you do not remove them in an hour, put something that may cause pus on the wound, and leave it as long as the leaks are between the bones,
and then will have more easily the bones;
and if it is a large bone, like a leg or thigh, if you only reset the fracture as much as possible so that the blackening is all bone, then patch up the wound;
and if there is a great deal of putrefaction, and it comes up to the bone's root; if it is suitable and covered all the way up to the corruption, and then heal it as long as it is connected;
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may use this as an example and aid in your work.
He was a young man of about .xxx. years old, who had a pain in his leg from some cause that came from within the body.
as long as the matter came to the leg, and was gone away with a great abscess, and had no cause to put forth by opening it;
but the mirror, through madness, opened so much that it went up to the abscess; and corroded matter, and became a fistula, and I came out of a perforation that all went up and wet with moisture from the body;
and many I have healed within three years, and there was no skill at all in the art of hands.
while I was called, and saw his leg and the medicine with which he was cured, and that which runs through the pores with great force; and his body became red with youthfulness, and had an orange-colored complexion.
I drove a tent stake into one of those gaps, and then searched all the gaps.
and I found that one came between the other on all sides of the leg.
So I quickly went over there, and I drove a stake into one of the gaps until I hit some bone. and I found it rotten and broken, and the corruption went all the way down to the bone inside;
I liked that which appeared to me of the rotten bone, and I took care that there was no other corruption than that which I had;
and I began to restore the wound with medicines which were made long ago, and could not be held together;
and then I began again, and uncovered the bone so as to see it well;
and I liked it, and then I held it, and I began to mend the joint;
but I could not as long as I cupped an elbow of bone, and took it to all its limbs. then I restored it with medicines; and he was healed and fully recovered.
and he no longer needed to risk injury for the sake of the disease, which could not endure it. and out of fear of death that I had for him. For due to the blood evacuation it often happened, but he was completely cured,
For due to the blood evacuation it often happened, but he was completely cured, and bore in place of the bone a hard piece, and was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary from all to all, nor did it affect him to go or come.
and stretch the head, so that you pull out the broken bar, and uncover the bar on top where you can see the silk, so that the silk does not stain the bar; and put a piece of wood or a table under the leg so as to move the corroded bone; and it is necessary that one can see and feel the corruption, and sometimes also.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then discover the whole char; then put a piece of wood under it,
and then let silk from one part to another the corruption, and let the silkworm out of long the corruption . i.e. time, if as we have said;
if the corruption is in the joint, then break the joint and let silk the bone where it is contained from the other side;
if the corruption is in the continuation of the 10 joints, then there is no other pain than that of breaking;
if the corruption is where the hand or foot pricks, then this is a very strong thing; but nonetheless you must inquire about this corrosion, how it affects you; and clean thoroughly in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not make you contrary;
and know that the incision and threads to patch these bones are many, according to the position of the bone and appearance of the hair; and their grossness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and because of this it is appropriate that he prepare each instrument for each kind of work.
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this craft, and the testimony of the manner of diseases; and if you prepare the instrument that is appropriate for this, according to what is necessary.
Here is a line-by-line translation of the provided text: "When the head..."
"and when you have..." "if it is necessary to cover that member all the way to the spot where the corrosion arrives," If the patient escapes from death by disease or by the evilness of the member, which is greater.
If the patient escapes from death by disease or by the evilness of the member, which is greater. and the signs are that the members become black, so that they seem to be burned by fire, and after that blackening, then goes this corruption of the member from one member to another, and takes hold all over the body; if you hurry with the cobre (a kind of metal),
and if it is due to the piercing of certain poisonous beasts, such as the sea scorpion and snake and similar things,
For if it is due to the corrosion at the top of the two bones, if you split it, and do not give it space to come out to the hand.
And if it comes only to the hand, if you split it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, if you split it at the collarbone; and if it passes the collarbone, it is death, and don't measure its effectiveness by how much of its goodness we use;
And so the rust comes or begins at the first joint, and then moves to the other joints after it;
If it comes or begins to move, and then copes all of it; If it moves up the leg, and then copes at the knee joint;
and if it comes up over the hip, then there is no other remedy than to make the patient die.
and the way of copper or iron to the limb so that you bind it above and below, and extend two ministers one of the threads upstream, and another minister the other thread downstream, and you remove the hook that is between the .iij. threads to .i. spatumile wide, as much as the bone is uncovered;
Then the cap or silk, and place each part .i. a linen draping, so that the silk does not touch the healthy spot, and bring to the patient other injury and abscesses.
And if blood flows when you work, cauterize the spot immediately, or put on some powdered substances that restrain it; then return to your medicine as long as it is completed,
and then cut off the member with a knife, and heal it as long as it is sound.
and I will tell you what happened to a man at 12 o'clock yesterday:
He had a blackness that seemed like fire to him,
and this corruption came first in his foot, so much so that it stained all his foot;
and when the hair is corroded, if it rusts on the stone, and is healed;
and long after came to me the corrosion or rust of the hand, and came to me;
and I put on him things that rub against after purification of the flesh, and cannot stop the rusts;
and he told me to chop off his hand, and I don't know how to say that I have hope of regrowing the material; and doubt too that if he were to cut his hand, he would not die, For the virtue of the man was weak; and he despaired completely, and returned to his land, and he struck off the cup from his hand, and was healed;
and I have no more to say but that each one do as needs be.
No one time comes the abscess to the surface of the flesh, and it lasts so long that it makes a great assembly of bowels. and then it runs and breaks out, and in the bowels it remains hidden, also as our servants; and the leather that is above is also thin like.i. drapelets deliquescent, and it does not hurt either to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy",
but if it is so long that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula";
and the cure is done by heating the skin very well, and most especially when it is thin, as in a piece of cloth; and does not burn for its corruption.
And if you see that the skins are getting thicker, and the corruption has not yet fully gone away, and the leather is thick like a horse's hide, then let them take a bath with this:
look if the breasts are large, and the milk that comes from them has an unpleasant smell, then apply the Egyptian medicine that is made like this: Take ash, oil, and litargy, evenly, and put them to cook in a .i. vessel by the fire, until the medicine is red, and as thick as honey;
and then take this according to your need, and make it with water and honey, and cook the wine in a vat, and extract the perspiration; and remove the medicine after 1 . ij . hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this mowting as many times as necessary until the breasts are completely empty and the milk comes out;
and no time is it cauterized with ash of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you should squeeze ash from a vine stem and add water to it,
and drain it, and bandage it, as long as you know that the breasts are well drained;
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither can Egyptian medicine nor ashes be used for him; if the cautery is with water and honey or a little bit of lead oxide; or you cauterize it with honey and wine that honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the health bad;
and when you have done this, and you have bet that the breasts are very well changed, if the cauterization of that which makes breathe causes pain in her,
and is that you squeeze ochre definitely, and the paint with rose oil and wine; ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. If there is a small hole in the sinus, then the cauterizing liquid cannot enter. If there is an opening of a small piece of iron, and put it under a tent of Egyptian ointment, For the ointment is basic, so that it may be widened;
and if the wound is too wide, so the cost and I let too much fluid .i. water or urine to enter,
and if the pit that shoots out blood is above, if the wound or lower than it is. For when the wound is well-healed, so it does not leave a scar; and if you cannot cover the breast well, as you see, If he appears in such a way that the bow falls to the lowest point that it is,
and if you cannot cover the lower end of it properly as you see, If he appears in such a way that the bow falls lightly to the lowest point that it is, and does not leave anything behind of the bow: and take medications to solidify it, put on top of the breast,
and be wrapped in a linen cloth that covers all of the breast; then tie it tightly around the chest with a strap that is larger at the first point, then apply ointment to the other cloth according to the quantity of the bulge, and place it over the shoulder blade to straighten the bow, and do not take off the large cloth except after many days once;
and who is on the shoulder blade, often takes off to take off the bow, and knows what corre of the bow, if it is poison or a little or enough, or digestible or indigestible;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when this medicine is extended in one part and you see the nature that jumps on the pit of the chest, if you know that the breasts have already begun to move, and bring the saint;
and then let it rest in the morning, or in the third day, and when you remove the wound, if a new cloth is changed, and the ointment is renewed.
And if her breasts become swollen and uncomfortably large after many days, knowing that the breasts do not grow larger. And if subtle venom creeps slowly along for a long time, so that you do not despair of your health,
For health draws near. For there are men whose nature it is to heal wounds, and others whose nature it is to cause them;
and if her breasts become swollen and uncomfortably large after many days, knowing that the breasts do not grow larger.
and if it is late to come forth, and is prolonged, so that it becomes stiffened, then take medicines, wet in substance and dry in virtue, if it is finished with cauterization, for there is much lead in it, and this is the last medicine;
take the last cauterization, and do so with rose oil, and dip it in equal parts of wine;
and then apply it; and this same thing, made into a paste, is better cooked with honey; When the heat treatment is finished,
Take mirr and oleum and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle on honey when it has come out of the fire; and then in a bowl, and place it on the chest, and never administer it without arnica or something else, and roots of licorice, which is also like flour of times and hundredfold;
and roots of licorice, which is also like flour of times and hundredfold; and when using simple substances or compounds: grind them, and make a powder of them, and put honey which I have said, and use it. and if the cure is long, and is not cured by this cure,
and if the cure is long, and is not cured by this cure, then you will know that corruption is complete, and it makes an impression on the bone, or on hard members, or on limbs. if the cure for the cure of fistula, as we have said above.
of the toe of the foot
is a blister that comes from an injury to the thumb of the hand, or at the foot, or perhaps it arises in another two;
and when it is worn, and one does not pay attention, then it comes to be a blister, a small blister, and cut and get bow so that it runs root of the nail, and perhaps all run it;
and comes the corrosion until the bone, so that it comes stinking pain, and is the head of the two wide, and is the color runs.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, so that you cut off all the excess that is held up by the nail, Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is sound;
and if the nail is pushing forward, and it pricks, and it blisters, so that you put the right treatment on the nail that pricks the skin, and the bottle on top, and cover it carefully and lightly, and put on the remains of the char burning and corrosive medicine to remove all;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then chop and burn, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the two corrupted, if the coat is a .i. of us as it is said before, then heal him as long as he is sound;
and if he is wounded, and bruised, and he feels great pain, then you must first heal him; then cut the nail of the spurious toe in a slanting direction from above,
and guard so that the cut does not come to the nail who is dislodged from the toe, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if there is something placed on top of it that provides relief.
The following is a partial translation of the provided text: and by chance he has broken his arm, and never has a finger broken.
And no two are born from the root of the joint, or their birth is in some of us of the two. Who is born from neither of the two roots will not move. and who is born at the root of the two will sometimes move.
the length of him who is chubby so is light, on one way: take the size of him at his root with a wide spatulate.
He who is born in the root of the joint so is difficult to cure: if you hold him down with a cloth.
In he who is born or should be cut near the root, so that you first cope the flesh completely up to the bone, Then tie the bone to a suitable silk, then heal it until it is well.
The joints that come together by nature, by the joining of a wound, by the burning of fire, or by similar things.
If you tie the joint so that it aligns according to its natural form; then place between two tendons or drapes wetted with oil and rosin so that it does not stick; put between two pieces of fine lead, so that the legs are welded together.
if it comes together at one end with the palm, if it welds together as well.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
and more is taken away from the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than to others.
Therefore, you must not administer any kind of purging at all, and then treat the disease from the base.
The cure for iron is done according to three ways: one is by copping and drawing out the black blood; another is by and another way is if you feel the vein, and then treat it completely.
The size is determined according to this method: raise the first leg of fresh water, hot, until the thick skin is slightly stretched. Then stretch the leg of the sick person from the hip all the way down to the knee; Then cut a vein in .i., .ii., or .iii. place of a broad width,
Then draw and twist the vein with your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient can bear to let flow.
and then let it lie, and he commands that he be dyed with black dye;
and begin again the evacuation and the bloodletting when the veins are clean, and hurt the patient.
The alleviation of the pain of the patient is done according to this method: raise the leg of the patient, if there is hair, and then put it in a bath, and dip it in hot water until it turns red, and swollen the veins;
and if you have no bath, warm it by the fire, and then hold the long side at the hip joint, or in the lower part of the thigh to the ankle.
then open the skin with oil, and scrape the vein from each side until it is felt when touched.
and when it appears red and black, and when it enters or leaves the skin it seems as white as a cord;
then pour the oil from the hair, until it is lifted from the skin, and then rub it with oil lightly;
Then make a cup in the other place too; then peel the skin off over the vein as long as it appears, Then cut it at the root, as you have done, and peel it off at another angle, as you have done first;
Then make a cup of a different size, or several if you need them, then peel it off and cut it at the base on the other side;
Then trawl and peel it up to the second size; then remove it by size until it is all gone, then cut it;
and if you cannot pull and lift it up, so I bind with a needle of all .i. strong thread doubled. and lay and draw it up, and I bind with a suture, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out; and be careful that it does not tear, for if it tears, so you cannot pull and lift it up, and it causes harm to the patient;
and when you have finished treating it, so put wool wet with wine and oil on the wound's top; and treat it until it is well.
And if its vision is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, if you split it diagonally, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
if you split it diagonally, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron that covers the eye if it is curved, and does not split it, but covers the vein;
and it is of a large curve, because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and here is the form:
From the civil vein
This vein is found in the legs, warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and land that does not have moisture.
And perhaps it will grow elsewhere than in the legs, and this will cause a rash to appear on the skin that leads to dry rot.
If it grows inside the body, twisting and coiling, it invades the skin and the hair.
And if the signs of this condition are that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the parts change, and begins to come out of place, like a root from a plant.
When the head is opened, if you wrap it in a piece of cloth from one and a half to two and a quarter inches wide, and then cover it with a towel,
and leaves the cloth hanging down from the leg, and every time that there is a movement, if the wrap goes around the cloth, and then cover it with a towel; and if it is too far away, take a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cover it in its root as long as it is all out. for if you take it, if it enters into the horse, and causes abscess and putrefaction where it is, and produces evil disease;
for this reason it is necessary that she be treated little by little up to the head, and there remains nothing of her or her curse;
and this chapter is never treated when it comes to long palms or fingers; and one honourable man came to me, who had .x. palm-lengths of hair; and when you cut him, if it is a little raised or sunken, and pierces right down to the foundation,
so that all is destroyed; and so that the material within it is emptied, and put in place medicine against pus every day, then heal it as with abscesses.
And never at this vein's base, and least of all when it opens in the joint of the foot, or the foot itself, and it comes out of a little opening, and where it jumps out, then heal it as we have said above.
Of the worms that are born between skin and hide
This disease is called in our land "beef disease" because it often afflicts cattle,
and is a small worm that is born between skin and hide, and goes everywhere up and down the body. and it smells good to the member's alarm as it goes from one member to another, until it turns the hide where it went, and jumps.
and is infected with certain humours, as they come towards and wind around, and shine, and worm-like creatures or eggs in the belly.
And doubt of his evil, for when he goes through the body, and he rises to the head, and comes out at the mouth, then enters and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
When you see it cured and treated, so can one only go:
If it is then necessary that you keep the place dry by a strong knot well tightly tied,
and cut it straight up and down, and turn it upside down completely in the mold, and you do not cut it, if the fire cautery on it, as long as it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does, if it corrupts the oil, as we have said;
and if you see his head coming near the oil, hold away from him the form of the wound, then chop it off and cut it out.
and it is appropriate to use the patient of purification of skin with soluble medicines for the bad humors that are produced,
and if he is cured of meat that causes putrefaction.
For pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "vacir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and it spreads from one limb to another; and I saw what I told you.
I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered some of her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
and then I saw it rise like a worm at the shoulder, as soon as possible, like a sharp silver blade when it cuts from one place to another;
the pain leaves the shoulder joint and enters the shoulder blade,
and then a little later it runs through the whole body, until it reaches the other arm;
and then he told me that she twisted her body, as I saw it;
I marveled at how she moved her member from one to another, for I have never wanted this disease in such a way. However, I had heard that many people who suffer from this disease want to move their pain from one place to another, but I have never wanted it, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought that perhaps because women have narrow waists and open veins; and for this it seems that the wind has been forced out by constriction;
and do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicious, and have moist hearts and relapsed veins.
And when you treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, if the head remains fixed and motionless, and then copes with it so that the wind constricted at its base may come out; and cauterize the joint; and if you do not see it in your eyes,
if the healer of those who cause windiness, like filthy pills, and horse-astrakhan pills, and similar others.
arrows
The arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the type of feather used for them.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English: and those that have .ij. angles, and those that have tongues, and those where there are pieces; and the one that doesn't shake in any member according to .ij. ways: or if in a principal member it shakes,
as brain, heart, liver, pancreas, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members; When it falls to the ground then you shall know that she is dead, I will tell you what below. if it is convenient for you to extract this arrow, for death comes after many preparations; and when the bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely extracted, if you turn it, and cure the wound.
And the sign of the skull when the arrow bites into the bone and jumps onto the skin on top of the skull, is when amputation, sweating, and twitching in the limbs, inflammation and swelling of the tongue, spasms and confusion of thought, and vomiting of phlegm; and by chance there is no air through the nostrils or ears; and by chance they lose their speech and voice; and by chance there is a white poultice-like sap coming from the wound that looks like burned flesh; and by chance it also looks like burnt meat;
and this sign reveals itself, if you keep the cure, and treat the arrow if it is still inside.
The sign of the arrow when it is shot or struck, is that it is near to the left breast, and also as if it were lodged in some hard thing, not in a void place. and sometimes the arrow moves like a bird, and in dark short breath, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and faints. then you will have no doubt that death approaches.
And the sign of the arrow that is shot out of its sheath is that there is no foam in the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he/she gasps and feels cold.
And if the arrow enters the shell of the shoulder, then it tears the small ribs; and it gives great pain and a great sighing; and all the members of the shoulders move.
And if the arrow enters the stomach, perhaps some meat will be wasted from the wound.
And if the arrow enters the belly, and through the intestine it does not come out, there is no hope for recovery, neither for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow enters the bladder, and with it the urine jumps out and goes away, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
The other member, if it is face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm and spine of the back and leg and foot, and similar limbs, are safe according to many provisions. When the arrow is in the neck or artery, and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you that it has happened to me, do not make any other way.
There came to one man an arrow where it entered in the root of the nose: I tried it, and pulled it from the other side through the grease of the ear, and was cured without feeling any pain.
And tie an arrow so it hits deep in the fat of the oil, taking off the paper. and the arrow was removed, and I could only see its tip toward the furrow. and the arrow was large of an arch-blue, all .i. heavy without ears; the game was clean, and there came no bad accidents.
And tie an arrow to the neck of a Christian, and the arrow with ears:
I loved the beard, and I made it grow longer than before, and the Christians were healthy.
And tried an arrow on a man, that it struck his leg or belly, and I thought he would die;
and then after three days, if not his condition changed; I cut the arrow, engaged it, and shot it, and there was no bad outcome.
And if you want to go to a man who has an arrow in his chest or back, and the wound is sewed up;
and do not change its natural position within, and do not find fault in any of its natural works.
And see another man, to whom an arrow has been shot into his face, and the wound is sewn up;
and it endures much pain to suffer; and more like these.
And take an arrow from the king of the knights, that he was missing his eye, no need for an arrow shot. and it was a little nghiêng to the right side; and the arrow was all re-set
I was called to treat after he was shot; I found the wound very tight.
I tried all of my efforts on her, and I did not feel it. and he felt pain and trouble in his right ear. I thought that it was from the point of an arrow
I put on the leech- Infused with salt and digestive, for fear that the leeches would not stick; and I showed him how to extract the arrow.
and I showed him how to extract the arrow. I put the plaster on every day, and resolved the wound very quickly, and delayed it for a long time so that the patient would not be in pain.
for as long as he felt the arrow; and he told me. I put on the wound a corrosive aqueous medicine every day, until it was open.
and try it, and feel the head of the arrow which has returned to its place. then I applied the medicine to the opening of the wound until I clearly saw the head of the arrow;
and I crossed well the boundaries of three months,
and then I spread out the wound with my hands, and pressed from one side to the other, and could not remove it;
Then I ceased not to study and devise methods of instruments, until I had taken it i.e., a day according to that which its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I have held it and restored the wound.
And the mirage judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I held it and then sewed the wound shut, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai said the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you place your treatment on those whom I do not mention, for the book cannot take them all into account;
but the master sage chooses only a few small things, and for those who are present and failing; truly nine operations, and nine instruments, in the dismemberment of strange things that come into this art.
I say that arrows should not come from the limbs except according to these 17 ways. or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that which jumps out of its normal place, is an arrow entering into its flesh, and does not jump out at any time now.
And if it does not jump now, let her leave the car while it is rotted in, and let its issue be heard.
and so it is stuck in the bone, and cannot stand up, if it leaves it like this for some days, and moves every day;
and so it jumps, and if it doesn't jump, then it pierces all the way through, as long as the hole inside is enlarged, and then the injury is done.
And if the arrow is lodged in the heart, if one cannot see it, then search for it with all your might. and if you can feel it, then handle it with an appropriate instrument.
and if you cannot, due to the depth of the wound or the thickness of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins, then cut through the wound as much as necessary. and test the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place,
and test the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place, if the bone is stuck in by .iij. parts where you can feel it, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it; and carefully so that you don't break the arrow, but rather tug at it more roughly.
And if you cannot pull it once, then let the hair grow until it is long enough; then try to pull it out, for extraction will be easy. And if the pain that comes with the extraction makes you oppose yourself, then administer what we have said about the treatment in our chapter;
and be careful of the nerve and vein incisions, and do not try to pull out the arrow without risk;
or hot or cold, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form he had when the arrow entered his body, For this is the greatest aid there is; and if you cannot do so, then follow what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another place, where it does not open anything of him, or the skin is swollen in a certain place if one sees it or feels it apparently:
Cut off now as high as the hooks can take hold, and then extract it: but if it is too far gone, let it be left.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand in a circle until it enters the bone and widens the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, let her lie there still, and then begin the extraction again as soon as she can.
and if it is stuck in the arrow, hit it with all your might;
and if it is a nail, and you see fit to use a hammer, so that if he uses a tool, so that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then hit hard,
and if the arrow is lodged, then he bottles it up.i. instrument with a sharp tip entering within, for to facilitate extraction.
and if the arrow is touched, then you must cut through all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can. then clean the wound as well as possible.
and if the arrow enters anywhere in the body, and it is near, and you can cover it, then you must cover it.
and guard against cauterizing the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch up the wound, this is a trade. and heal as long as she is well.
The form of the pliers used to treat arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and here is the form:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
of the common heart vessels: Of the veins which are cured are .xxxii, for which there is head xvi,
This is what it means: and the .ii. arteries which are in the .ii. temples apparent; and the  .ii. veins which are in the  .ii. limbers of the  .ii. hairs, which are called "aspirates"; and the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the neck; and the seventeen veins that are in the collar; and the two veins that are on either side of the mouth, and these veins are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are at the base of the tongue;
The veins which are commonly felt are .v. in each arm:
one is the cerebral vein, and it lies on the left side of the neck, and laymen call it the "vein of the head." and its movement is called the  "fast", and is composed of the cerebral and basilic. and laymen call it the "vein of the hand."; and the basilic, if it lies on the right side of the neck, is and they call it gentle "vein of the belly", and is above the ribcage, and this one that is opened clearly on the chest.
And the little finger vein is the one between the thumb and the index finger, and if it has three rays;
and in the leg and where the foot is: one is so far from the elbow of the left side, and the second syndrome, which is at the ankle of the right leg; and the vein that is called "nasse", which is in the ankle of the other leg;
and in the other leg are .iiij. veins from those.
And the vein that is after the ears if it helps the old catarrh, and migraine. and the quality of the vein, as I will tell you, and is that you return the head of the patient,
and the quality of the vein, as I will tell you, and is that you return the head of the patient, and rub his neck where the veins are with an coarse cloth; then tie up the patient by his collar with a rope, until the 21 veins appear behind the ears in 21 places depending on the head: then bring your index finger to his ear and feel for the pulse on the side of the neck, if it feels soft;
then take the lance, and pierce through the vein up to the bone, then gently pull your hand back along the vein; and chop and skin and the vein well .iij. must pass through, and make out blood as much as you see;
then extract and heal it, as long as it is healthy;
and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is old-fashioned emigrate, and sudores, and oculis acostumatees, and to the chest of tears as eyes;
the qualities of the patient are thus: as I say: and that the patient should open his throat so that the two veins appear clearly. and place your two fingers on either side of his neck, and then sign with your hand;
Then lie down and cut above your second finger, and open the blade. and then cut above the vein, and the cuff, as you did in .i. other veins, and make a cut of blood according to your need;
Then lie down, and put your second finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
and then let it rest until it is well; and we have spoken of its cuffing and extraction, or beginning of the book.
The pain of a headache is equal to that of a facial illness, and migraine, and jaundice.
and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until it feels better. then take the instrument which is called a 'chisel', whose shape is:
And place the point on the vein, and hold it with your thumb or another finger, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you wish; Then relieve the patient's neck, and bind the vein as long as it is healthy, and never use a wide flame.
Nevertheless, it is not convenient that the flame be too hot; and the vein being on the edge of health, for the bone is near, and the flame may break when it is thin.
The five veins that are in the five limbs should be tied with care to the hairs, and to the toothache, and to the rash, and to the earache, and to the eye diseases;
and the quality of their health is such that the patient's neck is dislocated by twisting it with no ligature, as before;
Then the fire, and so the surgeon, a little of the long flame a little wide, for there is no fire.
And if the flames are subtle, by chance so it breaks; then make a wound of the blood, as you need, and then put on cotton, and bind it well.
The surgeon of the vein of the baby so it goes into the body, and at once cut off, and at some distance from it, and from disease of the face, as headache and redness that comes to the face, and even if she is old;
and the quality of health is such that the patient twists his neck, then hold his nose with your left hand, and take the thin flame long, and put it between the 10th and 11th nostrils, For the vein does not open well enough on its own, and the blood will begin to flow now;
and do not overheat it too much, and make the blood flow according to your need, then let it rest for a night, for it is quickly restored;
and the remedy for these three diseases is with the use of heat, and with pressure from a mallet, and many illnesses, and with vermiculin, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and scrofula;
and the quality of the remedy is that the patient should remove his hair from the nape and sides, as we have said; and the master stands over the head of the patient, and the patient cuts with a scythe on one side;
then heal the vein well long little widely, then treat the pain temperately, or as much as is necessary;
then make another in the other vein, then massage the leg, and extract the veins gently, to prevent the patient from choking; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
Of the healing of the veins The patient must not eat or drink anything until the wound in the lips has healed; and he must be careful to prevent any damage to the gums, cracks in the lips, and the birth of teeth, and swelling inside.
And the quality of this treatment is that the patient should sit in front of you, and his neck should be held in place as I have said. Then turn the lip over, and look at the two openings, one on the right and the other on the left. and recognize them by what color they are, and by what color they surround the small openings. So then they both come together, and if you do not know them and you are in doubt,
So then they both come together, and if you do not know them and you are in doubt, So then take the biggest of the two parts, and do the same for the five veins that are above and below, because this is a similar method.
From the side of the neck From the side of the neck:
and the quality of the medicine is that the patient dies between your hands before the sun, and the liver turns black, and looks down at each side with a black vein.
Heal therefore both of them, and do not become too perfect in doing so, for the arteries are within.
The veins of the back that are commonly healed are healed according to .ij. manners:
where one pierces with fire a wide flame, and with a sharp knife the olive-leaf, and is called "anesil". and are wide and subtle according to the largeness and the narrowing of the veins. The shape of the flame is thin when it is named moist, and is wide when you see it.
And it is a task to open the flat veins that appear with thick blood, which contain thick blood and trouble; and it is the shape of the olive flame:
and is more subtle than pointed, and is for saving subtle veins, where there is subtle citron-colored blood.
The cure for the bazillar vein, which is one of these veins, is good for diseases that affect the throat, neck, chest, and stomach.
and the healer should cauterize and bind the artery that is beyond it. And if he stops the artery, and the blood flow stops, then he should bind it tightly, as I have said; and must not be held by fire but be cut off like a horse's mane.
If the nose does not open clearly, then you must extract it and change it with another one; or if you do not see any blood, or if you feel the vein pulse in the arm: it opens clearly; and hold it to the fire as we have described.
And if you know where the vein is, it is also necessary that you extract the arm, and touch the spot until you feel the pulse. then mark the spot for the incision, then tie the arm, and cut the vein from the flame in secret;
and beware that you do not wound the artery when you see the spot bleeding, for it is the artery: avoid it.
And if you see urine rising high as a child's urine, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is the artery: Hasten yourself, then, and set your shoulder to a long time, and then loosen your shoulder without straining, which often happens;
Let the arm rest and leave it alone, and do not move the patient; and be careful, and do not move it until it is well.
And if it is not dislocated, and you will come to me, and the medicine is not given to you, then open the artery, for the head of the shoulder is dislocated; and hold it steady.
And take a piece of fig tree, and make it, and take one of the halves and set it well up until the other day;
If it does not bleed, it is good; if not, if the healer, as we said, of the powders that stop bleeding;
and the stopping of the blood is not due to multiple conditions for the small size of the wound and the possibility of the vein of the arm.
The blood of the vein in the middle is treated with fire so that it stops flowing from the top of the head and the neck. For this reason it is composed of the basilical and cephalic veins, as we said;
and it is fitting for the physician that he be careful of the nerve which has been stretched, and if he cuts too deeply and completely, the nerve will be torn. and the patient swells and his health is damaged, and perhaps cannot heal.
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any way because of its lightness, then you must heal the instrument carefully; avoid damaging the nerve with your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then divide it longwise.
The cure for the headache of the shoulders, so it hurts the neck, and helps the eyes.
And it is necessary to heal with fire from the olive tree or from the mirrin tree, for this is the most salutary of all veins, for it does not affect the nerve or artery.
However, one should always start with the lighter treatment first, and do no harm the first time, and then start again; And in case one hurts some men the first time, it is no harm done, but it is no harm if one starts again; The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
The first thing you must know about a healer, is that healing should only be undertaken to maintain health.
and to prevent future illnesses from developing. The healer should be skilled in one of the three main areas of healthcare at the time: head, face, or gut. and it is necessary to take care in the beginning of pregnancy, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears;
and it is necessary to take care the first day or third day, after 1.2 hours or 1.3 days every day.
The remedy that is administered to the sick person does not have a fixed time, but rather it should be taken at specific times and intervals;
and it is not necessary to take care of children before the age of 12, and women only after four months until seven years; They are not to take the old men who have lived for sixty years.
And when someone is saved, in any way, it is necessary that he dislodge the intestines of a light enema. if he has retained mucous from the end of the nose, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous mucus that is harmful to the main members;
do not save those who are too sore from meat, or who are greedy, as long as it is possible, or droopy;
and he will be affected by the pain after colic, and vomiting, and stomach upset, and frequent sexual intercourse with women, and childbirth, and staying up late, and anything that depletes his vital force, or by something from his weapon or heart;
then carefully the humors, he becomes thin first, through meat and beverages and medicine if you have used it;
then enter or bathe, if nothing harms him, carefully to reduce his fever;
and heal the vein with a third part of the blood, as we have said before;
and guard him from work and from fasting and from lust and from similar things.
and be quiet and still, and let the doctor who is higher up than you heal you, and rub your arms. 10 times or 12 times,
then pull the ligament slowly, for when it is too tight or short, it cannot be cured;
and then rub it with your hands until the veins swell, and you can feel them;
then wet the skin with a little old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein at the place where he wants to cut, so that the vein does not run and it is not hurt by iron. For there are veins that flee like strings when cut, and some that are easily winded, so that when one puts on the fire, if one removes it, the vein cannot be opened, and thus is one of those;
and if he opens a vein, if the wound is too narrow, for in these things it is necessary that the doctor be warned.
And if he opens the vein for the first time, that is good; but if not, then let him begin again a little bit lower or on the back, where the legs are not swollen.
And if his legs are swollen and the patient is hopeful, let him rest for a day or two, and do not tie his arms. for in case he comes to an abscess; do not go into the bath, and then begin again the cure if it pleases him.
and if the rib is broken, or the lung is pierced slightly with care and doubt that it does not hurt as much as you see, then be confident in this broken rib for all the fire correctly.
and work a little healing, so that the veins are swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the vein swollen, do not put salt on it, and put a little oil on it, for it cools the body's heat, and is soft in this vein due to the oil that it has;
and thus administer the oil in each wound that you heal the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and this middle makes the triangle and bow of ears, when one lays it on its place; so subtle is the sinew and separates when it is too thick.
And if there comes an abscess that is big, which happens many times, most of all when it is not inflamed except at that time or when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and put on top wet sponge in water and in silk a little warm, and holds it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the exit of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after a few days no black or green color, then it will not hurt; and if you see, put on none of aloe or myrrh poultice in juice of mint, mustard, or similar.
And many times there is an abscess and appearance of the disease in the bazoo: so put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the touch when pressed with your hand, then this is the appearance of the evil. So don't put on any of what we have said, because perhaps in the court without the artery; but make him a dry plaster to harden the place, then heal it with other remedies, until he is well.
And treat each pain according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the pain.
For if it is without heat, let it be until it is red; and if you see a lump, let it be until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And it concerns the one who is flat and dry, and has a need for blood extraction, that he make a wide wound, and let the flames be wide.
and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and you must heal it often, and you must heal it by cutting across, not by piercing;
and this method of healing is saved from the corruption of blood and the stretching of nerves, and it is better than long-term healing;
And to the one whose pulse is in sickness, it is appropriate to give moist bread in grape juice; if it is heated up, then it should be eaten three or four times a day.
And if it is of cold complex, if he drinks before the sickness moist bread in syrup of musc or in honey syrup aromatized with spices, if as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup.
And if it has sweated at the sickness's exit, after drinking water from blood, it is appropriate that he sniffs brot of beer and subtle fragrant syrup.
and use of the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of vein.
And if he vomits up his arms and sometimes other things, when it is necessary, as he weakens with great sickness, so that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue continually.
And who vomits up his arms after the first healing, and he has a strong corse, so that he heals .vij. hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
And who should be healed from another part, should be healed two days in a row.
For he has internal heat that warms the body, and brings fever; if so much is drawn out, and the opening widened to the extent of a pea, then: and then that you treat all types of disease, and place your hand on his pulse when he heals, so that death does not come in the place of a priest. and if it happens again, when the healing has been neglected;
and do not come until you see the shoulder separate again, and close it, that you press firmly upon it; nor if it is curved, extend his arm carefully, for this would be wrong;
but let it be so that it heals the second time; or you i point to the tip of the flame, as long as the blood which is frozen in the vein comes out. and put on .i. piece of string soaked in water, and press lightly.
And if the vein has burst, let it be so that he does not compress it, as long as the abscess is calm.
And if necessary, draw the blood a second time, so that it heals in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein under the arm is cut at its base because it is composed.
And the way of the cut is so that the patient dips his hand in warm water until the feverishness is gone.
Then he should move his hand gently so that the vein appears clearly, then cut it now, not wide nor long.
And make the incisions wide and cut well next to the joint of the hand, and don't be able to pull it out, then dip the hand in warm water, and leave the blood running in the water, until you have enough.
and if it is not yet healed, then do not re-break my hand in warm water, for we treat it more in the cold than in the heat;
and the wound of this vein is safer from all other veins, that there is no artery or nerve.
the salve for the right hand's wounds is worth all liver diseases, and this is how:
remove the hand, and dip it in warm water, until the vein is hidden, if we see it. and if the spine is bent, and you chop it from top to bottom, it does not hurt anything.
and do not cut too much at once, for the nerves are all exposed.
and then dip the hand in warm water, so it freezes into the wound and cannot be removed.
And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, put oil and sutures on the vein to hold it firmly in place, and do the same for each arm.
The medicine man must treat the disease of the mouse with his left hand, and do all that I have told you to do with the right.
The medicine man must treat all diseases that are located in the chest. To treat diseases of the heart and hold back flowering, to cure diseases of the legs and knees, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of his medicine is that the disease drinks small amounts of hot water, and rubs the vein until it dies. and put it above the ankle joint; and if the vein is at the foot, then go over the foot with more rain.
And make it as wide or longer as necessary, or at the ankle, so that it does not hurt.
And if you heal it on the foot, do not worry about the nerves that may be affected, and heal it as you would a wound, and let the fire go out.
And if he cannot get out of it, put the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
And if it is necessary to cauterize for the first time, then begin again on top of that a little bit, because the leech is salty. do not doubt about the nerve, if it is as we have said, and in this way do the same with the other stone evenly.
The leech of the vein is to be put on the heel, and its sourness is worth the pain of the knee, when it is for bloodletting.
And the quality of its sourness is that the patient goes in or out of the bath, and strips off from the heel.iii. three things in twisting,
For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, so that the blood flows in all ways that you can, and crossing over. and wait until you cut it, for its line is out, and it is much renewed by many hands.
and wait until you cut it, for its line is out, and it is much renewed by many hands. And if you do not cut it, so that the rain of the line opens or closes from the foot, and towards the small day, and guard against the danger.
and make so much blood flow that you see it, and then wash the line, and put it on cotton and hold it; it is now healed.
Vacuums of suction
are made from horns, or of air, or of glass; and the suction is done in 13 ways: either by piercing and drawing out blood, or not piercing but drawing out by a kind of force.
And this suction that is not done by piercing is done in 13 ways: either it is with a sharp instrument or without a sharp instrument.
and there are two in the collar, and one at the chin. and one at the shoulders, and one on the back of the neck, and one between the eyes. and the ones that cover the arms, and the ones that cover the legs. and the suction of the .ij. feet; and the suction does not treat blood, save that of small veins that are scattered in the carriage
and so you do not affright any, unless it is a small vein that is spread out in the carriage; and it should not be mixed with anything, nor burned nor chilled, in any disease that comes from overindulgence, until the whole body is empty.
And if by necessity it is needed to suction, or through custom, let us make it uniform every hour in the beginning of the month, and at the end, and every ten days;
For there are many who, when they have the need to ventilate, become very heavy-headed.
and if it is true that people who are venting and have a flush on their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who are venting a drop of blood in their mouth, and have escaped the tongue, and feel thirst for blood; and if there are those who dream, and see vision, and death, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and most especially when it is damp in the month of May, we order them to be breathed on after iij hours of the day.
The treatment of the disease of the head with the help of the herb called marjoram ... which comes out, and does not come until all the body has been evacuated;
and this breathing should be in the place of the treatment of the head;
and it does not come until those who are of a cold complexion and have a headache, because this makes them much harm;
and for this reason I am not sure it is right to use it while sleeping or those who have a cold or feverish illness.
And those who are healing from it often become confused, and for this reason the suction cup should be placed a little further down due to the doubt of confusion.
The suction at the neck is in place for healing from the throat and base of the nose, and for this reason it is also used for cutting into the stone. and to cut through the channel of the pancreas, and all around, and to refill.
and it is necessary to push back, for if it holds too firmly, there is danger of injury or stomach or bowels.
The ventresses are the winds that come from the colo with pain in the head, and blindness and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the place of the saint's basil; and it is necessary that you instruct the saint to express his hand for a cut, so that he does not chop the artery, and do not cause an escape of blood.
The ventresses bring about the death of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the saints' lips.
The windings of the shoulders are a disease that comes from heat and filling up.
The windings of the arms also cause as much pain as three veins in the arm. For it draws blood from these large veins;
And commands the patient not to cut too deeply, for the bones are bare and the arteries can be easily cut.
The ventouse that is on the back so it reaches the foundation of the disease, and the disease of sore breasts, it is necessary that the ventouse be large and of air, for her work is to milk well; and if by chance it was thin, it would break and cause great wounds.
The leg ventouses open widely, for they draw blood from all the body, and they are good for old pains of the joints, and of the foot, and of the bladder, and they remove the flowers; and they are in the place of the iij. sophens, and of the iij. ankles, but they weaken the body after a long time, and bring death in many situations.
The way to put the ventouse is that you put it first, and suck quickly, and put it firmly, and stir evenly, and do not cease to do so, until you see the red and inflamed place, and the pain of the sanc; then stop, and remove the ventouses, and take care of the condition of the bodies, for there are some who have bitter heart: so it is necessary to stab once only, and to make deep wounds, and suck lightly.
And if the sun is thick, it is necessary to stab twice: the first time to soften the path of the thick sanc.
And if he is very thin, then it is necessary to hurt him for the third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, then we must press hard only once.
And if we want to draw blood repeatedly, then we should do so often; and if he is thin, then we must press hard completely, and the end should be that the pulse be felt abruptly,
and cover those who have thick and tough skin, and who are rough, so that you rub the areas with oil that opens and dissolves: if it is in the summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or squash seed oil;
and if it is in an ivory case, of oil of mustard, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar thing.
and if the excess is thick and cold, then take oil of amber, or of balsam, or oil of fennel, and similar things.
and if the one who suffers from acute heat and wide pores, then it is not necessary to put oil on,
but it is necessary to wash after the exposure to warm water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or other similar thing.
And those who have moisture from the mouth, if they rise thus, or from water of mirth, and from sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses rise up from old wine, or from water of oak, or from a infusion of fennel or chamomile, or other similar things;
and they should not go out into the sun before a bath or take a bath, but an hour or two after; and they should not sleep after wind-sucking.
and it is necessary that he be washed, when he needs to be wind-sucked, and when he has been wind-sucked. And guard against those who are coleric, and whose temper is too sharp and inflamed; If it happens that he applies cold things, as pomegranates and endive and lettuce to the skin, and similar things;
and soaking in puddings, and char of chastity, and moist meats.
And those with a cold complexion, if they apply syrup of honey, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and soaking in puddings, and char of chastity, and moist meats.
and as soon as he begins to breathe heavily, he must drink more than eat.
and it is necessary to give some people three times or more aniseed or mint before or after wind, to support the main limbs. and be subtle with the water, but it is necessary only for those who are warm.
The fists that are placed to hurt are those that are placed on the liver, and the mids, and the Podagre, and on the belly and the buttocks and the reins and the vagina, because this member does not suffer to be hurt on the outside.
and do not do so except to draw blood from member to member, as we put on the teats when the newborn is healthy; to remove the viscous substance that is in the limb, as we put vipers on the belly and on the breast to reduce the limb.
and remove the pain, when there is an operation or a stone, if by its attractive virtue it may happen that the operation takes place, or it removes the stone from its place;
and thus does it act when put on the liver and on the gallbladder when there is repressed wind,
and these suction cups are empty, but never together, and never water.
as well as the disease of pleurisy, and in this way the suction cup is filled with hot water or with water in which herbs suitable for that have been cooked.
The form of the suction cup administered to fire is thus:
and has .ij. inches in length and half a palm in diameter, and is placed so that the middle of it is about .i. inch from the edge, as for piercing with an needle,
and of rain, soufflé before so that it does not burn the patient when putting on the member;
and have in the middle a stick of wood or iron, to put a candlestick grip,
and they shall be large and small according to the illness and age of those who take them;
For the plasters for children are other than for old people, and thin ones are other than for fat people.
And must one put this suction cup onto the limb?
take the wax candle or ointment, and place it onto the ventose over the penis that is placed onto the ventose, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the ventose so it does not burn the patient;
and then put it onto the limb, and these two should be on the hole that we have said, so that when one sucks, if there is steam, and one puts the ventose;
and apply the poultice often, as you have learned.
For the wind-pump which has been opened up because of pleurisy, there is no need for a wick or piercing, and it should be placed lightly on the limb only when it is dry;
and this is how it is done:
For the small members such as lips and teeth, and similar things, where wind-pumps cannot be placed due to their size; and strip the lees from the wine, as two or three new wineskins, and other similar things;
and the quality of the use is that when you find them that are in fresh clear waters without danger, then take them;
and put them in water in fresh clear water until they are familiar, and do not have anything in their bellies; and then soak in water from the vein and from the tub, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the lees;
and when they are clear, and cheerful, if there is a place where it can be put a suction cup, put it there, because that's worth much more.
If not, raise the joint then, and then with water, very well, and then press it;
and if the head is too warm after raising the joint, then soak it in cold water, and put a linen cloth on it, and keep it there as long as the blood is stopped;
and if the blood is multiplied, then put on vitriol powder, or garlic, and similar things, until it is stopped;
Here is the translation of the first line of the text:
and if you have more work to do, so take others without saucing."
And if the sausages don't want to take it, so rub the fire on the meat, or you put an needle in it until the sausage comes out. and then put them on, and soon as they feel the fire, they heat up.
and when you see that they are crying, if you powder a little aloe and sawdust, or ash, if they cry now.
This is how the book of fractures begins:
For in the art of medicine, this chapter is necessary, and it is a cure for broken bones and dislocations.
Know this, dear son, that the wise man will pour this chapter of the book upon him, which he has never seen in any of the ancient books, nor has he read a letter about it;
and because of this reason the science is strange to us in our land, for I never found any good one.
and know nothing about it, except from the science of ancient books, where I studied so much and treated the science, and by experience, and by habit of my life;
and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have summarized it at the end, and clearly set forth the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the preceding two chapters.
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the sum of words and the chapters where wisdom is found, and delay on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or breakage comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to save the sick person from one side and the other, if nothing totalls him, so as weakness of the corsage, or enfacement, or age;
I say that when there is a break, or dislocation, or torsion, or breakage to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to save the sick person from one side and the other, if nothing totalls him, so as weakness of corsage, or enfacement, or age; or if his temperature is very low, or too often feverish; and eat cold meats often, this is to say, cold joues, and char of onion and garlic, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fat foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about a hot apoplexy, or an increase of matter in the limb; if the sick person returns to his first state of health.
And when the broken nose begins to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the sick person with meat that produces great fatness, or viscousness, such as cooked bread and rice and beans and peas and pork and venison and fish and strong wine and similar things. For a slow healing of the break begins later and more slowly.
And know that the broken bones of old and decrepit people cannot well heal or harden according to their nature because of the loss of members, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
But it does not heal, set the broken bone back in place - that is, the thick ribs which join the member together, as it was before; and do not at all take away from its work, and because of this it is necessary to increase the flesh, as we have said.
And know that there are different kinds of broken bones in various ways.
For the break in the head is different from the break in the leg, or the foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks. For there is a break that goes around the ear, and another one with the thistle, as if it were the size of a quill for writing.
For there is a break that goes around the ear, and another one with the thistle, as if it were the size of a quill for writing. And if a break with a wound, and a break all over a little slit.
And to each way there is its own tool, and its own implement in the restoration, according to what comes to mind in its place;
and is known the break of the bone by what its turn is twisted, and wide apart well by the other, and some at the presser of the hand;
and when there is no twisting of the neck, and the patient feels no great pain, there is no fracture.
but it may have a twist, or a break, or a small fracture. If you cannot move it by hand alone, but put medicine on it which comes later, and then gently restrain it now.
And know that the break which comes in the arm, and are the two parts separated, it is now necessary to make them equal, as well as the bones of the foot come;
and if there is a hard swelling, let him not leave it any longer than until the swelling has softened. then cut it evenly at the top so that you can move it easily and cleanly, and know that the healing of this is easier than the healing of that which has pieces; then hold it in place, as it is appropriate hereafter.
And if there is a broken bone with pieces, and it is healed from one-half to two parts, whether it is the hand or foot, or at the hand, if it is a small limb, or at two strings, or at a string and at your hand;
and set the limb back in its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the member have healed, you do not add anything to them at their place, as it is appropriate for you to make a fire cautery on them, and keep from your work so that there is no injury or pain to the patient.
and well set together the .ij. shoulders of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel well by the hand if it seems to you that it is not good: if it is held firmly, and does not strain too much, do not press it as they do who make an incision in an abscess, hot and contracted in the member, as we have wanted many times.
And when the member is in order, if you teach the patient that he not move it, neither waking nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and guard well that the member is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, unless it is a little, and the necessary thing is to put him in such a position that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, unless it is a little, and the necessary thing is to put him in such a position that he feels no pain; and make sure he is straightened correctly so that twisted movement does not come about when he is healed;
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Know that the broken members are different in size and in greatness and in form.
Car il y a petits membres, si comme bras et doigt et semblas: si convenent envelopper drapeaux de lin moult et subtils.
and those who are fat, so like a thigh and a leg: it is convenient to envelop in a broad and tough yarn, for wide yarns embrace the whole large limb, and restrain it equally from all sides, so that there is no foulness;
then tie it lightly, 2 or 3 times around the limb according to its size, and strain your hand at one end of the yarn, then go up to the break and strain less, so that the break is a little distant from the break;
and soften the ligament little by little, until you press a great deal of the sound part, then take .i. another ligament, and turn quickly on the broken side again;
then return to the sore part of the break, and hold it gently, not too hard or too lightly, as we said in the first ligament above;
then put between the tied ligaments of linen or drapes, until they are all equal, then tie them together well above  .i. bandage, and then put your well-made braces on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, place on the affected area something that cools and calms the swelling, and lets it rest for a few days.
Then strain them on your rafters, and be they of half a yard in length, cut from a beam, or from a palm log, and be they according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the rafters that one puts on the break are a little larger and wider than the others;
and be they also as long as necessary for the limb, whether small or large;
Then strain them on your rafters as you did with the first lath, then tie them together with a thread running horizontally, as you did with the first lath:
The smaller it is, the better; and the string should neither be too thin nor too thick, and should be made of linen.
For if the string is too thick, as I have seen with some of the poor craft who make their laces out of twisted linen string, and that is a great mistake, for the lace cannot be even if it is too thin, and should not have more than two spaces between each thread.
And if the patient is hit by the ends of the strings after they are cut and in their bones, then wrap them in linen cloth or another soft fabric so that they do not bruise.
When the wound is exposed to the air, and the bandage has been torn off, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not good to extract all the bones from the broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not good to put in slings before 5 or 7 days, or more according to the severity of the abscess which has broken out suddenly;
and take flour which is well-sifted and mixed with much ash, and make this composition, not too thin nor too thick, and use it; and this is the common method of theemplastriers in restoring the breach to many conditions, most of all to women and small children, for it is not good to be too hot or too cold.
Another method ofemplastriers in restoring the breach, dislocation and torsion: take 250 grams of alkanet root and 250 grams of danewort and aniseed and ash and gum arabic and myrrh and aloe, 750 grams; grind it into a powder, and mix it with much egg white; this composition of the flesh is warm, so use this emplaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones safely, and is useful for many people.
Another way to make plasters that is effective for torsions: take mugwort and vismar (wool fat), 10 z. mirr (mirrh) and 70 z. of aloes, acacia 6 z.; grind it well, and confit with vinegar or a lot of honey, and administer.
Another way to make plasters for dislocated joints and broken bones that are out of place, which soothes the pain immediately and properly heals the fracture: take another new wool, and grind it with water and oil, and put it on the joint. Such plasters do not return to their original form, but they are good for soothing hot fractures and properly healing the break.
Another way to make plasters that heal broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-pavement leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to make plasters for the restoration of broken bones and to soothe the remaining part of an abscess: take roots of vismar, chamomile, violets, wheat flour, and each in equal parts; grind them together, and confit with wine, and when the members are warmed up, use aconfited with coriander juice or water, and apply it.
Another way to poultice more strongly than the first, when the duration of the restoration of the limb comes. Take roots of marsh-mallow, and seeds of flax, balsam, melilote, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each in a part; and grind them, and confect them with salt water, or with sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
In his book, Ypocras says that you should not put anything on the broken member for restoring it more strongly than a wax and oil cerot, and nothing else, and he said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that you should put on the broken member, for restoring, dry things that are a little warm, such as mirr and aloe, and incense, and similar things, such as we have said.
Another way to poultice that is good for a wound and pain: take mugat and wool of sheep, or feathers of owl, and marsh-mallow, and thread it evenly, and grind them, and make a poultice with it, and put it on.
And then carefully loosen a little at a time, and watch the patient not feel any pain, nor does the jaw move out of place; if you loosen it by hand day after day
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, or feels tense or swollen, if you hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip into water, and raise up the place, until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved; then leave the member resting for an hour, then put on another dry one, soaked in water or oil and tied with a ribbon, until you are sure the blister is warm;
and rest the inflammation of the member, and be relieved of pain, then start again gently, and a little plaster, and do not loosen it too much as before; and gently until it is well.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen all over, you must apply poultices and binding, if it begins again, as you did at first with equal care.
And if it does not come to the member at all as we have said, then do not separate it until after three or four or five or six days; and never leave it for more than ten days, according to what is seen, until the fracture has healed and the joint has approached the bone.
Then increase the restraint more than before, and let it fatten its meat as I have said before; and if you see that the joint is drying up more than necessary, know that there can be no healing. Then leave it for a while longer, as it is good to prolong the time of treatment; Then every day raise it with warm water, and let it rest for a while, and then apply the poultice with olive oil;
By this work therefore cut off the member without delay, and break up very well what it has done wrong; for it is evil, and if it is done with fear, I see nothing else but to let go and do it rightly.
of breaking in various ways There are various methods of breaking, and there are various shapes, and the causes are divided;
For it has breaks that are made by the impact of a spear, and the collar bone all the way down to the hip which is the end of the bone, so as to make such a break; and for this reason this method of breaking is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure « absolue » ; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite .
If there is a collision that becomes stuck, or a break, or a collar of stone, or a fall on stone, or similar things.
And if there is a piercing break that approaches the ligament that holds the bone together, or that is on the bone itself, and this wound is either great or small.
And if there is a wound that enters the bone as finely as a thread of hair, and this break is small, and for this reason it is called a "capillary break".
and if the wound is caused by a stone, or by falling, or by some other thing, and causes a piece of bone to enter the body, and the head of the bone becomes bent in such a way as the smith does when he smashes the metal on the anvil; then it enters between the stones.
And this happens to those who have a wet skull bone, so that the skull is like a child's skull;
and these are the various ways in which fractures occur, just as small pieces of wood do; and I will now speak about them in detail.
and let us know all the types of fractures by their traction, and by the probe, and by the corrupt chisel that is above them.
The hair appearance is caused by what happens when you discover the bone and rub it over, thus opening the black fracture.
In the cure for the fracture, be careful of accidents of the disease, and if you see no bad accident, as vomiting of blood, loss of understanding, stretching, palmations, feverish ague, and hairs standing on end, and other similar things in multiple conditions, then it cannot be cured without doubt.
And if you do not see a hopeful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
And when the navel comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to open the bone before the fourteenth day at most that you can.
And if it is in this state, then you must hurry to cut the bone by the seventh day, so that the tissue surrounding the bone decays, and the accident we have described comes about.
And if the bone fracture occurs up to the point where the tissue that covers the skull is broken, then you must split the damaged part thus: and it is that you press the head of the patient hard, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound more smoothly than you can,
and if the blood flow occurs upon uncovering the bone, or an abscess, you must help him with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the space with wet cloth soaked in oil; and make the wound rest as long as the abscesses are calm, and are sure of blood flow; then begin to cut the bone, and it is done according to 11 ways: one way is that you chop at the narrow end first, and this is the form:
And then I cut another, just as long as the first one.
And the second method is that you have several different lengths, some are long and others short, and they are pointed, and of iron made; and work quickly, so as not to wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, so that you pierce it inside, as well as you bring threads with thorns, not completely through so that they do not pass beyond the bone's spine, and must have above the point a margin or a circle, that does not let the point go beyond the bone; and you need to have several, so that each comes in its place at the edge of the bone, so that you have threads for all test: and this is the form of the three methods of threads.
And the quality to pierce inside the bone is that you put one thread on the bone, and turn it twice until you know that the bone has been pierced; then remove the thread a little further away, and do so all around, then cut with scissors the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do so more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take the bone in your hand, or in any of the tools that you have like pliers, tweezers; and be careful not to touch the skull nor the sinews.
And when you have pierced the bone and cut it, if you perceive that you retain the grit of the bone in all.i. other instrument resembling an incision, but it is necessary that it be softer and thinner than the other incision;
and if it retains nothing of the small bones, or no scales, if the bone is slightly damaged by an instrument; then heal the wound with the ointment and oil that we have mentioned.
And the other method of preparation, which is more effective, as Galen says, and it is this: cut the meat very thinly, and then make a poultice with it, It is first necessary that you discover a part of the bone, where the break appears, so that when you have discovered this part, you place the tip of this lens-shaped incision on it:
And do not cut from one side, and is the part of water in 1.2 sides, so that the cutting is next to the bone; then proud of a small mallet on top, so that you lightly hit the bone all around, and you are well guarded by the cloth that is desoz;
If it is attached to the bone, so the bone is lightly hit, because the bone hurts well, and does not fear.
And if the bone does not break through the skin, and the bone is cut so little from above, and there are small pieces, then cover them with a sharp razor that you must have in different quantities, to arrange in each case the most convenient one, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you have a lot of sharp razors, and then some sharper ones, and never stop doing this as long as it is good.
In each of the other haircuts and subtle injuries, you must bring forward according to its treatment; and this is something that has not yet been answered to those who have put their study in this art.
And if the plague is uncovered, it is necessary that you press .i. a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and dip it in oil and put it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled in 2 or 3, and dip it in wine and oil and put it on the first cloth; and do it more lightly than you can, so that you do not harm the plague, then apply it above the other linen, and do not strip it off except to moisten the wound only;
and leave it like this for 1 or 2 days until the abscesses are calm, then remove it, and apply medicines as roots of plants, and flour of times, and powder of incense, and aristology, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and apply medicines to it constantly without biting;
and keep the wound clean and dry, so you don't let it get dirty, nor do you let it come together with the bow, for when the bow comes together with the cloth of the skullcap, if it is too tight and sharp, and comes to the patient with great harm; for when one puts on a mordant thing, if it stops above.
Take care then, so that no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without doubt.
And if black poison comes only because of the medicine that we have put on it, which has virtue, then you should squeeze a part of honey and 2 parts of rose oil and glop 1 drapelet, and put it on the medicine. then treat it in the way that suits you, until it is well.
Saiches that no time are broken the 17 parts doun of the neck above, or him by li soulement, for these are 17 bones; and this desoz is cartilaginous, and breaks not, unless it be forced or twisted, and then it heals.
And if one of the 17 parts is broken, it is appropriate that you tap your little finger or hole on the neck, and fit the break evenly with your ring finger, and from the side, until the neck regains its natural shape; and do it lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the neck, and cannot come to its place, it is appropriate that you make it even at the top of a small finger.
And if his break is of a third part, then make another, and hasten to restore the first the next day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or ninth, when the abscesses at the base are calm, then tie with linen cloth at the top of the shoulders the tents of tendrils, if his break is in one part.
Or you tie another one from another part, if his break is there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the openings of the necks.
And do not say that there is no need to moisten the tents in the preparation of oak gourd and powder of mill; then leave the tent, until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
And in no way do they use goose feathers instead of tent-fabric, and if it is .i. a soft drape that wraps around, and the wind blows through it, and makes the disease spread among the sick; or you will see such and such a thing happen.
And if the abscesses open up while you are operating, put cotton dipped in oil or  .i. a little drop of aquilon on it.
And if the abscesses do not open up, put an ointment made of semolina flour and incense powder, mixed with rabbit's fat, then put it on light bandages and do not tie it too tightly;
and if the break in the nose is small and it is broken into small pieces, then extract with suitable instruments at this time, and mend the break, and treat things that might get stuck in it, and bandage firmly, and apply ointments and oils suitable for this;
and if he has no pain inside his neck at all, so that the cure of tenures, and I put chains of plunging, until it is healthy.
of the rupture of the jaw
When the jaw is broken, and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only a little one, and it is not broken into two pieces, except that it is bent inside, then you must know that it is a light fracture.
If the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, insert your index finger from your right hand into the mouth, and push the fracture gently inside, and make it equal with your left hand from outside, and adjust it lightly.
And if there is a break in the jaw, it is repaired with .ii. parts, so that they are even.
And if there is movement of the teeth, or fracture, then strain them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then put on the broken jaw with wax, and put on 1 drape double; and put on the drape a large well-made plate, or a piece of leather that is even, long and wide according to the jaw, and fasten it to the muscled part that you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light food.
And if you see that the shape has changed, then wait three days, and then reset what has changed; and put plaster on, of the powder from the mill with plenty of egg or flour of chaff, after you have removed the wax; and put on another light plaster, and if the plaster sets, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it for as long as it is healthy; many times it is healthy in 3 weeks.
And if the abscesses break out, then do what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, make no piece of the bone into the bone; but if it is subtle, use the instruments suitable for this.
And if the wound is tight, if you widen it with fire according to your necessity.
And when you have joined all these pieces, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, and put on it plasters suitable for this, to prevent infection, until it is healthy.
Force him gently. Forces him to break several times before, over the shoulder, and the rupture is according to .iij. ways: or it is broken and dislocated in .ij., and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a rupture with a wound.
And the work is so when the rupture is without a wound, that you have 2 ministers, so that one damps the shoulder that is forced to break; and the others extends the neck towards the part; then make even the rupture on both sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or hair.
And if you have to extend further, so put a round staff of cloth or linen on the shoulder of the patient, and make it large according to your need; and tighten and hold the staff with your hand, so that you make even the rupture, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder away from behind, so that it comes out completely, then let the patient lie on his side, and put the ministers' shoulder forward, and have them hold the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then set the break on your two sides, and if you find debris, so it is convenient that you split it up; and gently twist the pieces, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, so the cap is to one of those who cut it; but that you put away this instrument, so that the medicine does not lose its effectiveness.
and seems like a spoon, and is not a claw, and is also wide enough for the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has .ij. chisel, as you see, and one is large and the other small, as is the break in the wound that you have made when you treated the bones;
and when you are assured of the wound, if it is hot, and the break is small, or if you doubt about the heat of the wound, if it is wrapped in blankets and tents, according to its quantity.
And when hot wounds come, if you wrap one drape in oil and another in milk and wine, and put them on.
The dislocation of the bone, when it is without pain and without wound, is that you put on the bone the plaster from the powder of the mill and the ash of eggs, and put thereon light staples, and put a spike desos on it if you need it. Then take a very strong band of one palm wide, then put thereon two drapes double, and plaster it; then take a thin stake of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that band, so that the head of the band is hanging down; Then put the stake on the break, and turn the band around the neck, and fasten the assel with a spike, and unfasten the assel that is ill; and reset it every day, and when you see that the band holds well ahead of the stake, and you clearly see that the stake does not move on the broken bone, then reset it; and if it slips, then restrain it.
And make the ill one sit up with his back against the wall, and let him put a little peg under his armpit for support, so that the dislocation goes up by the force of the shoulder; or you tie his arm to his neck, and do not unbind it unless there is a bad accident, until 20 days have passed.
puis recommence la plastre, si tu vois qu'il y ait besoin, et l'étanche et le laisse ainsi, tant qu'il soit guéri; et il est guéri au plus en .xxviij. jours, et en moins à certains hommes.
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
For the shoulder to be properly healed, it must be kept in the middle and only moved by touch; then arrange it according to its shape after the fracture, and return it to its natural position, in all ways that you can; then put on a double drape of powder from the mill with much flour, and light ones, and put on 1. double drape; then put on a wide and thin plate, slightly wider than the shoulder, and remove the plate if it presses on the shoulder, but use hair from the plate so that the plate sits evenly; and then tighten it firmly so that the plate does not move at all, and check it every day; and whenever it becomes loose, tighten it again, and put the plate back in place if it has moved out of position, and lie the patient on his side; and the shoulder is healed in about 20-25 days. And when these numbers are completed, if he still needs to be held in place, be sure, for this is not bone that will heal lightly.
And if a piece of the bone comes loose, do not remove it, but join it back on, and make sure that the joint moves smoothly; and follow what we said about breaking the shoulder to ease the joint's pain.
of the break of the foot
The foot is never broken in the middle, but it often breaks at the end; and when it is broken in the middle, if it tilts downward, the patient feels great pain, and lack of support, and sometimes vomits blood, and feels pain all over his body, and especially in the bones.
And the restoration is that the patient lie down on his back, and you place him .i. cubit between his shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and align the ribs with your hands, and carefully put him in position so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then wrap him in a thin cloth, and cover it with soft salt (or another light substance), and tie it firmly to the spine, and tighten it hour by hour, and if it relaxes, you tighten it again; and if it needs to be loosened, because of corrosion or itching that comes to the surface, or pain or abscess, do so quickly, and remove the wrapping, and treat it with remedies; then wrap him up again, and hold him fast until he is well.
of the ribs
Saiches that the breaker of the ribs comes only in large ones behind the back, and at the head inside, and does not bend too much for what they are dry; and the sense is good to the inquiry with both.
And if he has been injured, restore it so that it is even, as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and hold him by a staff, if you need to do so.
And if the ribs are broken and turn inward, the patient will feel great pain and ache, as if he were crying, for the bone rubs against the membrane; and he becomes pale, and his breath is short, and it causes great pain in the body, and the old ones have put a lot of effort into it.
And if among these who serve is one who can administer meat that swells the stomach, to push the break away from the back.
We do not make this, except that warm abscesses come, if it is not arrived. And if it has come, then the health.
And they said that we put cups on the head, to suck out the fluid, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, doubt I have that the cup draws out the excesses to the head for a weakness of disposition.
And they said that one must cover the head with another dry cloth, and put oil between the ribs to equalize the heat, then cure it of the plague cure, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone that points to the wound, there is doubt in the patient; so it is necessary to split the skin above the broken rib, and put there an instrument to ward off the evil one; then one must break the bone, and pull gently, and afterwards sew together the two lips of the wound, if they are wide, and treat with plasters until he is well. And when the abscess comes out, so put on damp liniments in oil and place them; and cure while the time of that which needs an abscess, and be gentle on his rib where it should be, until he is well.
of the break in the neck
No time passes without breaking the bone of the neck, and soon it will hurt; and also at the back of the spine. And when this has happened to anyone, and you can see whether he will be healed or not, if his hands become soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with an needle, know that it is mortal in many dispositions; and if they mute and feel well when stretched and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is healed, unless you set him cur.
And if there is a similar thing coming out of the back, then you must know whether it is healthy or not, and if the pains are softened, and if the accident that happened was caused by what was in his hands, and the windiness and excretion without will on his back, and when he is soothed with it on his belly, if there is no excretion without will. And when it is soothed on his back, and it tightens, then it cannot be. Know that it is fatal: do not work in its treatment.
And if this accident does not come from him, then this thing is the lightest.
And the cure is that you reward if there is an abscess, put oil of roses or oil of meadow on it until it is calm; then put it on a compress and dry it, tie it with a string, and order the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels the pain until he is healthy. And if some bones are dislocated, then cover it with oil; and break the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then apply ointment with charcoal until it is healthy; and if the chiès de la kowe (chiès de la cowe, or chiès de la coué) is broken, which means that the hand is dislocated, hold it with your left hand, and put the splint on it with your right hand, then tie it, and if there are any bones that have come loose, then fix them in place, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
of the break of the bone of the hip
There was a chance that the bone of the hip might be broken, and if so, it would not be too much of an issue unless there is some slight reduction at the head; and let it grow long, and decline to the back, and comes to the patient pain in the place, and swelling, and fever where it is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it as long as you are on top of the break; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the head in the middle, so make the break equal as much as it can be in a natural shape.
And if the break is long, or it declines inwardly, so make the patient walk on her belly, as soon as the restoration of that break has been arranged for her. And when you have made it even, if you put it on the plaster, then put it on a beam of wood or timber, and hold the broken part steady so that it does not move; and fix the place of the joint by the sides, until the place is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his side or back.
And if an abscess develops again, without pricking it, until the abscess has healed, and then apply the method we have just described; then return to the cure, and hold it as needed, and there is no evil accident; and that is the way.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is what is between the neck and the top of the shoulder; and if it is broken, then one should restore it according to one of these two ways: which one is that you take a strong stick according to this form:
The shoulder joint is what is between the neck and the top of the shoulder; and if it is broken, then one should restore it according to one of these two ways: which one is that you take a strong stick according to this form: And lie in four ties, and tie them high, and cut the patient on the side; then cast the limb down upon the fust, so that he comes into position, and has one fust underneath him; then place the broken member equal to his hands together, until the broken member returns as it should.
The other way is that you place the patient on his back, and tie his hand to his neck, then order two ministers that one hold what is on the broken member at their hands, and the others extend each leg to its side.
And if you see that the extraction is too hard, then stretch out one leg of the patient to its side, and another toward his back, and extend each leg to its side; and if the broken member is near the top of the shoulder, then it is good that you put one leg easily, without labor, so that the broken member is even on its place, and on its neck; then stretch out equally the broken member, as it should, and extract it, if the joints are not too tight.
And if the abscesses come, do not extract them until .vij. days; and put on a wet cloth in oil of roses as long as the abscesses are calm; then extract it, and the way to extract it is that you put the plaster on the break; then raise the arm with the help, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the lou; and wrap it up, and extract it with the aid, and with the arms so that the arm is in its place, if nothing hurts it or if the bone does not break.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use aids, and put on the break a larger and stronger nail than the others, and have between each nail 2 inches of space, and let each nail be so large that it goes through the break 2 nails from each side; then extract by means of these nails, so as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the plaster on the break, more strongly and less by moving away.
And if you see the setting of the nails and the extraction, as we have said, in the day that you restore the member broken, and you doubt the abscess hot, let it remain tied until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each 2 days whether it swells or not, so that the re-setting does not come to the member because it is too tight. If it does not set, as we have said.
And if such an accident does not occur, then let it not be released until after three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and he places the aid with a cushion of equal wool, and looks every hour during the day or night, that the form of the member does not move, nor are the ligaments softened; if it is administered by virtue of medicine, and gives him the food which we have put before in a certain way so that the food is at the first subtle layer; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick. And it is custom that the aid and leg should be recovered in ten days; and then it must be released and administered baths and medicines of ointments to address the stiffness. And if the stiffness is ugly and blocked, let it be held for a year or more.
of the break of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fociles," one small and one large, with the small being at the top and the large being at the bottom; or sometimes both may break, and sometimes both may be whole.
When the little ones are bruised, the healing is light, and the cure; and when the big ones are bruised, such a healing is ill, and more painful than when they are bruised all together. If it is only the little one that is bruised, then the pot that is to be used is to be lightly extended, and made equal.
And if it is only the big one that is bruised, then the pot that is to be used should be more strongly extended; and extend it on the .i. side, and turn the poucht of the hand higher up than the others, and the little ones lower down than the others, and let the patient lie across it, and the .i. side before it higher up than the other side, so that the patient suffers no labor; then extend the assistants by their arms to the part under their hand, or to the leg, and other assistants above. And then make the pot equal, according to its better form.
And if in the break there are pieces, let each one be put in its place, and if any of them do not hold a good position, and you cannot restore it to its place, then set it on top of the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the break there is a wound, I have spoken about it to the singular chapter; so take care.
Et s'il le poignent à leur naissance, on lui tire les yeux qui ne bougent pas tant qu'ils naissent. And if some bad accidents happen to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, it is fitting that you wet the member with hot water until the itchings are calm; and let the member rest without constraint. And then begin again with the tightening, and if the ligaments are soft and the bones desevred, and similar things, if you adjust them.
And if the member is too tight, so that the tightening cannot come to it, then it is fitting that you soften it a little, and leave it so for some days, until the tightening comes; and then tighten it again.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then don't stop until .xx. days. or it is not resolved, then he puts his hands on his throat, and keeps his neck straight, and guards against movement and damage, and sleeps on his back; and know that this breaker is restored in .xxx. days or in .xxxv., and perhaps in .xx. days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
of the break in the hand
Know that at the back of the hand and on our two hands there are few breaks, and comes only a little sometimes.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or plied, so that the patient feels pain, and sits straight before him evenly; then he puts his hand on the table extended, and extends the members of the broken bones, and puts them together evenly, until they are well joined; and he puts the plaster and the bandages, if there is any injury, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the place; and it is wrapped in .i. linen sheets.
And if it breaks inside the garden of the plant between the navel and loins, then make a spear of linen, and command the patient to strangle it at his broken plant; and then draw it out with a long cloth, and let the steel of a few softs also be as large as the plant in the palm, and draw it out, as it befits.
And if it breaks at the back, then it is necessary that you put a steel on, and another in the plant, so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the hand, and stop up the vein between the two.
And if it breaks on one of the two, then he should be made equal, as it befits; and draw it out with the plant, and if you see that you cannot lift the break by itself, then put a small right steel to lift the break, so it does not move; and if the break is on the other two, as in the index or the one on the other side, make them equal, and tie them together holding them tight, so they do not move; or you should all hold them together, so that they are comfortable, or you should put a steel on, as it was said; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the aposteme, and help those who come to it, as I have said.
And from the broken chest
The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it cannot be reset, so it keeps coming out of place with slight movement; this causes pain and injury. The patient lays down on his face, then extends the arms to each side evenly; and it is when the fracture has broken the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the shoulder, then one of the links is towards the knuckle and the other link is above the break; and if it is near the hip, then the links are extended upwards and downwards; then the physician aligns the bone evenly with his two hands according to its natural shape, and then applies the plaster, and ties it, except for the apostemes [small joints] which come later.
And if there is an abscess, let it rest then return to your treatment and work; the course of action is done in this way. It is necessary that you wrap around the break . i.e. bandage hard double in .ij. or .iij., and stop the excess, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the birth, and put .i. a long thread between the buttocks and the leg, taking off the knee cap, and bring the head of the thread above; then turn on the leg and on the buttocks the bandage, then put on the break plates, and put a plate on the bone of the leg; then employ the place empty between the leg and the buttocks of drapes soft to put even the binding, then begin to bind .iij. twists or iiij. on the break; and when you go up more on the break, and less the binding; then tie the 2 esteles that are above, then go back to the knee cap at the head of the thread, as long as you come away from the foot; and the binding, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then if it comes no aposteme or swelling or other apparent.
And if it should happen that he falls and turns over this one that comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that hold, if it is necessary to bend the place, and pull hard; and heal him as we have said, until he is well.
And in no way is the buttocks broken when we put plates there, as in the support of the arm; nevertheless, in this restoration made, the patient does not cry out.
And know that the scar is healed in .l. days, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
from the knee joint
For in the knee joint there is sometimes a slight injury, but it often heals. And if it breaks, it is only a crack or a split, and not a wound, and one feels no pain.
And the restoration shall be so that one who is bent on his two sides is made equal again, as much as possible; then apply plaster and put a smooth plate on it, if you need to, and fasten it with rope or string, as we have said for other fractures, whether in the head or elsewhere. So treat each accident as it requires, until it is healed.
of the breaking of the leg
That there are .ij. bones in the leg; so that one is called by right "mustelz", and the others are called "foscile"; and all other breaks are like those of the arm, and for this reason the restoration is as with that of the arm in equal fashion, and the wounds are all like.
And if both bones break together, then the leg turns on every side.
And if the thin bones break, then the leg turns in front.
And if the large bone is broken, if one feels great pain and sees it clearly, then return to the dislocation. Then put in extension, and make it even, and bind the bones evenly; yet, however, it is necessary that the fracture be ugly, and there are many pieces, so let the extension be smaller and lighter; and make it even according to your virtue.
And when you have finished your work, if there are 13 hair braids that purple the leg on one side and the other, and are long from the knee to the heel; then wrap them in 13 leashes above and below, and bind this bundle in the middle, and at this binding no leg shall hang downward to the right or left, and so it is good; and there let be 13 braids of hair on the leg, and if it is long, and put the leg to rest by warding off movement, and properly do I put one in the fracture or wound; and move each day the leg, that we may see if there is an abscess or another accident; then heal as long as he is well.
of the fracture of the bone of the foot
At the ankle comes no fracture, but at the bone of the foot comes a fracture once and twice, and there is no more to come unless it is broken in various ways.
And if it should happen that the bones of your foot are broken, and you see those bones coming together, put yourself down on the ground like one who wants to go, and then now put your foot on its side, where the bones have risen up, and press them until they come back into their place; then apply the poultice and put it on top of that, and put a small flat piece of wood in front of the foot's stomach; there will be 10.1 inches between the two ends. Then tie the bandages tightly around the foot, and all other things as you need.
And when three or four days have passed, if the swelling goes down, for you will find that the bones are even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two are broken, set them back in place, as we have said for the hands; then put a piece of wood on each of the two according to their length, and let it be slightly larger, then put the poultice on top of that, wrapped in one.1 yards of linen, and tighten the bandages on the foot; and let the belly of the poultice be under the foot, so that it covers it well.
And remember not to forget any of the other things that we have said for breaking bones; and attend to each accident as it arises.
of the break of the bone soft hand
When the woman's natural bone is broken, if she is seated enlarged, then she is inclined to the back part of the spine, and held behind; then fill the nature with cotton, and also put as much as 1/2 pound; then stand the woman, and gently push her spine a little at a time, and then let the cotton fall, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and returns the bone with the spine; and when she urinates, if she pushes out the cotton, and when she has finished urinating, then put it back, and in this way make 21 days or so: then will be restored the break, and if there is pain, take a bladder of lamb, and tie a cord to the hernia, and pour all the bladder into nature; then blow into the cord forming, until the bladder is inside: nature will then return the break; then fill it with cotton, and leave it for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the hand of the man or woman is broken, if it is restored as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and work there, and hears my book. For the break signifies many things to the right way of restoration: hear then.
In the hymen, when it is broken, take a bladder of goose and fill the hymen; then wrap towels around, and leave them for .iij. days or so, and it will be healed in hospital.
of rupture with wound
For those who have a rupture with wound, even if it is great, as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, let it be healed now, so that the healing we have described testify.
And if the wound heals, except for the vitriol stain, then you have nothing else, then start restoring the rupture in that very hour, or that day, unless the abscesses come to a head.
And if the abscesses come to a head, and you leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the abscesses are calm, and do not touch them on the third day or the fourth, because you would bring about a bad accident.
And if his nose is broken, it appears on the cheek, so that you put it gently with your hands to its tip, little by little.
And if the extensions are not equal in length to your hands, then take this instrument made of iron which is 5.25 inches long and its width is determined according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary that he immerse three or four times, according to what is needed in each cure of a fracture; and be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member at your opening, and be sharp at the front and thick at the middle from before:
And it is called a "palainche," for the broken shoulder should be placed on top of the head of the bone; and it should be hit once, as long as it revives, and they are even one against the other. And if the fracture is slight, and the instrument cannot take the bone well, then you should chip off the head of the bone until the instrument can take hold of it.
And if you cannot bring the bone back together as we have said, then chip off one side of it with an appropriate instrument, or chisel or saw, with your power; and then take that which is left on the bone and cut little by little.
And when the bone is set and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. If it is in its place, then moisten it with wine-styptic black dye and clean it properly if it is stained; and do not put tar or anything else on it where there is oil, lest it cause inflammation and corruption; then administer poultices when you have set the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not stretched with the fracture; and many times this has been done to the sick person, either dead or腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に
And if the wound is large or deep, and you doubt that bad accidents will not come, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, it is not right to put stilt on; but wrap it up, instead of stilt, hard drapes, and tie it. And when you see after 1 .i . day or 1 .ij . encumber bow with the wound, if he who has been put on all comes off, and sets the healing bandages, as the healing four-part bandage and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you loosen the limb three times a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and restored.
And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bow moves easily and lightly.
And if a main passes through, and it cannot be made firm but comes off again in pieces, knowing that there are small pieces of bone, so you must patch up the wound with stitches, and all these pieces that come out causing pain.
And if a fistula appears at the place, or other corruption, it is necessary that you heal it according to what he said in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and opened on the limb, as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and others like large limbs, do not pull it out, because many times death comes, but leave it until it decomposes; perhaps it will come back later.
Of the bruces that come from the sudor
We often come after the health of the bruised person, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the member's form; and perhaps can not make their natural movements.
Take care, therefore, that we are well: if the medicine is stinging, as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarc kolle, acacia, and similar things, so that you do not apply any of these things, or all together, and confound them with wine of stinging oil or with a lot of smoke or with honey; and put them on the knot in piles, and bind them well, and do not remove them for many days; and then remove them, and start again on another one, until the nodulation is hard; or you bind it to a piece of cork well made; for the quality of cork is that it hardens all the swelling above the members; and if the nodulation is hardened, it is necessary to cut off the surplus, or else you will have to remove it with a razor, until it is hard, and then cure it until it is well.
When the break in the bone is healed, and remains after weak and thin members, so happened for various reasons: because one was too tightly tied, and was not tied as it should have been; or because he had too many ligatures, and could not bring relief to the member; or because of many scar tissues; or because of too great movements, not in their right time; or because he had little blood in his body, so is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat well, and make the body flexible, until the blood multiplies in it; and give him baths, and give him joy and rest; then put wax on the member so that the wax attracts much blood, and rinse it often with warm water, so that the blood runs to the member; and return it to its natural shape.
the twisted member after the stay
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
And in no case should the bone be moved to rub continuously and extensively with moist hands. And let there be no continuous and prolonged movement of the limb every hour.
And if the torture is too great and hard, as in the case of stones, then it must be opened with a sharp and light knife; and put a poultice and study in the cure.
Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocation results from a joint moving out of its normal position, which prevents the joint from moving properly, resulting in abnormal limb positioning and causing great pain and injury to the patient.
When dislocation occurs at any joint, if you bring it back into place immediately without hesitation.
For if you delay it, and the joint swells, and by chance put it back in place; for this causes great pain and other troubles to come about.
However, if the disease is not yet well-established, then treat the patient and let it be until the abscesses are calm; then heat the member with hot water and oil, then gently move it, and heal each member as healing arrives in its place.
And I have ordered the ointments for dislocations of the shoulder joint just until the pain.
the mandibles
when the mandibles have been dislocated a little, and the dislocations of both are according to 1.2 manners: where they are a little osteotic from their places, and are softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the loins, and turn the saliva out of the mouth so that it cannot be held, nor can it close its mouth, and wrap its tongue with speech.
When the dislocations are small, then return to many other dispositions.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it in the hospital right away, and do not delay.
and in this manner that the minister holds the head of the ill person, and drips mirrhe from one of his hands on the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, then the dislocation is of a j.j. parts; and command to the illness that he softens, his jaws, and moves them in all directions.
And pour the mirrhe equal, until it regains its place.
And if they are brought back, most certainly it is because the two jaws are put together again; and if they are raised with hot water and oil, so that they are brought back lightly; do not delay in bringing them back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the sick person is closed well with a softener, put it on drapes soaked in wax made from oil and beeswax, then leave it lightly while it softens them.
and let the sick person sleep on his back, and his shoulders between two pillows, so that he does not move or strive to turn over, but eat soft food, until the pains are gone and the jaws have healed.
and then cut it easily, and do not work to open the mouth to eat or drink, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
And if the .ij. jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour, and are not returned to their places, then fever and the usual heat come, and by chance there is a solution of the abdomen, and sometimes vomiting of clear bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is a loss; and many die in .viiij. days.
of the fork
The fork cannot dislocate due to the costiveness within the continuation of it and from the top, and is dislocated only once at the end, and one can feel it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back and extends his arms; and then he presses the joint against your palm, and it will come back; then put the plaster on and bandage, and hold it fast.
And the shoulder that is towards the chest cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is dislocated once, you bring it back to its place as we have said; then put the plaster on and the bandage, and hold it fast, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
And in this way you also bring back the head of the shoulder when it has been dislocated from its place.
of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: either because it has dislocated from the part of the clavicle to the dislocation; and the second is to the part of the back; and by chance dislocates from the upper part, and this happens little.
And do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the neck; and many times dislocates out towards the clavicle, but at those who have little money, for it is necessary to go to hospital; and at those who have enough money, but go slowly, and return slowly.
And by chance there are some men who have a punch or a blow, and warm the shoulder with a hot poultice, and think that it is dislocated because of this.
It therefore comes that you should test it, until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And this is how the text continues: And you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and dislocate the shoulder at the joint with the arm as if it were one body; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his side, nor move in any way.
And also, if it is dislocated upwards, so it is not hidden, because you will see it clearly at the joint;
and this way of dislocation is not excepted when it is new, or when the person is sick.
And the way is that the ministers raise the hand of the sick person above, then put the splint out of the socket, and raise the joint with force to its place; and the ministers raise the hand, and extend it above, then put it out; so comes a sudden pain.
And if it does not come as we have said by hand in two days after, then it is appropriate that the sick person be bathed in hot water; and the minister should apply softening and soothing remedies, so as to make a decoction of althaea and fenugrec and melilote in water, and apply it.
and then the sick person should be massaged on his back, and a splint of another equal, not too soft nor too hard, should be put on the shoulder; then the minister should raise the heel of the hand of the sick person with force, and draw the chief of the shoulder gracefully, and hold the hand of the sick person.
and others ministers blacken the shoulder of the disease, so that it does not move down; this shoulder returns all at once, and you see if you do so according to this way:
and that you make present .i. a man who is greater than the patient; and is right towards the coast, and bottle so the shoulder dislocates of the patient's shoulder, and lift up the shoulder upwards, so that the patient hangs down by the arm; and li estre le plus a l'armure du malaide si que li armour ne se meuve tant qu'il est en l'espaule desoz. and others ministers draw the arm of the disease down towards the stomach. And if the patient is too light, then go with him something heavy and bring the dislocation back now.
And the ram on also another way: and is that you stick  .i. long splinter in the ground, whose head is also as a pistol, and is not too big nor too small; and li ram qu’il soit en ceste maniere: And then let the disease be put down, but that it have a drape of wool over it, and the disease be in the long furrow; then his hand is stretched out from one side to another forming, and the joint returns to its place at length.
And if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a piece of wood from the arm of a great tree and two fingers wide, which has the head resting on it so that it can enter fully into dislocation, according to this form:
then put it on the top of the wood, so that the disease does not burn the patient, then put it into dislocation; and extend your arms up the long side of the wood, and set the shoulder on the wood, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a small stone of the size of a stone, and let it hang down from one side: the joint will now return.
And when it is in place, in whatever way, then put on the shoulder a piece of wool that is equal, and set the plaster with powder from the mill, with incense and alum, all over the shoulder and around, then strain it out of dislocation facing forward, and tie the bond to the plaster, and embrace the hand to his neck, and let the hands remain in this way.
And it is necessary that he suck little by little as the limbs are comfortable, for they will heal more quickly; and then suck more after a few days or so, and move them; and if they are stiffened and not softened, then they are healed.
And if the joint has come out of its place by moisture that has come or by some other cause, then you must apply the cautery to three quarters, as it is placed in front or with the paste of the cautery.
And if you do all this, and after five or six days the joint does not hold and the arm cannot raise it, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint has never been placed in its place.
The dislocation that is opposite the loins and breasts, or behind, is made by impact, and the extending of hands, and you administer another place; and cure it until it is healed.
And if after healing comes stiffness in the limb, and a late movement, then the patient often uses it again until that stiffness is relieved and returns to its original state.
of dislocation at the joint
Sache that the joint at the shoulder is dislocated at the base, and returns to its place; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, for we can see and feel it well; and dislocate according to each figure. And when you join the dislocated shoulder with the healthy side, if you can see it openly. For the joint is cut, and cannot bend the arm, or touch its shoulder from all sides.
And it is necessary that you bring them back in this way as well as the apothecary's leg comes out, for if the apothecary's leg comes out, there will be great grief in bringing it back; and by chance it cannot be brought back from all and every part, especially when it is at the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and is of great pain, and by chance it brings death.
And the restoration is, when it is such that you can bring it back, that you extend its hand to your .ij. hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands at the elbow behind and in front of the body, and bend the joint to its palm root together, or at its base, as soon as it comes back to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, return when it doubles its hand to its root, and keep the elbow behind the body.
And if it does not return to its place, give a strong extension; and there are two who extend the arm, and tint them together, so that it does not move with the extension; then turn the arms of each part, then you have wrapped a double long and wide drape.
and when he holds his hand at the joint to the oil, if it is not oiled to smooth out the joint, then make the joint firm, until it comes back;
and when it is in place, if put on dry plaster with honey and oil, and strained firmly, and bent the arm at the shoulder of the sick person, and leaves it for some days, then loosen it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen it again, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not move well, then begin again with the plaster and the lien, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly placed; then loosen it again.
And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it mutates, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved; or put on the joint a layer of sheep's fat, then leave it. day and night, then wash it, and make him enter or bath and when he sweats, he gently rubs the joint, then puts the nail back on, and then into or bath; and so does .ij. times or .iij., until he is healthy; and if you see it, put it on the end of a wet cloth heated with butter, and strain it up; so will it return to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
the dislocation of the hand should be reset quickly, while it is still dislocated, so that its place is not lost; also, if the fingers are swollen or if there is heat.
And if you put the injured hand on a table, and stretch out the fingers, and look at it so that it is even; then put your palm against the joint, and squeeze it until it comes back.
Here is the translation of the text line by line into English: "If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's back hand on the table, and then have them put their hand in the appearance of the joint. If it goes back into place now, it is good."
"If not, if you cut the abscess gently, and let it rest in this way, then let it move freely."
"And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in place after a few days, then let the joint twist."
and don't hurt the patient until his hands are wet, and can not extract anything at all: so you know that the nerves are cut or the arteries; if there is no other way to extract it by fire cautery, and perhaps nothing else.
And when the hands are in place, put on the plaster as we said above, then extract it and leave it there .v. days, then release it and let it be.
If he cannot move it properly, and there is no fracture, if the joint is wet with warm water, and rub it until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the two hands
No times is dislocated the two sides of the hand to each part, no times at the back of the palm or the belly;
then are they two, and bottle the dislocation to your fists until he comes back, then hold fast the head of the two, and the pull towards the part where it is joined;
and leave .ij. days, and then put it equal this day; and of not the leg, so com we have said, and the un-leg from day, and the move it, and the tie again; and do this often, until he is tight,
and do the same, if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, and do so com you have done before, until it is well; and do the same, when it is dislocated on the other side.
Dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos
When the shoulder or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure, for it quickly leads to death.
And the signs are that the excrements come out without will, they cannot be held, and many times a member is softened or weak, or the two arms or one arm or .j. legs.
And many times the head becomes mute in three parts; that which is mute at the back is called "gilbositez".
If it is because you have stunted your growth from childhood, then there is no cure or healing for you completely.
And those who come from falls or blows or similar things, the old ways of treatment with big words were that they did not do any good at all.
but I have simplified them according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the stunting that comes before this, there is no cure or healing;
and so I say that comes straight into two sides, and cannot be cured except for the one properly which comes to the back, as I say;
and so that the patient is laid on his back in an even position, and has his hair cut short, so that he does not get injured;
and then put 1 log of wood under his head, and 1 log beside him, and tie a rope around the patient's neck, and 1 at the hips, and 1 between the knees, and 1 between the ankles;
and the two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other beside him, among the 2 logs;
and are well sealed, the twig as we have said, and the mirror puts his palms on the spine to form, until he regains.
And if she does not recover with this cure, take a table of three arms long, and cut out the wall, and let the patient lie on one side, and dip the top of the table cut out on the wall, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and put the mirror's palms on the other end of the table, and press firmly until he regains his position; and if you see that it hurts, do it with care at first so that the pain does not increase.
And place two torches at the end of the patient's head with one arm, and between each torch, and facing outward, a palm's width apart;
and place each log .i. one upon the other, or they turn around, and the logs are firmly on the ground so that they do not move; and between each of them  .ij. logs there is a small log .i. turning, for they tie them together, and in the  .ij. twists  .ij. small logs put one palm-length long logs to turn around the twist;
and then the one who is between them to the twist at the top, and the other tie at the other twist, and each of the ministers twists his own twist on all of the logs, and the master sets the stake equal as we have said.
And when it is equal, put on dried herbs with a lot of ash, and then the stakes, and then the tablet of 1.ij. feet long, that he may put the leach on the top of the gibbet and the part of the spine healthy, then the line of a log, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle leaching, until it is healthy;
and if nothing comes at the end of health, so administer soft and soothing medicines with the tablet that we have said above; and never give a piece of lead,
and never does the appearance come in the rear spine of the back, and thought to be dislocations; and that is the bone which opens, so that one must not have presumption: by adventure it would bring death.
of dislocations of the hip
For the joints of the hip and shoulder come out only as dislocations, not at all like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiij. parties: within and without, before and behind; and more within, and less before and behind.
And the knowledge of their dislocations within is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy, it is further away, and opens more the sick knee than the healthy, and cannot double the sick knee on fire; and is the head which is dilated inflamed abscess hot, because that the shoulder of the cockerel comes out.
And the sign of that to which it goes away, if this accident is opposite to these before.
And the signs of that which comes before, if he has a good leg according to the accomplishment; nevertheless, it does not double its knee with pain, and if one makes it walk, it cannot go forward, and holds back its urine, and swells up the ankle, and when it walks, it goes on the heel.
And the signs of that which comes behind, if he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is soft, and the head of the shoulder is at the place of the ribs.
For if the patient has had this type of dislocation before and it takes a long time to heal according to its condition, then there is no cure; and it is only right that one should be cautious.
And in this one where the dislocation is recent, and it is of the three types of dislocations, if you hurry to reset the joint, and push it back inside and pull it out again, moving it from side to side; perhaps it will go back into place, and there is no need for any further cure.
And if it does not go back into place in this way, you should use very strong medicine, and firmly support the leg with both hands, or a strong ligament tied to the knee joint; and another minister extends his hand above it in such a way that he can press his hands together, then ties the ligature across the thigh; and another minister ties the knot of the ligature;
and extend up and down all at once, as long as the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains still.
This manner of extension is so common that there are .iiij. resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then you must put the cure on the patient's back, then place the bandage on the root of the loins, and the loop that is at the angle, then extend the bandage upwards towards the angle, and upwards towards the spine; and
then wrap the patient's arms around the large loop of the bandage, and bring it to the back at a distance: now it returns to its place; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than that of others.
And if you cannot hold it in this way that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the .ij. feet of the sick person together with a strong twine under the .ij. heels, and on the .ij. genitals, and let the sick leg be extended more than the other two.
Then be hung from the top of a post, and on the ground  .ij. long arms; then order one minister to embrace the top of the hip, and let others hang with the sick person, who embraces the hips tightly, because the joints are now coming back slowly.
And when the dislocation is away, if the sick person lies down as we have said in that which has giddy-head, and tie one string properly on the sick leg, and on the hip too;
Then set   .ij. torches, one at the top and another at the feet, then put one torch between the hips of the sick person at the bottom in the form of a cross; and put up wet drapes inside, so it doesn't burn the patient, and then place each servant in front of him, and let the doctor put the dislocation on his hand.
If it comes back, that's good. If not, put it on a .table, and press it like we said in the book on the neck, and lay the patient on his back.
And when the dislocation is in front, extend the leg with pain like I said; and put the doctor's hand on it, then press with the other hand, and bring it towards the hip.
And when the dislocation is on the side, if it can't be extended towards the ground, then it must be extended like we said in the book for sleeping on the left side; and so that the patient' leg is lifted, and the doctor' hand is placed under the thigh; then press with the other hand, and bring it towards the hip. and lie extended on his face, and must all press together at the joint to the table;
and will be done when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then remove the bandages, put on the plaster, and extract a toothpick, so that the ankle does not move;
and rest.iii. days or iii. days, then remove it, and put on the plaster; and if you see that they are even, then extract it as before, and let it be.iii. days; then remove it, and make it bark, until the limbs are comfortable.
of the dislocation of the shoulder joint
The genoux is dislocated in three ways: namely, inside, outside, and behind; do not dislocate it in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his knee to his hip, and if it does not bend at the hip, know that it is dislocated.
and the reduction of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your knees;
then take his knee between your hands, and pull it back between your two, then bend the .ij. ribs from the knee-shape; and other ministers extend his foot, until the genoux has returned to its place, and the signs are that he bends his knee lightly at the hip;
and apply the paste on top, and make the leg rest in the trough, and fix it together firmly .iii. or iiij. days then let him free; and do not work the patient to walk, until the limbs are comfortable again.
And if the limbs are not yet healed, so administer a strong extension, as we said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is well again.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are never dislocated, and they are never completely dislocated inside or outside.
And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and test before the part where it has been dislocated:
The patient should be made to bend if it is light, and it must be gently extended with the hands when it is slightly bent.
And when it has been dislocated from the top, so that you make the patient lie down, and tie him up with a strap around his leg, above the ankle;
then train the foot to you with your right hand, and then to the left, and then extend it upwards, and blow on the foot upwards;
and do this 19 times, as we said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, it is good; but if not, then begin again the work, because it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, then bring the sick person on her back on the ground, and lay a strong pole firmly in the ground between her knees, and tie bandages around, so that he does not hurt the sick person;
then place the minister's knee, and another minister extends the foot to his hands or to 1.a. tie, so that he is tied to the column of the foot; then extend each minister equally, and the pole is placed close between the knees of the sick person in order to hold the sick person up while he is being lifted;
and then put the mirror equal to the dislocation with his hands, and other ministers dye the healthy leg at the deso, and the dislocation will come back completely.
And when it is finished, so that the plaster is applied and dried, and the form is given, and the foot is tied to the leg, and the tendons which are behind the ankle are guarded so that the bonds are not too tight;
then leave it.ii. days or iij., and if the form is good, then leave it; then remove it on the third day or fourth, and do not let the sick person walk for iiij. days; and if he walks before that term is up, it is still not safe that he does not dislocate again.
And if abscesses come up, so it is necessary that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, until they are well.
the two
When the two are dislocated, if it is gently extended without work, and this is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in the hip joint or in the ankle, so it is necessary that you make the patient sit down on a flat surface or on a table and put your foot on what opens these joints, then press with your foot in this form until he regains his position.
and when it is even, and there is nothing open, then place the sole of the foot on a table to .ij. shoulders, then draw out the form, and leave it .iij. days, then let go; and let it rest, until it is healthy.
of wound and dislocation together
When the wound comes with the dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times the patient has died:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful and slow to anger, do not be too proud:
and use at the beginning of things soothing balm, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope for health; and when you see hope, so I reset the limb to its place now, so that the balmy balm comes;
and when the limb is in place, then administer soothing balm to the wound, as it should be, with dried herbs;
and if there is a fracture with broken bones, and the joints are dislocated, then do as we have said in simple diseases;
and keep yourself from entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this will cost you dear according to your creator, and for the sake of arming yourself and your body. Amen.
