O, sons, for I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by the completion of it the end is achieved in it, and by the expositions of it, and by the declarations of it, it is my view that you complete it with this treatise, which is part of the operation with me, that is, surgery.
Because the operation with me is prostrate in our region and in our time entirely private, while many risk the science of it, and its vestiges are held captive; and there remain of it only some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered and have become subject to those errors and uncertainties because their clauses the understandings of it and are elongated the force of it and the art.
And it is seen to me that you bring that to life with the order of this treatise in that according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for that it may come with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work as it is by addition of the declaration, and by preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the cause for which no one has been found a good artificer with his hand in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and that it requires the actor to be exercised before it in the science of anatomy, which reconciles Gualia because it knows the joints of the members and the forms of those, and the conjunction and separation of them; and to have the knowledge of the bones, the nerves and the tendons, the number of those, and the egress of them; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and of the places of the emergence of them.
And for that reason, Hippocrates says that with a name is little, but in the work much, and most of all in the art of the hand.
But now we have already said that in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not learned in that which we have said of anatomy, is not evacuated that he will not fall into error for which many men die, as I have seen too many of those, who some are formed in this science and throw themselves from that their science and their experience.
For I saw a foolish and inexperienced physician who had incised an abscess scrophilos in the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed while the woman died among the hands of him.
And I saw another physician who prescribed that the trachea of a man who had been processed in his state, and the stone was large, and it came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man on the third day died.
And I had already been called to extract that, and I saw that because of the greatness of the stone and because of the disposition of the patient, I knew on him that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was taking a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came to a black crusted man who was broken in his hip; and prepared the physician with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with splints and splints with strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And then he dissolved it according to his desires, and then he ligated it, and then he left it for some days and commanded that we untie the ligament; and thus it came to be that the hip and the leg became inflamed, and it came to ruin.
And I was called to him, and I prepared to untie the ligament, and achieved tranquility and then eased his pains.
But however, already corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that I could not restrain it, and did not cease to wander the corruption in the limb until the patient perished.
And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it was ulcerated after some days, until the malignancy of it was magnified in its lord.
The cause of which is that the cancer is pure of melancholic humor, so that it does not come to it with iron at all, but that it be in a limb which suffers that it be held captive by all.
And for that reason, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with me be devised in two divisions: that is, in operation to which health is associated, and in work with which there is peril in the major dispositions.
And I have already insisted on this in all places of this book in which I bring operation in which there is error and fear; for it is necessary for you to guard this and leave that, so that the foolish ones do not find a way to speak and to dishonor you.
And therefore, take your weapons with diligence and with the protection of God, and your patients with facility and with firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God, seeking health and praiseworthy success, and leave the terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and hold your weapons from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more is it remaining to your glory, and more in the world and in the end to your sanctitates.
Gualia already said in some of his monitions: "Do not treat a bad illness, so that bad physicians are not called by name."
And now I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and the first of the first part. The first chapter ordered from the head to the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of that which is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of incision and perforation, and of cupping glasses, and of leeches, and of the extraction of arrows and of things similar to those, all chaptered and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of the cure of sprains and of things similar to those; chapter ordered from the head to the feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
It is necessary that I say the quality of the judgments of that cautery and of its harms, and in what cases it is prohibited cauterization.
Therefore I say that the sermon of the quality of the judgment of cauterization and of its harm is a long and prolix sermon, and subtle by science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken of it, and they have disagreed, and to me a little of their sermons suffices, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I say that cauterization is harmful to all cases universally, which are in matter or are matter, except for two cases, which are cases of matter that is hot.
In the case of a hot and dry matter, they disagree; for some say that cauterization is beneficial to that, and others say the contrary of that, that cauterization is not suitable for illness which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that illness hot and dry with that which is hot and dry be cured.
And those who say the contrary of that, say that cauterization is made beneficial in all hot and dry illnesses that come in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humors to the nature of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I say for the sermon of that, that experience has already taught me some times.
But however, it is not necessary that it should come upon this that which has already been explored and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by previous exercise, and who has known the diversity of the constitution of men and the disposition of the illnesses in their own bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the duration of those.
But in the other cases, there is no fear for you, and more so in the hot and humid illnesses, because already all the physicians have agreed upon those, and they are not disagreed upon the judgment with cauterization in those.
And know, children, that of the secret of curing by cauterization with fire and of its goodness, it is because fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member which is cauterized and does not reach the other member attached to it except with a small harm.
But the action of burning medicine reaches that in the members which are farther from it, and greatly causes to come in the member illness of difficult healing and greatly harms.
But fire, because of its sublimity and of the goodness of its substance, does not do anything but that which is superfluous, and it is already known to us by experience and by the length of service of study in the art about the truth of the causes; and for that reason I am excused for the length of the sermon, and if it were not that it is not written in my book in this place to you the secret hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and of its expulsion by which expels the illnesses, with a philosophical and demonstrative sermon, which would be acute in your minds.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to make cauterization and they pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, because so that the harm by the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of that which with the cauterization is aimed, and more so if the cauterization is for pains or of necessary pains, strong and fistulous, which do not suffer delay because it is feared of those that come malice, which is greater than a small harm entering by time.
And therefore do not catch in your minds, o, children, that this is not esteemed but by the vulgar people and the foolish physicians, because it is that to that illness that is cured by cauterization it is not reduced all times, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not at all like that which they think about it, because cauterization is not but in place of medicine which alters the constitution and dries the humors which are the cause for which the pains come.
But however, cauterization is superfluous over medicine by the will of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that its illness may return at some time in the future, according to the constitution of the patient and the location of its illness, and its virtue, and what is prepared in the body of it of the addition of superfluities in it, and what has reached it in its acquisition in foods and things similar to those causes; unless that illness in which cauterization is administered is a subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and humors, as cauterization of teeth for pain and things similar to that, it is possible that in it that pain does not return, but rather that it is made in small.
And more common speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is right speech, not that I understand it in it, because I believe that there is no cure that profits with medicine nor with any other cause except cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when they administer the ways of healing in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause man administers cautery, and it profits to that. And therefore it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand the common people and many foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen it and have found that it does not do so except in some bodies where others do not, and cautery with that is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you do cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the roar of the gold, and that it prepares to receive the heat; and if you adjust over it fire, the gold melts for the fire, and in the fire some sheets so that the artisan catches for the occupation of that.
And for that reason cautery with iron must be done more lightly and more carefully to the rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that afterwards the one who asks for it may have what they want from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers to the humidity and coldness over the  servant accident of which there are two causes, so it is the cause of soda and multitude of fluxes rheumatic, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the eyebrows and ears flow, and multitude of sleep, and pain of teeth and of the goiter, and universally of all sickness that comes by coldness, as well as paralytically, soda and apoplexy, and similar in those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is this, that first you command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine the head modifying, for three or for four nights, according to that requires the virtue of the patient and the age of him and his custom.
And then command him to shave his head, and then do that seizure between your hands on a bench lowered and that he place his hands on his feet.
And then place the razor of your palm near the nose between his eyebrows. But however, as the your said of the middle place is reached, sign that place with a tenta, and then ignite the cautery olive of which this is the form:
And then place that on the place signed with a tenta, in the manner that descends, with which your hand be constricted little by little, and you revolve that.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see already of the bone being discovered any quantity of the head, as the quantity of a grain of er, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand with that iron, with another of that, if it is cooled, until it is seen of the bone that I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve that on the place and leave that for three days.
And then place on it a poultice soaked in butter and leave that on it until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with ointment tetrafarmacon until it is healed.
And already they said that when the plague remains open, so much better gets the scar, because it is better and more helpful.
And they said some of them that the spine should be cauterized into the bone, and that the cautery should be kept until some part of the surface of the bone is burned.
And then scrape that which is burned of the bone, and then be cured.
And they said others that with the cautery it should reach the end, until it presses into the bone strong pressure until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati small: And they estimate of that place expire the vapors of the head.
And it should be kept open for a long time, and then be cured until it is consolidated.
But to me, these two species of cautery have not been seen at all, except in some men according to their way of fear; and leave that, of me, it is better for health, when it is; because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of it as we have testified in the other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of a cold nature.
And the species of cautery first is more safe and better of me; and of that I use and with that work with health.
Second chapter.
Of the cautery of the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and is prolonged in the patient, and use of herbs, poultices, and capipulges, and plasters, and guats, and cadels, and gualinas, and semblances, and mostly if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that is recounted and does not benefit him from any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and is not frail and finds a great deal of heat, then cauterize it with another cautery besides that one a little. And then cauterize that over the horn of his head with a cautery until the bone is parted. Incise the bone and uncover the quantity which we have recounted and cauterize that with a cautery in the back part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and that is the place in which a leech is placed. And alleviate your hand in this, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient by this suffers a great deal of pain different from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And I say this cautery in its place, because whoever cauterizes with the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occiput are cauterized, is more subtle than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
Of cauterization of  non-ancient hernia.
When pain in the side of the head occurs, or pain is extended into the eye, it is evacuated with medicines that modify the head, and another cure is administered, which I have said in the divisions of the diseases; and if none of this is helpful, then cauterization in it is in two ways: either cauterization with acute and burning medicine, or with iron.
But cauterization with burning medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and scrape it and separate the extremities of it from both ends. And then incise the place of the pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until there is a place made in it below the bone, until it is hidden.
And then strengthen over it with a stopped constriction, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then untie it and take away the alum, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then place over it a poultice submerged in butter until the place makes a scab.
And then cure this with a gargle until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the two treatises of burning medicines.
But cauterization with iron according to this manner: ignite a cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a clavilh, because the head of it is as shaped as a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small eminence.
And then place over the place of the pain, and keep your hand — so that the artery which is below is not burned — and revolve the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it which is burned by the sharpness of the bone is so much that most of it, then remove your hand so that the artery which is below is not burned, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
And then imbibe a poultice in salt water and place it over the place, and leave it for three days; and then place a poultice ground with butter, and then cure with a gargle until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize with the extremity of the cutellary according to the cautery, and guard yourself from incision of the artery in this hernia properly non-ancient.
Chapter Four.
Of cauterization of ancient hernia.
When you cure a hernia with that which we have said of the previous cure, and that which we have said in the divisions of the diseases, and if none of the cure is helpful, and sometimes because of the illness that does not suffice for it that which we have said of the first cauterization with medicine or of the cauterization with fire, then it is that you ignite the cutellary cautery until it is white-hot, because it signifies over the place of the pain with a line of length of which most of it, or whichever one; and remove your hand for a moment and strengthen that before you incise the artery and reach until the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the mandible, which is harmful to chewing, and that the muscle be not burned and the nerve which feels that, and that it does not become a spasm.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is incised, because in the incision of it there is fear, and more so to him who ignores what is done and is not studious and experienced; and leaves the operation in it at the beginning.
And I will come with a remembrance of the regiment of the flow of blood accidents of the artery according to its manner, in its place in this book.
And if you see of this illness that this cautery does not suffice and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you are, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter of the cautery having two handles, and this cauterization is better and more convenient.
Chapter V.
Of cauterization of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain from heat and it is cured with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have said in the division, and the pain is not removed, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one which has a point, of which this is the form:
And when you point it to the ignition, and it is moved around the entire ear as a wheel is rolled, or in the circuit of whichever part if the pain is in whichever. Lengthen it with the cautery from the root of the ear little by little as if you were feeling the place with your finger.
And if the cautery of ten points in the entire ear, and that one, and then cure the places while they are healing.
Chapter VI.
Of cauterization of tumors.
A tumor which is cured and by cauterization is only of the kinds which come from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the kind that arises from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that kind of tumor with leeches and purgatives and washes, and if you do not find comfort in your cure, then you should cauterize the tumor with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little below its temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery for the opposite of the diseased part, because softening does not come except in the part that is healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with the cautery in the right of the extremity of the ear, as sovereign a little above the corner of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger, and rest your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the species of the cord is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the cutler, the form of which is oppositely placed. But however, more subtle is that one a little as if you were seeing; and where the handle in it of superfluous thickness a little.
And then cure the place with that which is oppositely proceeded until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of cauterization of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you cure that with the water which we have said and you do not find comfort in your medication and the malady has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: above all the horns of its head; and with cautery and the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with cautery in the groin. And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said.
And already it is cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then it should be cured with the water which proceeds.
Chapter VIII.
Of cauterization of oblivion made by phlegm.
And if they should be given to the patient at the beginning leeches large and pills the service modifying.
And then shave the head of the whole patient and place on the groin of him a plaster of cente described in the treatise of the plasters.
And place that some times, for that is the manner of cauterization. And do water according to that same order which I have already said.
And therefore, if by those he is healed, well; and if not, then make to him three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which are descending from the most sovereign part of the head into the part more below the neck. And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cautery with the water which proceeds.
But if you add it and the malady is water tolerant, then make to him cauteries in the middle place; and if you want more addition, then cauterize that above the two horns.
And then cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive according to the form previously given.
Chapter IX.
Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of the whole body.
And that you proceed in the modification of the head with leeches and with the water which we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with the cautery in the middle place of the head, and with cautery above all the horns of the head, and with cautery above the rear part of it, and with three cauteries upon the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the malady of softening of the body of too much that and the maladies tolerant and the malady is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries upon the vertebrae of the back, and certainly with cautery until it is burned of the cord of it, and elevate your hand. And then take care of the one inside that is healing, and this cauterize with olive oil.
Chapter X.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized, but epilepsy is from phlegm.
And therefore, whoever modifies the brain of him at the beginning with years and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is great and is tolerating the excess of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer  guarguarsmes and masticators to the servant brain, before that for a few days, with the blessing of the foods.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle location of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery in the nape of his neck, and on each horn of his head cauterize. And if the patient is strong and is tolerating, then cauterize that with cauteries the ones which I have said, having paralytically and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And cauterize with olive oil according to what is preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then pause cauterization subtle according to this manner.
Chapter XI.
Of cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are humidities corrupted and phlegm thick, then cauterize that with the cauteries which we have said in the having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink water that purifies the brain of him according to what has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a proper torc of him over the circle, and then place that in the middle location of the head.
And the patient be felt to be cauterized, and be held from all parts.
And then apply liniment; and it is more worthy of bordering with wool of sheep. And warm that over the fire for temperate heating by measure, the one which the said suffers when it is most in him. And then put that in the middle location of the head of him in the circle, and let him inside that it is cooled.
And do this water with the patient every week once, with the other regimen of him well inside that it is healing; or if you want, cauterize that by making small points according to the best of him, unless you have the hand with a cautery so ordered: this is a species of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
And then apply that coat embedded in wool or in gray of guinea.
Chapter XII.
Of cauterization of water descending in the heel.
When to you is declared the beginning of water in the heel by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that purifies the head of him, and guard that from all humidities.
And do that suzar in bath in degu for some days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle location of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries over two temples if it is the beginning of the descent of water in two heels, or of one side if it is the beginning of the water in one heel.
Incise with cautery all the veins and arteries which are left the coden; and be the cauteries in that length in the latitude of the temples.
And guard yourself from fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see of him fluxes of blood, stop him with some medicine, the one which is to you possible.
And you will come with wisdom the one which is in the extraction of arteries and with the abscess of those and caution of fluxes of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries deliberately produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of cauterization of ancient tears.
When tears of the heels are ancient and by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluity frigid phlegmatic, then cauterize that with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water descending in the heels, and with a cautery in the middle location of the head and with two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below two bones. And if you need of addition, then cauterize that in all width of the heel's tail over the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of cauterization of stench of the nose.
When you medicate that with the water which we have said in the division and it does not profit your medication, then you equip and give to drink to the patient the cochias for three nights; and then shave the head of him, and cauterize him with a middle cautery with olive cautery. And then cauterize that with a pointed cautery with two cauteries above the two eyebrows, leaving the hair a little.
And guard yourself from the arc that you do not burn that.
And of the pointed cautery this is the form.
Chapter XV.
Of cautery for softening eyelids of the wheels.
When the eyelid of the wheel is softened by illness or by humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in all part, and be elongated from the temples. And be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too much your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid be cauterized.
Chapter XVI.
Of cautery of the eyelid of the wheel when the hairs are converted to the parts of them and pierce the wheel.
When the hairs of the wheel are converted to the parts of them so that they pierce the wheel, cauterize in those in two manners, because cauterize or is with fire or is with medicine comburent.
If with cautery of it with fire, command the patient in front of it that he see his hairs as those which they are washed, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if you pierce that of them, then you strengthen the wheels of it with a bandage so that it is not bad until the hairs are born.
Therefore, as they are born and equalized, then place the head of the patient in your see, and then send over the eyelid of the wheels of it with a tent, with a sign which is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the sign near the hairs.
And then place a poultice embedded in a white of egg or in a mucilage of ptilli on the wheel.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it.
And then cauterize over the figure which you have signed, little by little, in several times, until the surface of the codena which is as a myrtle leaf, be entirely burned properly.
And sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the wheel already be contracted and the hairs of it be elevated above the puncture of the wheel.
And therefore elevate your hand and leave it for three days, and then place over it a poultice with border until the scabra be eradicated. And then cure it with an enguent until it be healed.
But if it returns for the hairs any cause to their puncture and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery over that all as you had done first.
But if the hairs are in the eyelid of it, then cauterize that until it be elevated to its natural place and be equalized and that the hairs do not pierce the wheel.
But the cautery with medicine comburent this is that you command the patient that he see the hairs until they are prolonged and equalized, and then be made of a cloth the form of a myrtle leaf.
And then take of known soap and of live cause a un. i., i., or that, and then mix those causes well, and make it with a festinacio so that it not be frozen; and then expand it of it over the cloth which is made as the form of a myrtle leaf, and place it over the one wheel or with both; and place over the wheel a poultice embedded in a white of egg, and the head of the patient be in your see.
And place the said over the medicine and press it a little and no the mauguas until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, because bite is in it as of fire.
And therefore as he will perceive that the other bite, then leave the medicine and make it with your said; therefore as ceases the bite, then remove the medicine and wash the wheel with water; and then consider if times the eyelid is already lifted as it is washed above the constriction with fire or with incision, because then it is well; and if it returns over that of the medicine on the place in which it has not put the medicine and does not degrade until it be equalized your operation and be contracted the wheel.
And then place over it a poultice with border until the scabra of the adhesion be eradicated, and then cure it with an enguent deafinicon or with another until it be healed.
And it is necessary to you, above your operation that you guard with pervigil diligence that in the wheel does not fall re of the medicine, and if the eyelid apropos some days is softened and some cause of the hairs pierce in the wheel, then iterate your medicine over that place the which of the eyelid is softened, and properly as you have done at the beginning, and then enaviro it until it be healed.
And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
And know that the wheels of men are diversified according to the magnitude and the smallness, and therefore according to that is made your constriction.
And no one will be concealed the way of rightness to him who is studying in this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of cauterization of fistula that is in the lacrimal of the heel.
When you cure a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of the illnesses and do not confer your cure, then you must cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to put his head in your lap, and hold the head of him some minister between your hands in such a manner that it is not troubled nor agitated with his head.
And then place a cloth soaked in oil or in a poultice of ptilli on the heel of him.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
Which is concave, as is the form of a reed or a vulture's feather, from one extremity of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it be penetrating into the other extremity. And if you wish, let it be sorted as it tends.
But however, that which is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it blood and dry that. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and keep with that your hand a little distance from the cautery of the heel to the part of the nose, so that it does not burn your hand or the patient be troubled, and then place the cautery on the grains of the heel and corrupt that.
And therefore if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if it is necessary; and leave it so for three days, and then place on it a cloth with border and surround it with an exsiccating enguent until it is healed.
But if after eleven days it is not healed, then place on it a medicine sharp and corrosive until the bone is uncovered and it is scraped according to what you have ordained in your chapter.
And there is another manner of cauterizing a fistula which some first said:  Insert into the place of the fistula and make a hole there and then place in that fissure a fine cautery of which this is the form: And pour into that the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and keep your hand with the cautery with good retention, and do not trouble the patient so that the melted lead does not reach the heel of him; and when you place on the heel of the patient a cloth soaked in oil or in water, because lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said of the cauterization and the cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer trauc from the nose and reduce the fistula to the core of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
Of cauterization of the fissure of the potz.
Many times fissures occur in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
Therefore, as you cure those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and it does not profit your cure, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form which is:
And let its concavity be according to the fineness of a cottle.
Then place that init carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then cure that with cerotz until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there happens an abscess and then it breaks, and then it is old, and pus flows and a fistula is made, and then you cure that and your cure does not profit, then you must ignite a cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then place that ignited in the tract of the fistula, and keep your hand so that it reaches the iron ignited to the bottom of it, and at the back of it do so once or twice; and then cure that with the water that we have said of the cure until it is healed.
And therefore if the pus is abscised and is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and host the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
Of cauterization of the teeth and of softening of the angivas.
When the angivas are softened by humidity and the teeth are bad, and you cure those with medicines and it does not profit, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then ignite the cautery the form of which will come close so that you place the point on the tooth and introduce into that the ignited cautery quickly, and keep your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being reached.
And then take your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to what you wish.
And then the patient gargles with salt water and keeps it for an hour, then spits it out, because the bad tooth is stopped, the gums are softened and the corrupted humidity is dried.
Chapter XXI.
Of cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is a worm in it, or it does not respond to treatment with medicine, then cauterization is done in that tooth in two ways: cauterization with a cow's horn or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with horn is that you take the horn of a cow and heat it in a blacksmith's forge, and then take a handle and wrap it around the tip of the horn, and then immerse that in the heated horn, and place it on the painful tooth, pressing it firmly until it is seared.
And then repeat this several times until the force of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or cloth in the heated horn, and place it on the painful tooth, and place a red-hot iron on top of it until the iron reaches the edge of the cavity of the tooth.
But however, cauterization with fire is that you attend to the handle of the iron or the metal, and it has some thickness in it, and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cauterizer, the shape of which will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cauterizer is seared; and do this several times because the pain is reduced either on that day or the next day.
And cover that, by the application of that cauterizer, the patient gargles with warm water and keeps it for an hour, and then spits it out; and this is the shape of the cauterizer.
And cauterize with whichever extremity you wish, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
Of cauterization of extrophulos.
When extrophulos are of phlegm and humors that are cold and do not respond to digestion by medicines and you wish to digest them slightly, then you ignite the cauterizer whose shape is this following, having two thick extremities so that the smoke of the cauterizer can escape through the other extremity, and place it on that abscess once, and another if you deem it necessary, until it reaches the edge of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cauterizer according to the size of the abscess, and then leave it for three days and place a cloth soaked in warm water on top of it until the water that the fire has combusted is reduced.
And then treat this with gargles and compresses and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
Of cauterization of sore throat and constriction of the throat.
When the humors come upon the throat, and most when this is of cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that of the root of the larynx in the depressed area.
And be careful that you do not reach the cauterizer to the larynx nor burn the soft tissue of it except a little.
And cauterize that with another cauterizer at the junction of the neck in the lower vertebra of it. And the cauterizer of it be a pointed one according to the previous manner.
And then treat this with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
Of cauterization of lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are of cold humors and the patient has no fever or phlegm and it is an old illness, then cauterize that with two cauterizers on the breastbone in the depressed areas of the ribs and sternum; and with another cauterizer in the middle of the foot between the two toes; and be the cauterizer pointed according to the previous form.
And if you wish, be your cauterization pointed with the cauterizer that is called a point, the shape of which you have seen in the cauterization of ear pain.
And make points within those; and then treat this with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
And may the cauterizer have three ramps so that cauterization is done in this way: at one time you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
Of cauterization of the tithing that is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humors and it is not fixed at the time of its return to its place, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation before it returns to its place, and through a small movement it is dislocated as it should, as we have testified, then first reduce the dislocation, and the patient is placed on his back or on his side; and then elevate the tissue that is in the front part of the cheek to the lower parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated on the front part.
And then light the cautery having two heads; and this is its shape:
And then cauterize the chain while it penetrates one into the other; and the figure of cauterization will then be of four cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because they are the cauteries viii.
And then place on the cautery porys cuytz with salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb not be harmed for any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is at the parts above and tart is done, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery clavilh or with motz cauteris puntan, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of cauterization of the stomach.
When there comes in the stomach fire and many humidities that that extract from its complexion and so multiply raumas in it, and if you continue the ways of cure and do not confer it, then it comes that the patient is upon his two supinations, and extends his arms and his thighs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery left the foot for the quantity of a finger with cautery clavilh, and with two cauteries left of the two sides of the cautery, until the figure of cautery triangular; and elongate between those that are not adjusted that they will make poyredura.
And if the depth of the cautery the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the chain.
And be the figure of the cautery according to this form ses addicio, And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And be cauterized the stomach punctan ad aquel that of this cautery is spaventat: and it is that you senhes over the stomach point according to the quantity that you want with tent, and then cauterize that with cautery in the points; and then cure that with the cure qu’es precedita until it is sanat.
Chapter XXVII.
Of cauterization of the liver fire.
When there comes in the liver pain for fire, or for humidity, or for gross windiness, until its normal complexion is cast by superfluous egress, and it is cured the patient with that which we have said and do not confer it, then it comes that the patient is supinated upon his neck, and senhes with tent three cauteries according to this form and this quantity metess over the liver left of the ipocondres, the hon perve the decubit of man.
And be the space the which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and be the cautery according to the length of the straight body.
And do not comprehend your with the cautery mot.
And if the quantity of that which is adhurit the quantity of the majority of the specitut of the chain, and there be no pus adjusted; and if the patient standing upon the feet of him; and if it is not standing, then be jassent, the which already has extended his thighs, and elevate his arms.
And it is to you possible that cauterize these cauteries with cautery cutellar, when it is with you subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard you that too much you do not process in the cauterization, and be adhurit the specitut of all the chain so that it be adhurit all the body and pervengua into the bowels, for the chain here is subtle; and sapias that.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of perforation of abscess of the liver with cautery.
When there comes an incision or abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient atrobo gravitates and pain ses acuitat.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with the pain is acuitat great and times that already afatiguatz the doctors the cure of him.
Therefore, cove that the patient is reversed upon his neck; and then senhes the location of the abscess with tent; and then light the cautery the which is assembled to rag, the form of which a precedit in the other page. And cauterize with that i cautery until all the chain be comborida, until it pervengua to the ciphac, until in yesca sania.
And then cure that by cure of the other abscesses until it is sanat.
And do not cove that of this form of cautery use sino that of which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the mas of which many malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit upon this operation, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, and it is miels.
Chapter XXIX.
Of cauterization of pleurisy.
The ancients said that cauteries of the roots of aristology were used to cauterize according to this manner, and this is the one that you should take from the roots of aristology long and dry a root long and thin that is found, and it should be the thickness of the finger.
And then submerge that in oil and heat that in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the clavicle and the neck; and with two small cauteries, I have guided, one slightly sloping to the side that is right of the beard, and with two cauteries in that which is sloping between the fifth rib and the shoulder blade, sloping slightly to the sides behind; and another cautery in the middle location of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries of the sides behind; and one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulder blades, and with two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, besides the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
And in the cover that you understand your hand with the cautery, then it should be in the manifest of the code in work.
And already said some ancients that some of the men who use cauteries of iron resembling a ray and ignite that, and put that in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and it is forged healthy, thus as we have said in the abscess of the thigh.
But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, because it dies as soon as it is applied to the location of the fistula to which there is no healing.
Chapter .xxx.
Of the cauterization of the spleen.
When you cure the illness of the spleen with what we have said of the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize in it is according to three manners, all of which are straight, of which one is that you make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the thigh, the figure of which has preceded.
And be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the thigh equally.
And do not compress your hand with the cautery; and the patient be placed on his back.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, so it is that you ignite the cautery having two vergences, the cause of which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the code which is in the straight line of the spleen the horn to reach the lying of the left patient.
And be the elevation with which you elevate the code according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the latitude of the body.
And then, between the two vergences, ignite the hot, in that entrance where with those you penetrate the code from the other part.
And then, having extracted the cautery; and therefore are made four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with a cautery having three vergences.
And then you cure the cautery because it should have been laid aside for too many days, because it is more convenient than the other causes preceding in the cure.
Chapter .xxxI.
Of cauterization of hydrops.
Cauterize not in catz in hydrops but in alcinte3 properly.
When you cure the hydrops with the manners of cure which we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then cover that you cauterize with four cauteries in the circuit of the navel and with one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the thigh, and another cautery on the spleen, and with two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and a cautery in the right foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the code.
And then leave the cautery open so that it gets laid aside for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from cure after the cautery with what cover so that two understandings may be added to it, and it is festooned to it with the help of healing.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized is clavilh according to the form of which is used before, and it is the one with which the back is cauterized is olivar according to what is precedent to its form.
Chapter .xxxII.
Of cauterization of feet and of the thighs.
When the feet are abscesses in hydrops and are filled with watery pus, cover that you cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in nocrati, which is between the auricular and the anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist that; and then elevate your hand, and do not return that of all, because the watery pus remains.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on the two thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh be made cautery with the extremity of the cautery cutellar. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh; and let one be placed above and the other below the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
And then cure it with those causes that have been said.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of cauterization of the belly.
When the belly is due to cold and humidity that should be within the virtues, so is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with these ways of curing and not confering, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization to exhibit virtue, then cauterize it with a large cautery on their stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries in the circuit of the navel subtle, with a subtle cautery clavilh; and with cautery on the alcatin over alozis great, or with two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humidities are exuberant and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize it on the pentinilh and on the intestines, and firmly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal regions, for it is a perfect cure of benefit from which you will not err.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors cold or of corrupted humidities, and they are cured with what has been said in the division and not confering your cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus below the small of the back and small triangular, and with cautery above the navel cays by two digits.
And if you suspect that the stomach of him be cold and his food not digested, and the face of him sometimes pale, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and with a cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen with a cautery clavilh, and leave the cautery open for some time, and then cure him while he is healing.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of cauterization of a boil near the abscess of it.
When you abscess a boil, then you ignite the cautery that is assembled to a ray. Then introduce that ignited one into that abscess, and end your hand until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if the boils are too many, then cauterize each one according to what we have recounted, and then cure those with what you confer to them of the unguents until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the alcatin, it is more beneficial.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature of the lower parts of him.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recounted in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, be healed with cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the lower part, and it is old, corroded with pus and corrupted humors, and therefore that which is most worthy is that you probe it with a subtle probe, and then know the quantity of the depth of it with the previously mentioned probe.
Then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. And then introduce that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the probe enters.
And iterate over that cautery inside until those corrupted parts are burned once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And guard yourself from burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or the intestines, then guard yourself from all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.
And then cure the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the materials are cut from it, and remain so for a long time, then you know that it is healed entirely.
And if the materials are not from it, then you know that it is penetrating or in the preon of it the corrupted, or comes from those causes of which remembrance will come in its place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of cauterization of the boils.
When in the boils it is necessary pain due to cold or thick windiness, and by this the patient's groin is inflamed, then you should cauterize it on the boils with a cautery on each boil with a cautery clavilh of which we previously mentioned the remembrance.
And firmly cauterize them with the second one a little, so that there will be three cauteries lined, and then they will be more beneficial.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder is weakened and softened by cold and humidity so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area on the part left over the bladder, the side where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left side of it.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the knots of the pouch; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
And cauterize with a pointed cautery according to what is processed.
Chapter .xxxix.
Of the cauterization of the thigh.
When cold and humidity come into the thigh, and therefore pregnancy is prohibited, and the menses of her are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs in the place where they come, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the place left over from the back, or with two cauteries, and be the cautery pointed.
Chapter .xl.
Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip.
When moist humors are poured into the part of the hip, and are caused by the inflammation of its place, and a sign of it is that the thigh is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is felt in it where it is raised.
Therefore, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the part of the hip of him with a cautery in a circle shape, as you will have felt with your finger in the circuit of the part as it is turned, and so that the part falls in the middle of the circle.
And be the cautery of which preceded the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize that with three cauteries with a large olive cautery.
And be made the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the whole bone; and take care of that while it is healing.
Chapter .xli.
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the part of the hip, and it is caused by cold and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said and do not confer, and this is ancient, then it is necessary that you lance the patient of thick humors with fetid pills or with artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: the cautery with burning medicines, or the cautery with fire.
It is according to two scientific manners, of which one is that you cauterize that on the part of the hip of him with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make with those a good depth. And be the spaces the which is between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the olive cautery or large.
Sometimes, however, the cautery is on the middle part over the head of the hip so that there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which is preceded the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, that is, a circle containing and burning the thickness of the whole bone.
And this is the manner of cauterizing the sciatica when pain is adherent to the hip and does not extend into the thigh.
But if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh on the place where you feel the pain of the patient; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers a little below the fleshy part.
And if the cautery is a knife, and be the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the bone.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends into the place near the toes, then cauterize that here where you feel it with a cautery for three points or four or more if it is necessary of that.
And if the patient feels pain below the hip and towards the thigh, then cauterize that here with a knife cautery.
And guard yourself in all cauterization that you do not end with the cautery as much as you burn nerves or large arteries, and that by that to you is over the patient no harm or contraction.
And you have already seen one or another of those who cauterized on the hip and ended in the cauterization, and the leg burned inflated until the tumor reached the foot, and burning and corrupted the whole foot. And then a strong acid solution of the belly, and by that death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise ones said in the cauterization of the hip, a cautery of which this is the manner: make a circle of iron whose circuit is the majority of a palm; and be its orifice according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
And within that circle make another third; and let the space which is between them be the quantity of the night of the foot; and let those circles be open on two sides; and let the length of those cages be a night or two nights, and make in those margins of iron decently adorned in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then let it be ignited in the fire until it becomes red and throws sparks, and then let it be placed on the part of the ankle, the patient lying on their side. And therefore cauterize that with three red-hot cauteries at once.
And then leave that for three days; then plaster that with butter and leave the wound open for too many days; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Says Albucasis: O, sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the terror of its appearance, and for that reason we have found few who guard over it.
May the cauteries to those who suffer them, and those who are treated with it, be few.
But cauteries with medicinal ointments are that you make two circles having a perforated arm in which they should place the handle of the iron gate; let the length of the sides in the breadth of them be two nights or as many as those.
And if the space which is between them be the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and let them be open below and above, and let them contain themselves between them according to this form:
And then place your hand over the part of the ankle; the patient lying on their side, and compress your hand over the part of the ankle; and then take of warm water and pour it between the two circles, and the quality of that be with the small fire little by little, and keep that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the biting and burning of it — for that biting is so as of fire — until the biting ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the warm water from all the ankle with cool water.
And then leave that for three days and place upon that butter until the blackness of the burning is removed, and leave that for some days, and it will run from it pus; this is the end in healing.
And then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or the leg, make to it a statue in it which contains water as it is made in the ankle equally.
And this is the manner of warm water, and you have already written that in the treatise of the rectification of medicines. Take of alkali and of caustic, of each one part, and mix them and place them in a new vessel of which the lower part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
And place below the bottom of the vessel another vessel inverted, and pour upon that alkali and caustic warm water which covers them for a finger, and as soon as you compress them with your hand for good compression, and leave the vessel that descends from it water sharp in the lower part of the inverted vessel.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over other caustic and other renewed alkali, for that the hour is of strong sharpness, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for operation does of fire.
And so of the medicines some with which is cauterized much, as tezzizic and honey anacrat and caustic with sabao in such a way that they are mixed.
And Gualia recounts of an ancient man the operation and cure with which is cured pain of ankle and of sciatic vein, and magnifies much being of that, and says that there is no need of other cure, and that it is healed for one time as it recounts, for strong he that intertwine in bath and already sees of that.
And it is that it be taken of green fig, and if it is not found green, be taken recent fig; and much be minced with a little of grease and be placed upon the ankle in which is the pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and be bound.
And be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels cessation of the burning.
And then put that in bath and once the body of it be red, put that in the sun, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
And know that no one should use cauteries with these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
But already Escorides says that when with the wound of goat the sciatic vein is cauterized, it profits him very well; and let the cautery be with it according to this manner: take wool and be it dipped in old oil, and be placed between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
And then take dry goat's wound and inflame that with fire until it be made charcoal; and place it upon the wool and leave it until it be extended. And then iterate that, and do not cease to do that until the feeling of the biting reaches into the ankle and repauses the pain.
And this manner of cautery is called cautery of goats.
Chapter .xlii.
Of cauterization of pain of the back.
Sometimes pain is in the back for various causes, such as by blows or percussion or by excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, by infusion of cold and humid matter.
And cauterize not otherwise than in this single species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the patient with pills fitted and similar to them, which are made on the back in which is the pain three lines following the width of it, because you have with each line five cauteries or more, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
And let cauterization be made with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries with a medial cautery clove according to this form:
Chapter .xliii.
Of cauterization at the beginning of jaundice.
Often this illness befalls young children; and a sign of its beginning in children is that they accidentially stumble upon their structure in the ale and raise and move it.
And it appears in the last vertebra of the back and of its nodes that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that with a cautery that is circular according to this form: that presses the cautery over all parts of the vertebra evenly.
And if you wish, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with the pointed cautery two or three lines. And let the points be close together.
And after cure the place until it is healed with what we have said.
But beware that cauterization is not administered in jaundice that is made by spasm of a nerve.
Chapter .xliv.
Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore as gout caused by cold is cured by method of cure and not only the pains are removed, then the pains are removed by cauterization.
And it is that you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And let it be an olive cautery of which this is the form of it:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the tendons or to the other joints, and this many times happens, then cauterize that on each tendon with three or four cauteries of all parts with this olive cautery.
And if many cauteries that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize that and do not press too much your hand with the cautery before, be only around the form of the bone.
And if the pains rise into the tendon of the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the muscles only, and it is called suagra, then prick in the circuit of the fossae as they turn, prick in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick in the circuit of the fossae on each node and on the knuckle of the hand.
And if the pains rise to certain joints in the elbows or to the muscles, then cauterize those of all parts of the joints.
And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done good regimen and the flacma is evacuated with this cautery it is healed, God help.
Chapter .xlv.
Of cauterization of ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestines appear before the hernia, and this begins to approach, then you command the patient to leave their food in their day and use of lenitive causes so that the wound descends from their belly.
And after follow the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to keep his leg until it is thrown or the hernia or the intestines appear.
And after return that with your fingers and feel with ten the rupture on the bone of the pelvis with a sign the extremity of which is similar to the majority of a circle on the upper parts of the body.
And after ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it:
until it is very hot and throws sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery over that sign with your hand holding the cautery straight, and you must insert that into the space between the bones of the penile shaft into the middle of the urethra; and repeat with that other time if you haven't succeeded in the first attempt to insert the bone.
And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during the cauterization, so that you do not burn the intestine so that on the patient there does not come death or other great harm.
And know that when you with the cautery do not touch the bones, do not consider your operation.
And know that the cautery of children should be subtle according to their size and measure.
And then care for the location of the cautery for three days with a border until the scar of the fire is healed.
And then care for that with the other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient shall lie on their back for forty days until the location and the plague are sealed.
And know that you should pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time of his healing, which lines his belly, and that the intestine does not come out from the effort of healing.
And then when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer a decent amount of food, and keep that for another forty days.
And be moderate in work and repletion of food and drink, and of voice vehemently, for when he uses this regimen of healing entirely he will be healed.
And you say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want them not to pull, then cauterize the rupture of that with a round cautery according to the quantity of it, and it should be that which is exhumed from the chain as if the third part of it; and then care for that with what we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And already some first ones say that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with a tent:
And it is placed a line that goes by the latitude in the part most superior of the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter .xlvi.
Of cauterization of torsion.
When in some members by accident or by percussion pain and that pain persists for a long time and does not confer to the cure with medicines, then know that you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And be the cautery of every member according to its magnitude and its smallness, and its virtue and weakness, and location of torsion and pain of it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, well is; and if not, then repeat on it the cautery; for by custom of those pains is that they are pointed members to that member which approaches to it, so that know that you should cauterize those until the patient is healed.
Chapter .xlvii.
Of cauterization of leprosy.
Leprosy some times with cautery for great benefit, and more so if the species of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And therefore, as you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and has that cured with what we have said in the division and do not say, nor is it, and fear that the corruption comprehends the whole body of it and the whole complexion of it, then cauterize that on the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle place of the head, and the second farther from it, and the front to the end of the hairs; and two on two horns; and one behind, on the nape or service.
And finish your hand with the cautery a little while until it impresses on the bone a small impression, and from it the scabs are displaced, so that the expiration of gross vapors is relieved from it; and cauterize on the flesh according to what is necessary.
And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then know that you should cauterize that with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and with a cautery on the extremity of the nose, and with two cauteries on the two cheekbones, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the rib, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and with two on the knees, and one on each knee, and with two on the elbows, and with two on the muscles, and with two on the tendons of their feet; and cauterize that on all the joints of the fingers of the hands and feet, and on each heel of their feet, and on the hollows of their hands.
And guard yourself from the nerves which are on the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis and with another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that as much as you adjust cauteries, so much is more beneficial and more conferring; and know that the patient does not have in the cautery pain, as if they have their own, for so the body of it is already stupefied.
And the size of the cauteries should be great or few according to the limbs and joints according to what was said before about the kinds of instruments.
And then cure the cauteries with flour of herbs mixed with honey and the other cure within which it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of the cauterization of stupor.
When some limb is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that numbed limb with cauteries according to what merits the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the thickness of the bone a little. And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes cauterization is done on some stupor which originates in the hips and feet, and in the vertebrae of the lower back and where the nerves emerge that move that limb, and the stupor is removed.
But do not presume about this more than he who is wise in the anatomy of the limbs and the egress of the nerves of the whole body moving.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the cauterization of ulcers that are mortified.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize over that with a cautery, preon a little, according to the quantity of the thickness of the bone, until it is removed the whiteness and the color of it, and the color of it is changed.
And then cure that with flour of herbs and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and blood of dove or blood of round, from each one a part and all are mixed, and then let a linen cloth be laid and placed on the location until it is healed.
Chapter L.
Of the cauterization of a boil.
When a boil begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize that with a circular cautery around its circuit, as it is revolved.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle location; but to me, this is not seen, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is more straightforward that it be cauterized in its circuit with a circle, as we have said, or with pointed cauteries.
Chapter LI.
Of the cauterization of abscesses.
When some abscess is delayed in maturation, and thus it is because of the superfluity that makes it, or because of the patient's age, because he is old or decrepit, of little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize in its circuit with small pointed cauteries; and then let that be, because it will have hastened in maturation.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it: and place that in the middle location of the abscess until it penetrates the bone.
And if the cautery in that location that is farthest, so that the body of the arm be relieved; and then cure that until it is healed.
Chapter LII.
Of the cauterization of a rodent.
A rodent is a corruption that walks in the limb, which corrodes that as if a fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that rodent in a location that suffers cauterization with fire, then you ignite cauteries, small and pointed, a few, and large according to what is convenient in that location where the rodent is.
And then cauterize that from all parts until you eradicate all the corruption and no cause of it remains.
And then leave that for three days, and place over the cauterized locations a cloth soaked in oil mixed until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption.
And then cure that with ointments that generate flesh.
But if after three days you see that the flesh grows healthy in which there is no corruption, well; but if not, then repeat the cautery over that which is raw in the corrupted locations.
And a rodent is medicated some times with sharp medicine, because that is placed in the location of cautery. But however, cauterization with fire is of more lighter help.
And I have already said the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when from it you will have need.
Chapter LIII.
Of the cauterization of claws and of other similar things.
Many times there is a malady that is called a claw in the lower parts of the foot, and it is a large, deep cause, which bends the foot; and cauterization in those is done in two ways, so it is cauterization with fire and cauterization with boiling water.
But cauterization with fire is that you ignite the cautery concave, similar to the beak of a vulture, which be made of iron according to the quantity which contains the claw from all parts, and be of subtle margins.
And then place that lit [object] on the key, and then turn your hand with the cautery around the key until the cautery reaches the depth of the key. And leave it for three days until it begins to sweat. And then plaster it with wild herbs crushed with salt, and leave the plaster on it for one night, so that it is eradicated from its roots.
And then cure the area with a rinse of generative flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not converted, and many times it happens on the surface of the body, mostly in the arms and feet, then you must administer cauterization in those with water, and that you take a tube of lead or iron or a vulture's feather, and place it on the key; and then put in the tube a small quantity of water, and hold your hand, and you turn it with compression of your hand of all, and press the edge of the tube in the root of the key, and it will absorb the small amount of water through the vein of the root of the key; and wait for the patient a little bit the bite of the small amount of water for an hour, and then remove it, because the key with its roots is eradicated.
And thus do it to those and the other until you come over all of them in the body.
And then cure those pus that the roots of the keys are eradicated with this of the rinses that the flesh generates.
Chapter .liiii.
Of cauterization of tremor.
When someone has a tremor due to fire in the nerve or fever of a burning cause, or by another similar cause, then you must cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with a cautery; and with cautery on the feet of him, and on his stomach, with olive cautery.
And the tremor of him is rested and hastened the health of the burning illness.
Chapter .lv.
Of cauterization of white accidents in the body.
When in the body there are white spots, and they are pustules split that are made of coarse corrupted matters; therefore, at the beginning when it appears, it must be cauterized over all the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with myrtle twigs, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of long erestologia; or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized additionally at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and if they are not believed, and the superfluity is broken, they do those, and it heals from those.
But however, it must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter lvi.
Of cauterization of blood flow accident by incision of artery.
Many times there is a blood flow from an artery that is incised, the wound which must be closed, or the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and then similar, and it is difficult to remove that.
Therefore, when it happens to someone, then you must cover with your hand the orifice of the artery, and place on it your finger, pressing it tightly many times until the flow of blood stops from your finger, and that it does not come out.
And then place in the fire the few and large olive cauteries, by number many, and exhale over them while they are burning.
And then take from those one small or one large according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein, quickly, pus that you have removed your finger, and place the cautery until it is cauterized and restricted that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries that in the fire are prepared, and therefore do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is restricted.
And guard yourself that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it comes upon the patient another evil.
And know that when from the artery blood flows, then it is not possible in those to restrict the blood, and especially when the artery is large, if not by one of four ways: or by cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of him are well burned and the blood is restricted, or that it is tied with a thread or with a ligament for strong structure, or that medicines are placed on it whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and they are tightened with a cushion with decent constriction.
But he who administers decent restriction of him with a ligament and with structure with cloths or by position of burning causes and similar things, do not confer otherwise than briefly.
But if this happens to someone and the physician is not present nor medicine, then open with the placement of the finger indicated on the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it until the blood is stopped from the sovereign part of the wound, and on the artery the finger is not removed; and over the artery be sprinkled with cold water of great frigidity until the blood is coagulated and thickened; and more sew in that which must be cauterized or of medicine necessity.
Of incisions and perforations and ventoses and of phlebotomy and of poultices and their kinds.
We have already said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which it is convenient to use a cauterizing fire and medicine that is burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary in those with the forms of the cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters of the sovereignty of the head among the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in that same manner, so that the one who wants it may be helped, when they have asked for it.
And first of all, know, my sons, that in this chapter it is about the things that are in the first chapter of cauterization.
And because of this, know that great caution must be exercised, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many times the evacuation of blood is necessary, which is the lifeblood, and the sprinkling of the vein or incision over the abscess or opening of the fistula or purification of the ulcer or extraction of the arrow or incision of the stone and their kinds. And of all those, fear and trembling are accompanied, and in the hands of them, the death of the patient.
And I admonish you that you should not fall into that which is a state of being, for sometimes the case demands that you handle the affairs of men with many manners of illnesses. And of these, some will go away with their illness and it is lighter for them to die, and thus because of the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and because of the length of their illness, and with the illness is fear, which means death.
And of those, it is the one who gives to you his wealth and property, you expecting with that health, and his illness is pernicious.
And therefore, you should not consent to that one who comes to you of whom this manner is; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and your greed; and do not presume any cause about this except with certain knowledge which verifies this, and to which by the way, a praiseworthy success will follow.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses, prognosis and indication of them, to which health is converted, for in that, you are helped in the acquisition of fame and memory, of praise, and of glory.
O, sons, may God inspire in you his understanding and guide you in direction and protection, for that is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter, distinguishing it by chapters, as it preceded in the chapter of cauteries, of the care of the head among the feet, so that you may be helped with what you ask for and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
Of the cure of the water which is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness often happens to children during childbirth and when the midwife tightens the head of the child, its vitality is affected.
And sometimes it happens for a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this illness except in children; and to all those whom I have seen, death came, and thus it is that I have seen the abandoned work in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always so magnified that he could not sit on himself because of the greatness of his head, and more than that, the humidity increased until it died of fire.
And this humidity is either added between the bone and the bone, or it is added after the bone above the skull.
Because the operation in that, if the humidity is between the bone and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should do in the middle place of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and the length of the fissure be two nights until the humidity runs, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore, if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two fissures according to this manner:
And if the humidity is after the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open from all parts and the water is squeezed when you compress that with your hand to the parts of the head and it is not hidden from you. Know that you should do in the middle place of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the humidity; and after strengthen the fissures with cloths and cotton; and after embroil that above with wine and oil until the fifth day, and after untie the bandage and cure the wound with tents and ointments, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the limb be comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, which you should consider according to the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess appears and the repletion of the water, and do it according to what is best for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood and death to the patient by that flow of blood during the evacuation of moisture.
Second Chapter.
When a catarrh or wound occurs in the foot or leg, and it does not get better with treatment, and the medicine does not help, then the last resort is the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries, the patient raises their head, and you press the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries are apparent, and you tightly bind the patient's neck with some cloth; and you consider where the vein is; and the places of each one are above the places which are near the ears, and they are hidden unless in some men.
And then you press on the artery with your finger, and you cut each one with a sharp pointed spatula, making the incision reach into the bone, and this is done by the width of the head.
And if you wish, you put the spatula inside the artery and break it at the incisions at the upper parts.
And the length of the incision is about two fingers' width, because when any vein is incised, the blood is emitted with pulsatile egress, which jumps out by frequent jumps.
But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then you measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then you press with your finger, and make the incision into the bone.
And this is the quantity of blood that you should get rid of is the quantity of one ounce. And do not get more or less than this, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and the repletion of the artery of him.
And then consider the plaque, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the cicatrix, then incise it so that it does not become a cautery abscess.
And then strengthen the plaque with cotton and bandages of cloth, and care for it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter .iii.
Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When a certain kind of ancient migraine or catarrh occurs, due to humors and quality in the nerves of the temples, or a sudden and violent headache and similar to those, and it is treated with the customary methods of medicine and this does not help, then we resort to these ailments the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
And the way of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient raises their hair where it is in the temples; and understand the artery appearing in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden unless in few men by the violence of the flesh.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient is tightly bound with some cloth; and then press the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears to you manifestly. And then you take the spatula of which this is the form: And then you scrape the flesh with that with ease until you reach the artery; and then you put it in there and extract that at the superior parts until you extract that from the flesh and discover that of the tunics which are below that, entirely.
But if the artery is subtle, then you wrap that with the tip of the finger, and then you cut it from that one part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are elongated and contracted, and it will not cause a flow of blood, because if it is not incised it will not raise the blood from all.
And then evacuate the blood of one ounce. within three.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie that in two places with a double strong cord or with long ropes, and do not let it putrefy before the consolidation of the plaque and cause a flow of blood.
And then you cut the superfluity which is between the two ligaments; and do this either at that hour or at another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery into the bone with a cautery cutter until the extremities of it are incised, and stay in the place of that same work.
And it is a better work if the patient has a fever or is of a hot complexion; because cauterization is of those causes that help the final humors, and therefore it is better in judgment.
And cover after the extraction of the arteries that you have placed the area of the incision, and that it be covered with decent powder, and then it is cured with dry medicines that make the flesh rise and with ointments until it heals.
And if while you work another vein becomes a flow of blood from the artery, then you must take care to restrain that blood, either with a cautery, or by what you cover the area of the incision, and strengthen your hand until it is restrained. And if none of those causes are present, then place your finger on the area while the blood is coagulating, and apply water of great coldness to the area while the sharpness remains, and tighten it according to the need.
And that which is lighter in the extraction of artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, because you have marked the two places with a probe, and pause a little, not igniting, until they reach the bone and dissect the vein in two places, so that it is elongated that which is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated altogether with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two handles is at the same time. But however, if it is less sharpness that two handles is better, because if it is sharp with two handles it approaches every burning, and it does not dissect the flesh with velocity.
Therefore, as in those there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in those and the flesh is lightly abcised.
And this work is better in all works and lighter.
And the spaces which are between two handles the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Chapter Fourth.
Of the cure of the bodies of acute and sour ulcers of the heels.
When the ulcers are sour, and the bodies of those veins which are on the test of the head of the heel, and do not confer in that any cause of the cure of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already reddens and feels in their forehead walking as if it were walking of ants, and the heels of that are exhausted, humid so that already the hairs of them are known, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient agro mixtures in the cure of those of this operation, and number that cure with spassa.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hairs which are on their forehead, and then dissect in the forehead three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little of the movement of the lacert which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other part.
And guard yourself of the incision of the arteries which are in two places, and elongate your hand of the continuation of both the jaws. And if the space of each incision the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
And if to you a piece of sponge dressed or cloths dried not with which you dry the blood.
And then insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: which is from the part of the temples into the second incision. Excoriate with that all the tissue which is between two incisions with the  ciphasc which is on the bone, and then make that of the middle incision into the second incision. And then straze with this spatula and insert into the first incision another time an instrument which is called a cutellar, sharp on one part and on the other not sharp.
And pause the side of that sharp of the flesh annexed of the tissue, and the side of it leon dintz the bone, and push that until it reaches the middle fissure, and dissect with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But that the incision be continued to that which appears of the tissue, and then make that in the middle fissure into the other fissure.
And because it runs from the blood quantity equal, express the places of the pieces of the coagulated blood.
And then pause in each fissure calgua of old cloth, and pause over those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, and vegas that it does not become pus caut.
And on the third day untie the bandage and administer great infusion of hot water or tea, and then cure that with an enguent of bazilicon with rubbed oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of ulcers by catartz and on the heels descending from the parts dintz of the head.
When it comes to a certain catartz sharp and continuing, and sometimes the heels of the patient exhausted small, and already the regard of them is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and of their case the hairs, and in the forehead of the head is acute pain leading and exhaustion consequent, then you know by these accidents that the matters and catartz do not come but from very veins of the parts dintz proceeding.
And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to shave their forehead, and then dissect in that one fissure in the middle place of the forehead, a little by the latitude (and begins with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and be incision into the bone; and elongate your hand of the lacert of the temples which are maugutz of the mastication), until it be the bone uncovered.
Exsicca all the blood with sponge or with dry cloth and then repleys between the two lips of the fissure with old cloth or with linen rags. And then tighten them above with powders mixed in wine and oil so that it does not become a purulent abscess afterwards.
And when you untie it and see that the abscess has already diminished, then cover it with a poultice that begins to grow flesh, and then cure it with a drying regimen that makes the flesh grow, such as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix it, and make a poultice of it and apply it to these wounds at the birth of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
Of the cure of that which catz in the ears.
Every cause that catz in the ears is one of four species, whether it is mineral stone or a similar cause like iron and lead, or it is of a plant like thistle or bean, or it is a fluid cause like wine and vinegar and their likes, or some beast.
And therefore when stone catz in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit or grow in the ear, and place the ear in the sunlight, and if you see the stone, then distill into it some cause of violet oil or sesame, and then administer the extract of it, and make the patient snort with a condition, and plug the nostrils to prevent the event of snorting. And then place in the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the parts above, for many times it is forced-driven with these causes.
And if it is not driven out, then administer the extract of it with the instrument called the gesti epicicarios subtil of which this is the form:
And if it is driven out with the gesti, well is it; and if not, then administer the extract of it with a subtle onci of little duplication.
And therefore if it is not driven out by this, then make a canula of brass and introduce the extremity of the canula into the tract of the ear and close around the canula with wax and softened oil so that it is not open except the canula. And then extract with your wind with strong suction, for many times like the water that we have recounted.
But if it is not driven out in this manner, then take of halka illuminated or of vecz apparelled with which birds are taken a small quantity, and place that in the extremity of a ray, and then envelop over that well-placed cot. And then introduce that into the tract of the ear with facility, and then dry the ear of the humidity.
And therefore if it is not driven out with all the causes which we have recounted, then you must cut it before it becomes a purulent abscess or spasm.
And the manner of cutting it is that you at the beginning lances the patient from the cephalic vein and extract blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make that cauterize between your hands and convert the ear to the parts above, and finish with a small incision in the root of the ear, over the gray of it in the well-pricked place. And let the incision be of lunar figure until it reaches the stone, and, the stone being broken, extract it with appropriate instruments; and then close the incision in that hour with velocity, and cure it while it is healing.
And if the cause catz in the ear is one of the greases that grows and inflates, then administer the cure and the extract of it; but if it does not obey your advice and so, then you take a subtle spatula according to this form: and administer with that the abscess of that grease which is catz in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place that in many pieces, and then extract it with the oncis or with the subtle gesti, or with the incision as we have said, for the extract is relieved.
But in the water which is introduced into the ear when the patient uses sneezing with a condition at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cot, and pour over that ear which is the water, and if it is driven out by this, well is it; and if not, then take many small stones and lions according to the length of the said, and calfa those in the fire a little, and the patient introduces one of those into the tract of his ear and jumps on one foot of that part and percussion with another stone on the stone which is within the ear. Therefore do not cease this with stone until all the water is driven out.
Therefore do not cease this with stone until all the water is driven out. And already the water is driven out so that you take paper or of gonc, i.e., and put one extremity of it in the ear and extend the other extremity with fire until it is burned the most of it.
And then put another gonc and do this so many times until all the water is driven out, and straights that with a canula as it has been said of the stone extractor.
But in the extraction of beast entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, as well as its likeness, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of a large thing which causes to appear at the bottom of the vessel, then administer the extract of it with gesti and oncis, and the cause of it is lighter of all the other causes that catz in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations and do not compare your treatment, then you must watch the ear in the sun.
And therefore if here appears any cause of worms, then extract them with tweezers or with subtle instruments, but if there appears no cause, then take a cannula that is narrow at the beginning and wide at the end, the shape of which is like this: And introduce the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can bear; and then suck with that by strong suction, and do this several times, until all the worms are ejected.
But if you do not obey to this, then you plug and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been tried in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise of distillations.
And it is your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the shape: And make it of silver or of brass, narrow at the beginning, with a small hole, and flat at the end.
And therefore it is as if they were pushing it into the concavity of the cannula as is necessary here. And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it in the end decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the concavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or water that you want of these medicines into the cannula — and that is in the ear — and then introduce the reed with cotton underneath and express it with your hand with moderate compression of it until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is infused into the ear be already scalded with fire a little. And guard yourself that the cause which you distill into the ear be not too cold, for the medicines of the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter .vii.
Of the cure of ear-wax.
Sometimes, some children are born with their ears unperforated, and this sometimes happens to some men, earwax in the meat of the ear due to plague or flesh that grows in that; and this earwax sometimes is made in the preon of the tube of the ear which does not allow the hearing, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the preon of it, which does not allow hearing, is in the greatest dispositions of difficult cure.
And in that one in which you achieve hearing, then you must place the ear of the patient in the sun and watch it. And therefore if you see earwax appearing, open it with a subtle spatula of which this is the shape:
If the extremity of it, in which the latitude is small, one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula is of two lengths, so that it does not make a hole in the ear.
And therefore if the earwax is due to flesh born in the ear or in the meat of it, then you take that with subtle instruments and cut it with vehement facility until it is removed all the flesh.
And if the earwax is in the preon of the ear, then take a subtle reed long and scald it with fire a little, and then put that in the meat of the ear.
And therefore if you have felt earwax with that which the patient feels with facility, by the weight of the ear, exert the oppression of it with facility; and guard yourself that you do not plague the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a cloth according to the quantity of the width of the tube which you have enveloped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or that you take some and put it in water and pulverize it over it, seeing that it is thrice-distilled and use of it; and if you see the ear already being suppurated, then you must extract the pus and replace it with another one which you have enveloped in cerot that is made with rose oil, until the suppurating abscess yields; and cure that until it is healed.
But if there happens a flux of blood, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear, and use of the other cure which restricts the flux of blood, which is said in the treatise of distillations.
Chapter .viii.
Of the cure of athazil which develops to the eyelids.
Athazil which develops to the eyelids of the eyes sometimes is humid, sometimes is dry.
Therefore, when you have those with tweezers or with an instrument, and you cut them with a spatula from their roots, and then place over the places the thrice-distilled.
But if there is pain with a flux of blood, then you cauterize those with a subtle lancet cautery.
And the best cauterization is to place it on the incisions and several times return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter .ix.
Cure of great swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Many ailments occur in the eyelids of the eyes, some of which are assembled into a great swelling and hardness, and because of its size, it is called.
And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid below and above.
Therefore, the operation in them is that you consider it so when the swelling is proceeding in it, that apart from the eyelid and is harmful to all parts; and the cause of it is lighter.
Therefore, fen on it with a fissure through the width, and then drain that from all parts with ease while it escapes, and then suspend that with an onion and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with suture; and cure that while it is healing.
And if it is little, to you will not come harm for that because the angent of it restores that and incarnates.
And if the swelling is declining to the parts within the eyelid, you should scrape the surface within, then you raise the eyelid and suspend the swelling with an onion, another that you indigested of incision, and press that from all parts, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, that is not noticed in any cause.
And after the incision, wash the eyes with salt water; and cure the place with water that incarnates while it is healing.
Chapter .x.
Of the cure of the above eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath is gray which is generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and mostly occurs in children, it aggravates the eyes of those and accedes to their cataracts the most; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because of that because tears are joined to those.
And because of that, those times to make those on their faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; and to the eyelids of their below the eyebrows are humid, the ones that have already covered inflammation, and imminence of accernac appears in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel accernac within those.
And some manner of operation is in that which the patient puts his head in your, and then put cloth on him and make a poultice of it, and make of it a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach from all parts, and then put that on it and press with your fingers from all so that it be aggregated arcernac in the middle of the circle, and then make in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incident with fissure through the width, and the fissure not be larger than the fissure that is made in flaubotomia.
But in the preon cove that you make the code all while you reach to arcernach, because in the most serious processes arcernach by fissure according to the form of grayseza blanca.
Therefore, extract that with cloths the ones that you have enveloped between your fingers to the parties of fore and revolve between the right and left hand while it be dispersed.
And guard yourself that you do not adjust in the fissure so that with the spatula you do not reach the eye and scratch it.
But if it does not appear to you arternach at the beginning of the fissure, but that you adjust in the fissure a little with facility while it processes arternach; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths of it in water and vi agre and put them on the place and strengthen those with poultices.
And so those who press salt and put that in the concavity of the fissure so that that which is remade of that humidity.
And then cure that while it is healing.
But if it happens in the place apostema caut, then cure that with poultices cedatils while it is healing.
Chapter .xi.
Of manners of touching the eye.
When in the eyelids of the eyes it is born because of the adjusted below the natural hairs and they are antiquated, then those to the eye and make become manners of ailments as such as tears frequent and softening of eyelids and web while that is cause of destruction of the eye that is called tactinir of the eye, and cure is in four manners: or by cauteri with fire; or with acute medicine according to that before is said in the chapter of cauteri; or is made atactini by incision and suture; or by canes according to that I say.
And therefore cove that you put the head of the patient in your, then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, it is good; and if not, then introduce a needle into it in the which be faithful of the part below of the eyelid, and make penetrate the needle with faithful below, and that be — near the margin of the eyelid in which naysso the hairs — near the hairs, and pull the faithful to the parts below with the eyelid, and convert it with the ray.
And then make in the part within of the eyelid below the hairs adjusted with spatula incident of the lacrimal major into the lacrimal mendre; and then extract the faithful and put below the eyelid small powders of coto or of cloth, and then send on the eyelid with tent, and be as such as figure of leaf of myrtle.
But however, the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because this is already diversified in men, because of those who are indigenous that should be incised of the eyelid a great quantity according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
And then push with the spatula on the two lines that you have made, and begin from the larger lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal. And if your fissure is near the natural hairs as is the thickness of the king.
And then put the ounce in one of the two angles of the bone, and then scrape that whole thing, and then adjust with the incision the two lips with a thread or a fine wool thread, and cleanse the blood, and make adhere that which superflous of the threads on two eyebrows with some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and otherwise, do not care.
And then remove the suture of the threads within three days or four, and then care for that.
And if you want, leave the plaque its suture, and care for that with that which dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated of the sealing of the plaque and the addition of it; but suture is better. And therefore I say this differently from the ancients of taxation.
But however, there should be solicitude over the patient, and it is of good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And it is another way in taxation, and it is that senhes on the eyelid figure as a myrtle leaf, and then elevates the eyelid with three uncis separated and congregated according to this form:
But if it is not possible this, have the uncis, and that is not equal, then take a needle in which there is a thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and introduce the other thread near the larger lacrimal, and the other thread near the smaller lacrimal, and adjust between those said threads with equality, and then with those elevate your hand with equal elevation, elevate the whole bone on which it is marked as we have recounted.
And then adjust the two lips of the plaque with suture, and care for that until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs due to your incision or your fissure, then treat that abscess with cerot and similar things, and with ointments.
And some times it happens that the eyelid that its hairs are converted, then it is necessary to use in that of what we have said of incision; but suture in some is more artificial.
To taxinir with canes is according to this form: And it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure which is detailed according to what I have recounted; and then by art make two canes or two subtle splints of which length be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them be less than the width of the spatula. And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
And then add each one with subtlety over that which superflous of the eyelid of the hull, and constrict the canes of each part with strong stricture, and leave that for some days, because the bone by the stricture will die and will be denied and will be able to be pulled in until by itself it falls.
But if it is late, then break it with the tongs, and then care for the plaque until it is healed.
Therefore, as it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this form: And have the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
Of elevation of prickly hairs in the hull with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and prickly in the hull, then the operation in it is that you take a subtle needle and put in it a thread of fine cedar and linen, and then that you adjust the extremities of it and noze them in a way very subtle. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of a palm.
And then you compose another subtle thread below it in brief, and nuza the extremities of that if you want.
And then place the patient their head in your lap, and be near the sun so that your work be declared, because it is subtle and delicate operation.
And then introduce the needle in the root of the hair adjusted which has need of ingenuity, and make that penetrate into the eyelid gently until you extract that from under the natural hair.
And then pull the hair under and introduce that into the alixati, and be the hairs one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand with that until the hair be outside-rotated with alixolati in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if it is thrown alixalati and it is not rotated the hair, you will throw alixati to the parts below with the thread which you have composed with that, until in it be thrown alixalati of the above.
And keep that with the vision of the hull, because then you will throw alixati and the thread, and grotan some and close the hull, and leave the clos for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place and is born on that good flesh.
And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a longer skin from the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that, or that you let it enter until it is lengthened in a certain space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cure of the cataract that comes in the upper eyelid.
When it comes in the pupil and is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted upwards, or to the right or to the left side, by bad consolidation of a plaque or of a cautery, and it is called leporina, and this cataract is either natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of a plaque or of cauteries, or by something similar to their malcuratz.
The manner of the operation on it is that you make that consolidation and that you separate the lips of it, and you put in it in that which is between those a piece of cloth, and you tie those together until they are healed.
And do not use of cure of it of the causes which dry it, constrict; because if you do that it returns cataract worse than at no time you would have it.
Use in that of causes that soften it as is fenugreek, and embroiled with the water in which they are cooked altea and its seeds, or enguent dyaquilon, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submergeys in that the cloth, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all engine that is not consolidated according to the form that you had at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is nothing but any rectification of cataract that does not return the form of the place according to what you had before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of cataract that is made in the lower eyelid.
This cataract which is made in the lower eyelid, which is truly named cataract; and it is of it some natural, other accidental.
More accidental is made by plaque or by scissura or by cautery or by others similar.
And the way of the operation of it is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and you put that in the flesh, and that you make it pass from the lacrimal of the left into the lacrimal right, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the parts above with the needle and stitch that with the needle, and inscise with a wide spatula. And therefore if it returns the figure of the eyelid according to what cove, well is; and if not, take the ray and put that in the figured fissure, and with that converts the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the side of the lower eyelid.
And be the extremities of the two fissures of two angles of the incision, which you have made until they meet, and be of their made angle until when they congregate be made figure of them.
And this figure is Greek letter: the lambda.
And then put the flesh that by the amount that is the edge of it acute below of it, that which  seals the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and stitch those with the thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said of the softening medicines and of the poultices until it is healed.
And if cataract ends by fissure or suture or cautery, then cove that you make with a flat fissure over the hairs of the eyelid according to what is preceded. And then separate with the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the sum of the sermon of the cure of cataract when it is above or below, that run in it operation, according to what is prepared of the form of cataract, and that is in form of motas diversity.
And the artificers savi all times prepares engine in each manner which is possible to it until it makes return the figure to the natural form, or near that, and that patient according to what to him convenes of the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many men in such a way that the eyelid is more above with the album of the pupil, and is forbidden of the facility of movement and of its natural works, then cove that you enter the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and elevate that upwards, or extend that with the unci.
And then you inscise the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which not be with the sharpness of the incisions, have obtuse a little so that the patient not be disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula that it does not damage the pupil with its sharpness.
And be your incision that excoriate that adhesion with facility until it is returned the eyelid according to its natural form and that it is healed all the adhesion.
And then you put in the pupil salt water with which you wash it; or distill in it of zunia dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the pupil with a poultice of it, and put on the pupil wool infused in album of egg, and then the third day use of consolidating causes until it is healed.
Chapter .xvi.
Of the incision of the nail and the prominence of the flesh of the lacrimals.
Know that the nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous, and it is like a hard, thin cypress; or it is non-nervous, resembling white, congealed humidity, which, when you touch it, it is forced to take on a color, it is cut off and the color does not go into it.
And both kinds do not begin except from the larger lacrimal, inside which it goes little by little that it covers the sight and prohibits the light and the movement of the eye.
But the manner of working in the incision of it is that the patient places his head in the low, then opens his eyes, and elevates the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail with a small, double-edged scalpel and extend it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and introduce into it a piece of horsehair or cowhide or wax, or something similar, or double the end of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with thread; and extend it to the upper parts, and scrape with the skin the side of the nail which lies close to the pupil. And thus you follow it with the thread until the end of it.
And then you incise the remaining part in the root of the lacrimal with a fine spatula or with small scissors, and leave the flesh of the lacrimal natural so that by incision of it no continuous flow of tears should occur.
And sometimes the nail, with the sole edge extended or tied, as we have said, and then it is scraped with a spatula lion of which this is the form:
And guard yourself that with the spatula you do not touch the cornea tunic and that there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then the incision is put in the eye a little salt ground or a piece of boiled sinia, and leave it for another day; and then cure it with water that covers it until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle, nor is it put into it the scalpel, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed as I and recommend in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a fine spatula lion of acute steel according to this form: with fineness. And if you see that it is rarified and confused and placed in that root, then distill from your hour in the eye of boiled sinia or with boiled rog or with salt ground, and close the eye for another day.
And then repeat over that the operation until it is removed all the water that is from it, otherwise that the contrary abscess will be in the eye, for then you leave it, and cure at the beginning the abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation over it with reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it is felt in the eye for great harm, be suspended with a scalpel; and incise it from that one part, and do not end the incision so that no flow of tears is incised.
And then distill into the lacrimal boiled rog and boiled sinia until it is healed.
Chapter .xvii.
Of the incision of a sty and of the water that is born from flesh adjusted in the eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some, flesh red is born, and it is over-placed until it covers the pupil, or it approaches or strains over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the sides and is assembled to a rose of balustrade.
But the operation in it is that the patient places his head in the low, and then opens the eyes of that one and collects all that flesh with suitable scalpels to water, and you to water with a forceps or with a basket; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until all is finished with the scissors, and guard yourself from the eye that you do not damage it with your operation.
And be your incision with the one with which you incise those or with the spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which the ascebel is collected according to what will come the form of it in this chapter.
Therefore, as the incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the eye with ground salt, or distill into it powdered rog and similar to it of the corrosive medicines, and place over the eye outside a cloth with album of egg until it is secured of abscess caut.
And if there remain any cause of sty and it is lordly abscess caut, and you fear abscess caut, then leave the eye and cure that abscess with water that yields that abscess, and then repeat over it with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which occurs in the eye of this kind.
But however you cover that all cure of the eye steel by natural or accidental way, operate with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is suffering that operation.
Chapter xviii.
Of the collection of urine in the bladder.
Urine flows through veins which are located on the bladder and prohibit the passage of urine, and the bladder is lengthened over days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the bladder in which urine is present is strong and in it there is no other illness besides urine, then you collect that urine.
And it is that you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a cloth or with two, according to your prudence; and let that cloth be of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two cloths gradually in one body according to this form:
And then those veins are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and cleanse the blood hour by hour, while those veins are being removed from the bladder and are being rolled up.
And guard yourself that you do not lead the bladder with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the afternoon before the sun, and be firm in your operation that you do not injure but those veins.
And when you will have finished, then you distill into the bladder chief green or red for that with its sharpness corrodes the water that is removed from the urine.
But if that water is not to you possible to collect all in that hour, then you plaster all with water that yields the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is calmed and that it is assured of cauterization.
And then iterate on it according to the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the shears:
Chapter xix.
Of the reduction of arizati to the nose.
When you cure arisati with cautery or with sharp medicine according to what is preceded the narration of it and it is not healed, then it is not born in it but that you make over the abscess you take the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the power until it is discovered the bone.
And therefore, when it is discovered the bone and sometimes in it corruption or blackness, then you root it with a instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named of sharp cap, and it is made of iron, and it is the cap rounded as to grasp it which is made pointed by the point of a file or with a chisel by subtle point (as it is in the following form).
And pause that over the corrupted place of the bone, and then revolve that between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped.
And that be done several times, and then restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Therefore, if the place is consolidated and there is born good flesh in it and the body of the wound is separated and remains for forty days, and it is not renewed and it is not festering and you do not happen in it accident, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is not in it born but to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover of second bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and as soon as it is discovered the bone, then you take a tribe according to this form:
Let the extremity of it be triangular, and the shaft of it be prime extended at the extremity as sometimes so.
And then pause that over the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little of the bladder, and then revolve your hand with the tribe until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient as soon as it finds wind to exit by it when your hand.
Therefore, then restore the place with astringent drying medicines as you have been taught.
Therefore, as soon as the flesh and the place are endured, then the matter which flowed to the foreparts returns to the nose, therefore that is lighter over the patient.
Chapter xx.
Of the reduction of the prominence of the bladder.
When the bladder protrudes with its entirety and does not happen in the passage harmful or diminution, then cover that you relax the patient, and then you follow it, and then you pause windy in the neck its scarification and suck by good suction; and then pause over the bladder liniment which is made of  acatra and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster over the bladder with motz powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of lions motz, and each cloth be duplicated in four folds; and make of those motz.
And then pause those one over the other according to the quantity of which the bladder has need. And then strengthen over those with a hard cloth with strong structure; and iterate the ventosa with suction its scarification; and then remove the ventosa and leave the bladder straight the day and the night.
But if meanwhile the ligament is softened, then cover that it be very straight.
And then remove the ligament near the day and the night as we have said.
And if sometimes the bladder already be reduced, well is, and if not, then iterate the plaster with the powders and the stricture and the ventosa until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of the incision of the eminence of the tunic uvea.
When there is a rupture in the tunic uvea, and it is prominent and protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of rasim, and the shape of man is formed by it, and you want to cut it, then the operation in it is as we have recounted, that you introduce the needle into the root of the uvea from the part below to the part above, and then place the other needle, which is double thread, on the lacrimal side, and make it penetrate and release the first needle according to its disposition; and then cut the location of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and tighten that motion.
And then extract the needle and place it over the wool thread infused in the album of egg and release it until the thread falls into the uvea.
And then cure the wool with water that comforts it until the plague is healed.
And sometimes, gather from the whole part, a circle of cloth around the prominent eminence, and then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes to the edge of the wool, and run the albuminous moisture, and let the wool descend and enter quickly.
And then tighten until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of alconati.
This illness which is called alconati is nothing but a swelling which is adjusted in the wool resembling descending water and is not that.
But the manner of working in it is that you make the patient lie on the saddle arranged and straight, and then take his head in your two hands and move it so that you see the swelling come to the lower parts, and then let it dry and not descend, and keep the light, and the patient sees the causes as he sees.
And if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
But if the descent is not prepared to the swelling with the water that we have said, then make the patient lie between your hands and then take a fine spatula and finish on that over the panniculus, separating a little of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown (in the place where it is void), until the swelling is discharged.
Therefore, when it is discharged, then you distill into the wool water cauda in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey.
And then cure it with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of the descending water of the wool.
We have already said the species of the water in the division and which convenes to pierce with a sermo declaring, then that according to the health.
Now, therefore, you must make the patient lie between your hands on a cushion and tie his wool tightly.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his wool if the wool in which is the water is the left one; or on your right hand, if the wool is the right one.
And then with your right hand take the almond, if the wool is left; or with your left hand, if the wool is right.
And then place the tip of the almond near the crown for the thickness of the ray in the album of the wool from the part of the lower lacrimal, and then press the almond with virtue and revolve your hand on that.
And then penetrate into the album of the wool and feel that the almond has already arrived at the void cause.
And then, let the measure of the path of the almond to the edge be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the wool; for you will see with that pupil the vision of the wool by the clarity of the tunic cornea.
And then place the almond into the place where is the water, and then you throw it down once, then another, and then if the water descends quickly, then immediately wet the patient's wool with water, and the almond in his wool.
And then rest for a while; then if the water has descended, then you remove that other time before the almond is thrown.
And then when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the almond with ease, and revolve it with your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a little of clear salt of gemma and with that wash the wool from within; and then place outside the wool a cotton or a wool infused in rose oil and egg album and lick the wool with water.
But not those who are of our time, place on that with commi trissat with egg album.
And if you do not obey your almond to the entrance of the wool because of its hardness — for it is some of the men whose wool is hard a lot — then you must take the spatula which is called alberid of which this is the form:
And then pierce with that that conjunction, and do not end your hand in the trace, and it is not if you do not make a path for the almond location subtle.
And then introduce the almond as we have said.
And you must complete the work, be prepared for the patient to sleep comfortably in a bed made in a dark room, and be prohibited from all movements.
And pause in his nature so that his nature may be cleansed, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
And be the bandage according to his disposition within the third day.
And then unwrap that in that dark room and prohibit the sight of the wound, and make him see some causes, and then return the bandage within the seventh day.
And do not cover that which you have done at the hour of the cures or as soon as the infusion. You must cover that so that the water may lightly pass through with great and vehement regard.
But if an abscess occurs, then you must unwrap the wound before the seventh day, and rectify that with water that yields pus.
Then you shall cover the sight of him and pause over his face oral so that his movement be regulated, leaving him for some days, him existing in the dark room.
And then be taken from that room gradually and converse in his causes.
And know that in alchemy the disciple is not excused from vision some times, and then you shall be bold about the operation.
And already has it come to us from some of those who are at Artach, and some said that he made fire in the Ayrac magdaam perforated with the which water is sucked.
But however, I have not seen in our land anyone who had perfected water, nor have I read about it in some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is novel.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that it may be over those who ignore those:
And they are made of iron or of iron properly, and their extremities are with this triangular subtlety, the acute extremity thus as it is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose are born diverse flesh growths from which some cause is assembled like a scorpion of moth's weight, or a polyp weighty; and this malady is called polyp because it is in resemblance of that weight represented. And of this is cancerous flesh, a lapping, of a dusky color; and of this is that flesh leon not of a dusky color.
Therefore in that which is in these leon flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must make the patient be between your hands and placed in the sunlight, and uncover his nostrils, and prick your own finger in those flesh. And then extract that to the foreparts, and then incise that which you have comprehended of those with a sharp and subtle spatula of one part until you know that all the flesh has been removed; that if there remains of it any cause of which the abscission is possible, then you root that with one of the subtle instruments with facility until of it remains no cause. But if it bleeds or an abscess occurs, then you pause to him what you must; or if it is of the malignant abscesses, then you cut and cauterize that until it is cut off and the cavities are all removed.
And then be put in the nose after the incision a little wine and water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that from within him is flesh wound in the pus that soars bones of the nostrils to which it has not reached abscission.
Therefore then you must introduce a thread of linen into which there is some thickness, and weave in it moth's wool, and place between each wool the quantity of the finger or less, and engage the patient and introduce one extremity of the thread into the nostril with the ray or with other cause which is to him possible.
And as that will have been done, that he may throw his odor into until it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and be spit upon his throat, because troops of times the resemblance to this action do the children in the schools, and it is lighter cause to him who wants to do it.
And then pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity which issues over the nose and the other which remains in the nose, and then administer a lock of flesh with the wools that are in the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already among the wools of the thread.
And then extract the thread, and pause in the nose after the abstraction of the blood a poultice, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that is remaining of the flesh.
And then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a tube of lead for some days until it is healed.
But if you desire of cure that which requires, use of that.
And this is the form of the instrument to capipurge maker with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nostrils:
And make it of silver or of iron, which is similar to a small open lamp, thus as a small conch, and the meat similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a pipe, and the tube of the instrument to be used for purging be flat, uncovered; to which have a handle at the back of it, with which you hold it when you pour into it oil or water as you wish of the suckable causes.
Chapter XXV.
Of the ills in the extremities of the nose.
Many times the pain in the extremities of the nose is manifested, and is magnified and lamented on some days, when it is not seen to be looked after.
And for that reason, you should investigate that at the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all of it. And then place on the spot a cautery or a medicine that is burning, the one that is in place of it.
But if the incision is delayed until it is magnified, then consider if it is calcified, hard, of a dark color, and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron for it is a dangerous abscess; for many times the one who incides this abscess must endure great malice from the one who had it.
And if the abscess is of a lion's touch and not of a dark color, and sometimes when incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and incise it without fear, and cure the spot with water that exudes and constrict within that it be healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of suturing the nose and the lips and the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by similar things.
Know that when an accident occurs dissolving continuity in one of these cartilages, pay little confidence in that operation unless in some men.
Therefore, when it becomes necessary for anyone to have any of these causes, consider if it is fresh plague with its blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with suture, and then take care of it until it is healed.
And if the lips of the dissolved continuity are already separated, and each is made healthy, then you must scrape each part of its apparent edge until blood comes out. And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen them, and over the powder sprinkle dragon's blood and a thin layer of resin, and place over the powder a piece of diaphana plaster, or some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave that tied for two or three days, and then untie it and exchange that plaster and leave it until the wounds are by themselves closed, and then take care with an enema until it is healed.
But the manner of suturing is that you add the dissolved continuity or with needles as we have recounted in the suturing of the belly, or add the dissolved continuity with thread as you have done and have known.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts between them.
Many times it becomes necessary for many men in the parts between their lips some abscesses hard like fat of worms, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, when you convert the lips and split each of those hard things completely, and then incise the abscess, fill the place with dragon's blood until the blood is restrained, and then wash it with vinegar and cure the place with water that is astringent, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of incising the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Greatly often there is a growth on the gum, flesh adjusted, which the ancients called an albulus, therefore, when you suspend that with tongs or have it with the forceps and incise it, you must cut its root, and let the blood run.
And then place on the spot dragon's blood or other astringent or drying powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for then the cautery will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the reason of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the parts between them and of the front and between the gums are adjusted rough, jagged, and some times are of black and are made yellow or green while the gum feels for this corruption and are made the teeth jagged.
And therefore, when you make the patient sit between your hands and place the head of him in your lap, and scrape the teeth in which appear those rough things and causes resembling sand until none of them remain, and this do of the blackness and of the yellowness and of the others until they are modified.
And therefore, if it is last that which is in those of the beginning of the root, it is good; and if not, then you iterate the root over those on the other day and the second and the third until it comes to the last statement in that which you want.
And know that the teeth have need of drills of diverse forms and of diverse figures according to how it is prepared for your operation. And because the razors which the tooth is scraped from the inside are other than the razors which are scraped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you must prepare as you shall see forthwith:
Chapter .xxx.
Of the Eradication of Teeth.
Know that you cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and take your time in its complete eradication, for there is no cause that should supplant the healing of it when it is eradicated, for its substance sublimates within that excuse in the eradication of it.
But know when the patient is forced to have that tooth eradicated, that you must firmly certify which tooth is the painful one, for often the pain deceives the patient and leads you to believe it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this by the operation of the barbers.
Therefore, as you must be certain which tooth is the painful one, and that you know well, then know that you must scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gum on all sides, and then with those words, or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that concucesquas.
And then, with a strong grip, hold the large forceps for good communication or great stupor, and place the head of the patient between your teeth, which you hold well so that it does not harm, and then draw the tooth according to straightness in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place that one below it on all sides with ease and exert the removal of it thus that it is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then know that you must compress of cloth that break and tighten that with the extremity of a fine ray so that it not be broken in the hour of your constriction upon that with forceps.
And know that you work exquisitely with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard well your strength that you do not break that and remain part of it, and return upon the patient for the malice that be greater than the first pain of it.
And guard yourself that you do not do that which some ignorant barbers do in their fistinacio and audacity upon the eradication of theirs, for they do not administer what we have recommended; for often times they bring upon men maladies great ones which are more difficult to be broken, and the roots of them remaugulated all, or some of those, or that you extract that with some bones of the mandible as well as many times we have testified.
And after the eradication of it, the mouth be washed with wine caut or wine agre with salt.
And if it behoves to flow of blood thereby, as often times it behoves, then apply a certain quantity of zegi and sprinkle it upon the wound, and if you do not confer that zegi, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and subtle forceps with which the tooth is mauled at the beginning be of long extremity, of short handle and thick, so that they not be bent when with those you must work.
And be as times of thick handle so that when you tighten with those they not be bent, be short extremities.
And be made of Indian iron descentment made of straight extremities, and in the extremities of those be teeth of which some introne in the others and tighten by strong constriction descent, and some times the extremities of those be the form of the beak of a bird the one which has name ciconia, so it is gaunt, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of the Eradication of Teeth and the Extraction of the Bones of the Cracked Mandibles.
When you must the eradication of a tooth which is broken remain some cause, then know that you must place upon the location a poultice with border for a day or for two until the location be mollified; and then with some instruments or forceps the extremities of which are assembled to the beak of a bird called ciconia or gaunt, the form of the forceps:
The extremities of those be made from within as a file or rasp.
And if you do not obey to your easement with these forceps or those, then know that you must cave upon the root and scrape all the flesh and insert the instrument the one which has name atali, so it is a small lever of which the form is this:
And be of short extremity thick a little, and not be bent so that it not be broken.
Therefore if by that the root be broken, well be it; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument be of triangular extremity in which there be some thickness:
The form of the second instrument be that it be triangular and of more subtle extremity.
And already so helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form near the following: And with other instruments the ones which I shall precede in the rasping of teeth; for the scraping is made with this instrument the one which is assembled to a large onion, and this is the form:
Of the triangular limb twisted or short, which is some thickness, and not enclosed so that it is not squeezed.
And know that the instruments of the moving teeth are so and similarly the other instruments.
But the artificer skilled and subtle in the art, finds for himself according to what to him signifies the operation and the diverse ailments; because they are of the ailments to which the ancients did not say nor pause proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is fractured, or if it may be, then let it be cured on that in its place with what is convenient to it of the instruments and the forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help with the gesture of which this is the form:
And let there be in it some thickness little by little, and be enclosed or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is set; and then restore the place with medicines convenient to it.
But if in the bone is a small puncture, then root that of that puncture and of its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of the teeth eminent above the others.
When the teeth are eminent not according to their natural course, for those the form is laid, and mostly when it happens to women, and mostly to the venerable old ones; therefore, because you consider: if a tooth is nothing near another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or liniment it, then root that; but that it is not annexed to another tooth, then you incise it with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to a pig's snout, and be made of Indian iron of a sharp extramitat.
And let your incision be with which you incise it in several days for the hardness of the tooth, and that it not be gnawed by another of the teeth.
And if the eminent tooth is exposed to filing, then file that with a file of Indian iron of which this is the form:
And let it all be of Indian iron and the margin well-made; and be of small sharp points as a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth be filed little by little in several days with facility, so that no other tooth be gnawed and broken. And then line that at the end, and root that with some razors.
And if the tooth of which a part is fractured and it pricks the tongue, then cover that until the sharpness of that fracture is stayed and smoothed, and be filled so that the tongue does not prick it nor the word be corrupted.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the restoration of teeth marred with filings of gold or silver.
When accidents happen to the teeth in front with concussion and removal by percussion or by fall, and the patient cannot strengthen over that which he eats, and you have cured that with stiptatic medicines, and it has not been of any avail, then because it does not break, it is made in those that are strengthened with filings of gold and not of silver, because silver becomes green and can be seen after several days, but gold at no time is changed.
And let the filings be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that it can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reccio is that you take the filing and take the double of it between two healthy teeth, and then that you curve it with two tortuosities of the filing between two marred ones, or if it is one or several, until it reaches the healthy tooth of the other side. And then iterate the teyssiment into the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and skill so that it is not marred.
And let your striccio with which you strengthen the filings be the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
And then incise the superfluous extremities of the filing with forceps or tosoys, and add those in each place with gesture, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the marred one, so that it does not make injury to the tongue. And then let it be laid so tightly like a Roman.
But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with other filings in such a manner in all their time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the rection of two healthy teeth and two marred ones, as well as sometimes these are tied:
And when it is done that a tooth or two are returned to their places after the fall of each one, and they are recurssed as we have recounted, and that they remain marred.
And that is done only by a good artificer and wise.
And sometimes it is fitted some cause of the bones of the cow, and it is made as the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves with it for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which comes from the tongue some times or is natural with which man is born, or accidental and happens by plague which is already consolidated.
And the operation on him is that men open the mouth of the patient, his head existing in the tieu se; and raise his tongue, and then cut that ligament nerve according to the latitude within which the tongue is released from its recess.
But if in that there is any hardness or knot, and that is due to the consolidation of gout, then you throw an oil and cut that according to the latitude within which you have incised the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And guard yourself that no fissure be made in the flesh of the chin and that you cut here artery and blood comes.
And then wash the traces of the incision with water or with wine or with cold water; and then place the tongue moistened; so it is the way which has the patient to keep the tongue in any night so that it is not consolidated again.
But if there occurs a flow of blood, place on the location vitriol trissat; but if the blood comes out, then cauterize the location with a cautery  which is convenient for this. And that cure with the other causes within which it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the extraction of a ranula under the tongue.
Sometimes it happens under the tongue an abscess resembling a small lump that prevents the tongue from its natural operation; and often it is magnified within which it swells the mouth.
And the operation on him is that men open the mouth of the patient sensing in front of the sun and consider the abscess.
And if you see it of a dark color or of black, hard, to which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that because it is gangrenous.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the oil in it, and cut it with a subtle spatula, and cut it from every part; and if blood comes to you in the hour of your operation, then you place above  zegi trissat, that is vitriol, within which it is restricted the blood.
And then return to your work within which you had treated it with compliment of it, within which it is washed with wine and salt; and cure that with the other cure with water within which it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
Of the extraction of an abscess of the ears and of that which is nothing in the throat and of the other abscesses.
When in the throat it is swollen, so are the glands which are assembled swollen, which sometimes happen outwards and are called boils, which when you cure them with water that we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of a reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; let it be left within which it is matured, and then either you will extract that, or it will be ruptured by itself.
And if it is of a white color, radon, and the root of it is subtle, then that is that which must be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already rested it with a complete rest or if it is diminished with some diminution; and then make the patient stand before the sun, and his head be in the tieu se, and open the mouth of him, and the servant takes between his hands pressing the tongue of him from with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it is made of silver or of brass, and it is subtle like a knife.
Therefore, as you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and gaze upon that with your eyesight, then take oil and put that in the opening, and pull that to the parts outwards as much as you can. And other water that you pull any cause of the tunics, and then cut that with the instrument of which this is the form:
And other water that you pull any cause of the tunics, and then cut that with the instrument of which this is the form: And it is assembled to forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the right of the other, very sharp, which be of iron indi embedded.
But if this instrument is not to you present, then cut that with a spatula of which this is the form of it: And it is sharp on one part, not sharp on the other part.
And since you have incised a furrow, cut the other according to this same manner of incision, and then the incision the patient gargles with cold water
But if it happens a flow of blood, gargle with water of decoction of the bark of  millefolium or of myrtle leaf and similar to that of the stiptic causes within which the flow of blood is restricted, and then cure that within which it is healed.
And sometimes naysso in the throat other abscesses other than those boils, and cut those according to what I have said in the incision of two furrows equally.
And I have already treated a woman of an abscess which was in the throat of her, which abscess tended to a dark color, of little sensation, which had already closed the throat of her, and the woman breathed with tight meat, and had already prohibited to her eating and drinking of water, and she had already arrived at death if may it had stayed for a day or for two.
And the abscess had grown so much that for two months there were two openings through which it came out.
So I cut it fistularly and stayed in one of the openings, and pulled out that one, and it came out a large portion, and then I cut that one which I understood from the other opening, and then I opened the mouth of it, and I compressed its tongue, and then I stayed the opening in that abscess.
And then I drained a large portion of it, and it was not running from it except a little blood. Therefore, the abscess of that woman was completely drained, and she immediately began to drink water and eat soft food, so I did not stop cutting into that abscess many times for a long time, and abscesses would succeed in its place, which incision would extend as long as it was.
Therefore, I inserted a needle and cauterized the opening of it, so as to prevent further addition; and then I walked around and I did not know what God had done with that, from that time.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of incision of a boil when it is abscesses.
When a catarr arises on the boil, and it is abscesses and it is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the part below thick and round, and then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and it does not compare to your cure, and then sometimes that abscess cauterized already is gone from it and it is subtle, then you should cut into that which is added round; and if it is to that length, and it is bloody, of brown color or black, and it is not to the touch, then you should attempt the incision of it, because in that there is fear about the patient.
And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you should make the patient lie down and press the tongue of it with an instrument of which you process its shape and then place the opening in the navel, and pull that down and cut into it with one of the two instruments which are said in the incision of two mills.
And you should not cut into it unless it is adjusted over the natural term of its addition, because if you cut into it more, you will damage its speaking.
And after the incision, use that which has been recommended in the incision of two mills, and cure that while it is healing.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision of it, then you should use a needle in the cauterization of it, and the manner of the cautery in it is not but with a sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient in your side, and then press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and then take from the water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and apply it with that living cause, and place it not thick nor subtle, and from that fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the shape:
Let the extramitat of its concavity in which the medicine is placed be like the concavity of a spoon of ray, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient yawns on his side so that saliva or mucus of the mouth of that flows through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend from it for any cause over the opening of it and that it is covered.
And then with your hand on the medicine, and express it on the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see it being darkened and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cotton and envelop it over the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and introduce the ray with the cotton into a tube of above until the cotton adheres to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then remove it when it dries and falls after about three days or four.
And if you wished to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and after the cauterization, cleanse the circuit of the uvula with cotton dipped in border, and modify it with that which is in the circuit of it of the medicine, and be washed with cold water, and be cured from then on with embrocation, and give gargles until it is healed.
And this kind of cure is more safe than incision and more long of fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with that which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with fumigation in this manner: take calamine, hyssop, oregano, rue, siccated arabic, chamomile, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all of those causes, or some of them, in an olla, and they be submerged in strong wine, and boil; and the olla be well washed with decent lut, and be in the middle of the olla a hole, on which be placed an instrument concave of brass according to this manner; be made of silver or of brass.
And be introduced the extremity into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula on the concha, until the uvula be somewhat obscured.
And then repeat over it many times until it is dry, and guard yourself that you do not do this cure at the beginning of the coming of abscesses, because it would too much adjust in the abscess, and do not do that, but you must declare the abscess of it cauterized.
But if you do not have this instrument at present, then take a cane and compose in the middle of it a cup of wool, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, because the wool cup prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat and of the other causes.
Many things, stuck in the throat, or thorns or any other cause.
Therefore, you must extract what of those appears, on which the gaze falls, because you press the tongue with an instrument beforehand, so that to you is declared what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is to you hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because forth, the cause annexed to the throat is thrown-up by vomiting; or make the patient swallow a piece of bread or a root of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or prepare a piece of dry sea sponge, and tie that firmly with thread, and then make the patient swallow that, because when it arrives at the place in which the thorns are and are extracted, then they are thrown-up. And yet take an eel and tie it firmly with thread, and its head is placed and its tail is extracted; or take a porcupine and its quills and its tail are extracted.
But if they are not thrown-up with those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it should be thicker than a ray, and in the middle of it there is a concavity which you introduce into the throat with ease.
And hold its head elevated upwards, and guard that the touching of its bone of the throat, so that it may be moved to its body and with that which pushes the bone or the thorn, or that the physician with his hand.
But however, that the patient that is introduced is milder, for the science of the place of the annexed cause and pushes it down, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is prepared to him before it is thrown-up.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of the extraction of blood stuck in the throat.
When blood is medicated with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and does not conform, consider then in the throat of the patient to the sun, because you have examined the tongue of him with the instrument which to you we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the blood, extract that with a small onci or with subtle gestures decently.
And if it is not possible to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and introduce that into the throat of the patient, and then place in the concavity of the cannula a burning iron, and do this as many times (until the blood is dead and is removed from the throat) and abstain the patient all day from water.
And then prepare a vessel full of cold water, and work the mouth of him in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow any of that, and evil the water one hour after another with his hand, because the blood as soon as it feels the water catches.
But if it is not thrown-up with what we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with thyme or with asafoetida by the instrument which we have recommended in the subfumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it may fall.
And there is another way of operation in the subfumigation of that, which is that you take a bowl in which there are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cover in the middle of which there is a hole, and it is composed in that hole the extremity of the instrument; and then let the subfumigation go down; and place the patient's mouth on the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the subfumigation is not thrown-up until you know that the subfumigation has arrived at the blood, because the blood as soon as it feels the subfumigation falls.
And if it does not catch, then you iterate the subfumigation many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and eat salty and spicy foods, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that with this regimen it be thrown-up.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood of the throat is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, except that in it there is some curvature: which is placed in the throat, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is gripped, in which it is sharpened with a file, so that, when grasping any cause, it does not let go.
Chapter XL.
In which is the sum of the sermon on the appearance of abscesses and in their section.
Abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to what we remember of them, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and section of them by two manners, of which one is by the species of abscesses in themselves; and by that which we grasp of the humidities.
And the second way is for the places where boils occur in the body, because the boil that occurs on the head is different from the boil that occurs on the buttocks; and the boil that occurs in the fleshy place is different from the boil that occurs in the joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
And more boils there are some that should not be pierced but rather allowed to mature by the body's own healing or by the completion of their course.
And other boils that should be drained when they are ripe, and not allowed to mature by their own course, such as boils that occur near the joints, because when a boil occurs near a joint, its being there is prolonged until the pus that is in the circuit of it is discharged, and then the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, so that it causes contraction of that limb; or it is a boil near the main member, and if you delay the drainage of it until its maturity, it will cause harm to the main member; or it is near the buttocks, therefore perforate it before it matures; and you should not perforate it crudely, before its proper digestion, but the one that is near the buttocks, so that you cannot reach the perineum of it and prolong it to the parts behind the buttocks, and make a fistula, or that it be done in a way that it is not healed. But more importantly, you should know the time of the boil's drainage, and that is when it is mature.
And know that it is mature when there is a cessation of pain and fever, and with the decrease of the redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the boil, and the other signs.
And that you should know that the drainage should be done in the place pus is coming from the boil and from the pus coming from the healing of the eminence.
And the incision should always be made along the length of the flesh or the body, whether the boils are in the parts of the limbs or the feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, lastly, in all places equal to those in which there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use the incision according to that limb.
But when the boil is in a fleshy place, then it is best to let the incision be made after its digestion has been confirmed according to its course, as we have said; because if you perforate it before that, the course of the pus is prolonged and a lot of dirt is produced, and then the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it is increased.
But some boils should be incised according to the width of the flesh or the body as necessity demands, or according to what the limb requires.
And you should administer a small incision in small boils, a large and wide or multiple sections in large boils according to the diversity of the size of the boils.
And others are of boils in which the incision should be concave and incised when it is made so that it becomes a pan and it is done in a way that it already adheres, like those that occur in groups of boils and buboes.
And of those there are those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those there are those that are incised in the way that resembles the shape of a myrtle leaf, like the boils of the armpits.
And of those there are those in which a round incision and a lunar incision, and those similar to them, are administered.
But that one to which there is no such as his boils are superficial, you should perforate it with a superficial incision, or a flat one only.
And when the boil is large and has already collected a lot of pus, that you perforate it and do not attempt to extract all the pus in that hour; having extracted one part of it, and then close the boil until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and so do this several times according to the degree until it is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is of frail virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, because the animal spirit is often resolved with the exit of the pus, and then the patient may die, and you should operate on them with caution.
And guard this chapter with great care, and in the way you perforate these boils, you should abstain from the plagues and consider therefore whether the plague of the boil is small, or a flat section, then you should administer the poultices of it or of a counter-irritant; and if the boil is large, and the fissures of the incision are many, then you should place a piece of cloth in each one until they meet.
And if in the boil a part of the skin is cut off or has been concaved in the circuit, then you should cover it with a piece of old cloth or a thread made of linen, as when you have treated pans or abscesses, with its humidity; and strengthen this on the third day; and then process this and care for it with what is necessary until it is healed.
But if there occurs a flow of blood during the operation, then you should administer cold water and vinegar in which you have soaked a piece of linen, and place this over the place of the blood flow several times.
But if the flow of blood persists, then you should administer a regimen and cure and powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and of division.
But if it is in wintertime, and the place of the abscess is a place of numb nerves, then you should infuse powders in wine and oil, and place those on the places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then you should place powders mixed with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all that be applied until the third day, as we have said, and then you should open the abscess and cleanse it and administer to its cure what is convenient to it until it is healed.
And thus is what is necessary of the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said of every abscess in what manner is the way of its cure by chapters individually.
Chapter .xli.
Of the section of abscesses which come in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are of a kind of nodes which contain tunics that are to their making; and the kinds of them are many.
And of them are pimples, and of those it is that contain humidity similar to lime. And of those are the ones that contain humidity similar to dust, and resembling to them; and of those are the ones that are stony, hard.
And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must the exterior of those does not make contrary artery.
And the operation in section of those is that you probe those with an instrument the shape of which comes near thus, which is called entromes, as long as you know that it contains.
Because if that which contains is humidity, then you should divide that with section according to the length by superficial section according to this form:
And begins in the section of the line of .B. into the line of .G. Therefore, as the humidity is evacuated, then you excoriate that skin that contains that humidity, and do not leave of that any cause of all, because troops once gone back, if there remain of that any cause.
And then you submerge the wound in Egyptian wash, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with that the wound and leave it for another day, because with that you corrode all that is broken of that skin.
And then repeat on that wound with Egyptian wash second and third time if you need it, until you are confident that there is no longer any cause of that skin; then cure the wound with wash until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should cut that according to this form: with a section having the shape of a cross, and get onces between the two lips of the section and scrape that from all parts, and exert your strength in the extraction of the tunic which contains that.
But if to your artery makes opposition, then do what I have told you first.
And similarly do in the stony abscess of section and cure according to what we have told you; and section on a stony abscess is easier, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
And sometimes there are some of these abscesses which are in the head of some men with which there is no humidity at all; the cause of which is because I incised upon an abscess in the head of an old woman and brought the abscess back as a hard, rough, white sore, which could not be pierced, and if anyone was struck with that, it would plague them.
But in the other abscesses accidents in the head other than this is not this chapter, as well as the abscesses that come to the heads of children and you must the roots of the ears, but the section of all these is superficial.
And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them so that the body be relieved of the sania in the lower parts.
And then cure those with what is convenient to that of cure.
Chapter .xlii.
Of the section of scrophulas which happen in the neck.
Many times these abscesses become in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they happen in the other parts of the body.
And those that happen in the neck, and there are many that are generated between them, and all scrofula of those is within its own tunic, and as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
And the kinds of these scrophulas are many, because of those there are some stony, and of those there are that contain humidities, and of those are malignant ones which do not obey to cure.
Therefore, in that which you see of good disposition in the Touch, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the neck, and is soft to all parts, and is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not hard, then you should incise that with superficial section from the lower part to the upper part of the body of the line of .G. into the line of .B., and scrape that from all parts, and extend the lips of the neck with onces, or with many onces if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more caution that the vein or nerve is not cut.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that you do not hurt the patient with a cut, or that you cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and you prohibited yourself from your operation, then pause in the plague vitriol crushed or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and tighten the wound, and leave that within which rests the sharpness of the abscess and be softened the wound and begin to be pus. When the blood is separated.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then inquire with your little finger if there is any cause of the other small abscesses, therefore cut those and cleanse them.
And if it is in the root of the large abscess, then cover it so that you do not cut that abscess from its root. Cover it so that you place it with a strong double bandage and let it stay until it falls by itself naturally.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you cut that abscess entirely, then cover it so that you adjust the two lips of the wound and close it as soon as pus comes out so that there is no superfluous discharge.
But if you see that there is an excess of discharge due to the size of the abscess, cover it so that you understand to cut the root of it, and remove it and administer suture and what is said.
And those of the abscesses that contain humidity, perforate it with a superficial perforation where you see the place of maturation of it, and place a perforation of it so that the pus flows from the lower part of the body, as we have said.
And then administer the perforation, washes with ointment and similar things to those, so that it corrodes what is coming from the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, then cure it with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
Of the incision of the abscess of the boil within the groin.
The ancients said this incision in the groin, and I have not seen any man in our land that it has been done.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men having a hernia, cover that the extraction of the groin be avoided, as for that it is not well done for their sake because all the veins and major arteries of the body are here.
But in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or groin or both ears, when the illness is not in the canal, cover that you use the incision of the groin to avoid the damage which is done by perforation.
Therefore, cover that when we want this, that they cut the groin below three circles of the circles of the groin, or four with a small incision for the latitude in that which is between two circles by quantity, that the incision be in the fascia, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for incision, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood of it are there.
And if the physician is fearful, cover that he extends the groin with an incision, and then open the groin until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause of them.
And then cut the fascia according to what we have recommended; and it is significant on the incision of the canal by the flame which is of that exit with what is of it disrupted and by the abscess of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, as the hour is renewed in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the groin of the wound, and stitch it alone if it is the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make flesh grow until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, the exposition is not but that you see that some of these abscesses have already opened the groin of the patient, and the patient has come into death, and the ale of it is dried up, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound for some respiration, and be saved from death.
And for that reason, I command to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice of it is for three days; and then cover that you close the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And that which I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and placed it in his groin and cut with it a part of the canal of the lung, and I was called to the cure of him, and I brought back the woman as it is mooed of the dead, and I uncovered the wound and brought back the blood which was coming out of the wound small.
Therefore, I was confessed that he had not cut a vein nor guided it, and the wind was coming out of the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
And I did not accuse the servant if not for the voice, and after some days returned to the improvement of his dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epileptic there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of incision over an abscess which happens in the throat outside, and is called a hernia of the throat.
This abscess called a hernia of the throat is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it moves in women.
And it is according to two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one it is not a matter of curing.
And the accidental one is according to two ways, one of which is similar to fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to an abscess that is made by the blockage of an artery, and in that one there is fear. And no cove that it be made presumption to it, like iron, but in that which is small. And you probe that one and investigate that one with the said, and if you find it similar to a fatty node, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise that one as the nodes, and extract that with what contains it of the skin and bursa; and if not, then you scrutinize all its being, and then care for the place with what is necessary for healing before it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of incision of the species of nodes.
Of nodes there are many species and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
And I must recount as the difference between a node and an excrescence as if making a doubt.
Therefore, I say that in an excrescence there is heat and fever and violent pains until the boiling of the superfluity is stopped; and it is a putrefaction that then ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
But in a node there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that which is in the sac proper to it.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cyst and it is made so as a vacuum, whether it is larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, whether they are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, that you examine it and inquire about it at the beginning with the instrument that is called intromes, according to how it will come its form in the chapter which is near this.
And the manner of inquiry of abscesses and of all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you revolve your said ones with that little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the core.
And then last your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the intromes and consider what is issued in the trace of it.
And if the humidity is flowing out, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial incision according to what I have said in the other abscesses.
And if from the trace of the intromes there is no humidity, then you know that it is fatty.
And dry over it with an incision having the shape of a cross according to this form: as such as I have taught you, and suspend that with tweezers, and excoriate the core from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sac, if you can, over it and extract that sania with the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many times it must be so, and then you extract it in pieces until there remains no cause from it.
Because if from it remains no cause, little or much, the node returns according to the most.
And if you see that from it remains any small part, then fill the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place on it a cautery of the abscess, and cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you sew the two lips of it and cure it with what is necessary for healing.
But if a pulsatile vein is to it contrary, or non-pulsatile, then you cauterize and fill the place of a zegi three times that is vitriol and leave it straight for two days or three until you can scar the wound and that it rests the boiling of the blood; and then return to incise that which is broken from the node.
Chapter XLVI.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary in incision and perforation.
Of those there are the forms of the intromes, and they are of three species, of which one is large, and of those one is medium, and of those one is small.
The form of the large introme is this:
The form of the small introme is this:
They shall be made of iron, of lead, of extremities well-rounded, so that they fit the entrance into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the instruments, and they are called probes, and one of them is called a berid.
And there are three kinds, of which one is large, medium, and small.
The form of the large one, its form:
The form of the medium one, its form:
The form of the small one, its form:
Convey that they are for those abscesses and fistulas and boils so that between them are of the bones and other causes.
And they are made round, thick, like needles, as with which the stitches are sewn, and they are made of citrus copper, or of tin, or of iron, or of silver, And the best ones are when they are made of citrus copper.
And they are made the instruments of black plum, the ones that are agreed that for those to be openings the fistulas in the concavity of which are reflections, that they are reflected with their lightness with those reflections.
And they are of three kinds, because some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its stricture.
Form of the large plum instrument:
Form of the medium plum instrument:
Form of the small plum instrument:
The forms of the probes are of many kinds, because of those some are simple, to which there is only one curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
And of them are curved probes, and they are of three kinds.
And of those are probes having two curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
And of them are having three curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Form of a simple small probe, form of it:
Form of a large probe having two curvatures: Form of a medium probe having two curvatures: Form of a small probe having two curvatures:
Form of a large probe having three curvatures:
Form of a medium probe having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three kinds, because some of them are large, medium, and small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of the medium scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but that it may be done carefully in the scraping of the nodes the fear of incision of vein or nerve, and that by those the malady may be healed and tranquility be restored a little by the burning which causes the scraping of the abscess.
And these are the forms of spatulas, and they are of three kinds: large, medium and small, as you see.
They are made of copper and are similar to a ray with which and made alcohol.
And it is in the lateral extremity pointed with a spatula hidden and in that it runs to the inside and outside parts, when you want, as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers during the perforation of abscesses and the patients do not perceive them, and they are of three kinds: large, medium and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of cupping glasses with which the flow of blood is removed, and they are of three kinds; large, medium and small; the forms of them:
They are made of citrus copper, round with some length, and they are subtle.
And know that these kinds of cupping glasses, great, medium and small, are so that by them the flow of blood is removed with speed in need, and then when to you first it is not medicine.
However, do not use those to remove blood in every place of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places, such as in the folds of the arms and legs, and in the folds of the breasts, and of the belly and groin, and similar to those of the fleshy, moist folds.
And sometimes they are made of those instruments other small ones resembling fish scales according to this form; by which the blood is removed when it is done by phlebotomy, or by incision of vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Chapter .xlvii.
Of the cure of the nipples of men which are assembled from women.
Sometimes the nipples of certain men are inflamed due to the compliment of sleeping as they begin to become hairy, and then the nipples are inflamed, and the nipples are assembled from women, and Roman abscesses, they are removed.
And to that one who avows this, it is necessary to cut those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B. into the line of G., and then scrape the entire thickness, and then fill the wound with a medicament of carnation, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and take care of it until it is healed.
But if the nipple leans towards the parts below and is softened by its magnitude as it should be in women, then it is cut in two halves with its surplus pus, with two sections resembling the lunar figure, of which each one should be contained in the other, as long as the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line of B. and the line of G. And then scrape the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said of the suture and the poultices, which is necessary for the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not comply with the incision of this which it is necessary to cut because of the restlessness of the patient, and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a cloth submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it until that which corrodes is removed from the gray, and then take care of it until it is healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
Of the perforation of abscesses that come from below the nipple.
These abscesses that come from below the nipple are of the species of scrofulas, hard, which contain a skin that is removed.
And of those, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity, it is necessary to be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G. to the line of B. And as it is all evacuated that is in the abscess of the healthy, then you fill it with old cloth and leave it until the next day.
And then the cloth is removed and it is cured with a suitable ointment to it, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the species of nodes and of scrofulas, then you cut it as we have said in the section about scrofulas in the same way.
But if the wound is extended in such a way that it becomes a pockmark, then administer cautery to it according to what we have said before.
Chapter .xlix.
Of the section of abscesses that happen because of artery or vein.
When an artery is ruptured, and the cord which is above it is consolidated, then many times abscesses happen. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are from the artery or vein: that when an abscess is from the artery it is long aggregated in the front of the body; and that when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel in it that which is stridor.
And that which is from the vein is round to the manifest of the body.
And the section on this abscess is an error, and most of all in that which is below the armpits, and in the corners, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, therefore it is necessary to avoid its cure with iron, and that which is in the extremities, or on the head, it is necessary to avoid.
But on that which is of those by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut a section in the cord, in the long; and then scrape the section with hooks, and then the artery, and deliver from the tunics until it is uncovered.
And then put on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to ease in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then prick the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until the blood that is in it is removed, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer a cure in which it is engendered power until the ligaments fall; and then take care of it with suitable ointments to it until it is healed.
And if the abscess is from the section of a vein, then it is necessary for you to have with your hand that which is possible of the abscess with the cord, and then introduce the needle below the place which you have had below your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a good ligament according to what I have told you in the ligament of the grape of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then introduce the thread with that needle below the whole abscess, from the incision of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle place of it until when it is emitted that which is in it, then you cut the superfluity of the cord, and leave that which of it is tied.
And then place on it the powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with warm and damp cloths while it is healing.
Chapter 1 of the abscess which occurs due to a twisting of nerves.
Thus as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they are struck or overworked, and by similar means.
And it is made most in the places of the arms or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are bad.
And it is a serious abscess, and it is similar in color to the rest of the body, and in the majority of its dispositions it is painful and when it is tightened with violence, the patient feels like a stupor.
And it is not an abscess that is attached in the front of the body, and for this reason the chain is left, and it is bad in every part and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be enclosed with iron, because it will very much increase contraction.
But those that are in the head or on the forehead, bind with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then take it with the forceps and cut it from the root.
And if it is large, then you suspend it with a hook, and scrape it, and then put it back; and adjust the wound with suture, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 2.
Of the incision of an abscess that occurs from a boil that occurs in the belly.
And it happens to some men, growths in the bellies of those and in other parts of the body of those, which are called fungals because of their resemblance to fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head of it is thick; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is of those that is small, and it is of those that is very magnified.
And I have already seen one, and in the belly of him there were two parts which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between them, white, of fine root.
And already the lips of those were reversed and were splitting, and moisture was running from it all the time.
Therefore, I incised those and took out of one in a weight of eighteen ounces. and the other, six ounces.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider, if the patient is humid, and the color of the boil is white, humid, of subtle root; then you should incise it with a spatula, and have in your presence cauteries in the fire, because many times the blood should be expelled from the section of it; and if you see the blood, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient fearful and afraid, guard yourself from incision with iron; but rather, take a leaden ball recently made, and strengthen it with that boil, the manner of which is that which we have said; and leave it there for two days.
And then adjust in the tightness of the leaden thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly, until it is cut off and falls by itself through its work.
But if the boil is of thick root, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and of terror, and more so in that which is in the belly.
But it is possible that you should incise the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then care for it until the wound is healed.
And guard yourself that you do not presume to incise those that are of dusky color, of little feeling, of little regard, because those are cancerous abscesses.
And I will come with a remembrance of cancer, then.
Chapter 3.
Of the cure of an eminence of the navel.
Eminence of the navel is made by many causes; or by fissures of the skin which is on the belly, and from which the cloth or intestine comes out according to how it should be in the other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery according to what has been said before, or by wind contracted in it.
But if it is by a fissure of the skin and by the protrusion of the cloth, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is lean in pain, and then appears of different situations. And if it is by the egress of the intestine, then the situation of it with that which we have recounted, of greater and diverse variety, and when you press it with your fingers, it is hidden, and then returns; and very much is felt in it, and it is magnified a great deal by the introduction of baths and violent labor.
But if it is by humidity, then it is lean and is not hidden when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it increased.
And if it is by blood, then with these signs appears the abscess in a declining blackness.
But if it is by flesh nothing, then the abscess is serious, thick and hard, and it is placed according to a quantity.
But if it is by wind, then the touch of it is light.
And the operation on him is that you consider at this time if the prominence of the navel is from artery blood, or from vein, or from wind; therefore, if it is prohibited from the cure of him, because in that there is fear and fear as you have been taught in the chapter in which I have said the abscesses by artery and by vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is from the intestine or from the cloth, then you must command the patient to hold his leg, and be standing extended; and then you will try in the circuit of all the navel, and then command him to stay between his hands on his two, and then surround with a spatula wide in the circuit of the navel on the place which you have marked with the probe; and then extend the majority of the abscess to the parts above with a large finger; and then tie it in the circuit with a strong thread or with a cord and the manner of tying is decent.
And then break the middle of the abscess extended over the ligament and introduce your finger into that indication and seek the intestine; and if you have found it or guarded by the ligament, then you extract it and impel the intestine to the parts behind the belly.
And if you have found the cloth, then take that with a finger; and cut the superfluities of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put in those two strong threads and introduce two needles in the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a manner of cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place until you can feel the flesh extended and fall by itself; or cut that when it is softened and can be, and then cure that with water which is customary of the unguents until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh nothing in it or by humidity, then you must concave the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or the humidity, which you find in it, and then cure that with water which is customary and that consolidates the place.
Chapter .liii.
Of the cure of cancer.
We have already said, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner it is cured with medicines, and that it is harmful in it the cure with iron because it is not ulcerated; and we have said cancer generated in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
And they said the ancients that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible the eradication of it, as of the cancer which is in the nipples or in the groin and their likeness of the members allocated to extract all that, and more when it is beginning small.
But when it is ancient and is large, you must not trust in it, because I have not been able to heal from that at all, nor have I seen another, nor that has come to that.
And the operation on it is when it is allocated as we have said, is that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black bile some times, and then bleed him, if a manifest repletion is found.
And then prepare the patient with the preparation in which he is located for the operation, and prohibit in the tract incisions which are necessary for it; and then concave from all part with the good saw careful excision until there remains no cause of the roots of it. And let the blood run, and do not cut this lightly, and express the places, and wipe the thick blood all with your hand or with the instrument with which it is possible to you of the instruments.
But if to you it makes contrariety of thick blood incision of vein or of artery, then cauterize that until the flux of the blood is ceased, and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .liv.
Of the cure of hydropic.
We have already recounted, in the division, of the species of hydropic of the water, and the signs of each species, of the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of althitas alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanistres nor to the species of yposarcha, because that is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of hydropic tympanist with medicines and do not confer your medication, then consider, that if to the patient already is achieved debility, or is in that other illness another hydropic, as if it is in him cough or chest of belly and similar to those, then guard you that you do not medicate him with iron, because fear is upon that.
But if you see the patient of exuberant virtue, and in him there is no other illness but hydropic so only, and not a child nor old, then the manner of the operation of it is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister then expresses the belly of him with his hand, expelling the water to the part below the navel, and then take a spatula thorny according to this form:
be of two parts acute long, of acute extremity as a spatula; but however be in it some brevity small by small, so that in the operation with that you do not pass into the intestine, and that you lead that.
And consider if the generation of hydrops is from the bowels, for when you have the section at the navel, you should move three fingers to the left side, on the right side of the belly.
But if the generation of hydrops is due to liver disease, then your incision should be to the left of the navel, three fingers.
And if the generation of it is from the spleen, then your incision should be on the right.
And do not let your incision be on the side where the patient wants to make the incision because it will not allow the superfluities to flow to that place freely.
And then perforate with the instrument the entire  area, and enter into that incision, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the fascia and the skin, and you excoriate that; and if the quantity of a fingernail or around.
And then perforate the skin until the spatula reaches the desired place, and it is the place of the water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape: and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or lead or tin, to which at the lower part of it is a small hole, and on the sides of it are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the tip of it is made blunt according to the manner of a feather, thus as sometimes:
And at the tip of it most sovereign is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then it instantly rises on the instrument, therefore evacuates the water in the middle hour quantity, for if you evacuate from that more than you should in the hour, very soon the patient will die by resolution of their animal spirit, or you will bring him to five-pi (a state close to death).
But evacuate from that according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what the dispositions of the patient signify to you from the virtue of the pulse of him and from the goodness of him.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is the cause for it is immediately retained by the fascia which retains the hole that is on the skin of it and recommits to you that you perforate it according to that manner.
And then repeat the instrument the next day if the patient tolerates the water, and extract a small quantity of water, and do water for several days with fear, and guard yourself from error so that it does not remain of the water but little.
But if you fear about the patient, and let the water a great quantity, then cure him with burial in hot sand, and bathe him in hot water, and in the sun wait for a long time; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen and the liver after the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in what is preceding.
Chapter .lv.
Of the cure of children who are born with the places of the urine not perforated.
Sometimes some of the children are like this from the womb of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or it is a straight hole or it is not in its place).
Therefore, it is necessary to repair with perforation of it as soon as it is born with a very fine spatula according to this form:
And then place in the hole a fine lead nail and tie that, and keep it for three days or for four.
And when he wants to urinate, he will be urged and urinate; and then return that.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes on the place, will not let this opening.
But that one whose hole is straight, be medicated with a lead nail, as we have said, for too many days until it is amplified.
But those in which the hole is not in its place, are led by the cause for those, the one who is born and the hole is deviated, he deserves the end of the head of the vagina because he cannot urinate in the parts below, until he raises the vagina with his hand to the parts above; and it is not to him generation, for so the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad disease.
And the manner of the operation in him is that the patient be inverted on his back, and then extend the head of the vagina of him with your left hand with vehement extraction, and inscise the head of the head of the vagina of the place of the perpucii with a sharp spatula, as it is incision of a feather, or that you do not cut any part, so that the middle of him comes similar to the head of the vagina and that the hole falls in the middle place as it should.
And guard yourself in your operation of blood flow, for many times accidents happen there; and pause yourself to him with the water that you abscind the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lvi.
Of the white that happens in the prepuce at the head of the vagina and of corruption and blackness and adherence of the prepuce of the head of the vagina.
Many times this white happens in the vagina and it is a prominence of bad flesh.
And of that one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, however, which you suspend with a fine thread and cut that which is within that whole; and then place on that root submerged in Egyptian poultice; and then that, cure it with the diaphonic poultice until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of a leg color, then you must administer cautery to the edge of it and the root of it.
But if the ulcer is in the prepuce of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then you must treat the ulcer which is inside first until it is consolidated; and then you treat the one outside, because when you treat the one outside at the same time as the prepuce, it is not certain that it will not be troubled.
And if there happen to be blackening and corruption in the genitals and the prepuce, then you must remove all that which is already blackened and that which is about to corrupt or that which is already corrupted; and then apply a line over that with honey, which is mixed with the flour of the bark of pomegranate and of crushed and sifted herbs.
And then treat that with the other treatment until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
Because cautery is helpful in two dispositions at once, so it is in the flow of blood and in the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and is destroyed all at once, then you must introduce into the flesh of the prepuce a lead tube so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in the case of which the prepuce is sound, and upon it circumcision is not performed; and when adhesion happens because of plague or because of abscess) you must excoriate with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
And if it is difficult to separate them exquisitely, then you must excoriate with a spatula some cause of the head of the penis and the prepuce, and thus it is because the prepuce, when it is subtle, is easily perforated by its subtlety.
And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a thread of the subtle, which is already softened in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then treat it with a vi stiptic until it is consolidated.
Chapter .lvii.
Of the purification of children and the treatment of those who happen to undergo circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other plagues: but since it is of our operation and our will, and it is done to those of our own, it is necessary that we assign in that better operation and easier way less loss to health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in some of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, the cause of which is that I have found the majority of the artificers and barbers use circumcision and purification with a knife and with torrets; and they use a ligament with a nail and an incision with the nail.
And I have already tried all these manners and have not found better purification with shears, with a ligament with a nail than in purification with the nail, because many times the root escapes the most below, because the root of the prepuce has two tunics, and the tunic remains further down, and it is very easy to be forced to another incision and sure pain. And in purification which is done by alphecati, and is digital, of which the barbers use, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not assured, because it very easily enters into the furrow of it.
But in the operation with the nail, very easily it is obstructed by iron and corrupts your operation. And the root of the child is short by nature, and many times it is in such a manner that there is no need for purification, and I have seen that.
But of the purification which is done with shears and ligaments with a nail, the goodness, experience has shown me, because the shears are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness that is below is as the sharpness that is above; and therefore as you press your hand so proportionally to the two sharpnesses, and you cut it according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the nail with a figure containing the root of the penis in all parts, with which there is no error of all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie most if he is of those who understand a little, that you do nothing but you tie the nail in his penis only, and that you leave it in for another day.
And then make him happy in all that manner that is in your power of what receives his understanding. And then make him lie between your arms, prepared and do not be seen; and hide the shears in your hand or under your foot, that the child does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
And then place your hand in the patient's groin and blow into the canal, and pull it inward until the head of the canal is released, and then modify that which is attached to it of dirt.
The shape of the forceps for modification, this is the shape:
Let the one pair of extremities be non-cutting and the other pair be cutting, so that the handle of the key does not come out, and the length of the two points be as the length of two handles equally.
But the error in modification is that too forcefully it evades the intrinsic canal entirely, or a part of it from which the incision.
Therefore, so that you extend that of your hour with your nail before the apostema of the place and that you cut it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract that with a pin and cut it.
But if three days have passed, and that which is inflated remains below the groin apostema, then you let it go until the apostema cauterizes, and excoriate that with facility, and cut that according to what is prepared for you.
And guard yourself from the head of the canal, because it would not be good for that.
And therefore cure that with the water that the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise of the powders.
And if it is incised from the canal beyond measure, and obeys the parts above, then that does not hurt it.
And but cure that with the water that we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lviii.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is made by obstruction made by stone or by congealed blood, or by pus or by carbuncle, and similar to those of water that we have said of the ways of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with the water that we have said and vehemently is made the cause upon the patient, then it is necessary that you administer extraction from him with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It is of silver and is a subtle cone, as well as a tube of bird's feather with the subtlety of a long ray in similarity of a palm and a half, to which there is a subtle cane in the head of it.
And the manner of the eyssiment of the urine by that one is that you take the double knot and tie it in the middle of it wool or cloth for good binding; and introduce the extremities of the knot in the part below of the syringe, and cut with the forceps if superfluously any cause of the wool, but introduce it into the tube with vehemence and then engage the syringe with border and with album of hog.
And make the patient lie on the shelf, and embrocate his bladder and groin with oiled, olive oil and water.
And then introduce the syringe with facility until it reaches the root of the groin; and then double the groin above the part of the navel; and then push the syringe into that; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and that centa the patient be reached to the cause void, and it is not made according to this order, but the meat in which it goes to tortuousity.
And then extend the knot with the wool little by little, so that the urine seeps into the wool.
Then extract that and make for cure urine, and use syringe, do not cease to do water and use syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient returns to relief.
Chapter .lix.
Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with clampcedra and with similar instruments which are agreeable to water.
When accidents in the bladder ulceration or abscess, or congealed blood in that, or is constricted by a wound, and you want in that to distill waters and medicines, then it is made with an instrument which is called a clampcedra, and this is the shape of it:
But in the extremity of it is blunt, so it is closed. And in that there are three straps: two on one side, as many times.
At the beginning it is concave, in which is that which is filled, and as much as it fills, its addition, until when any cause is drawn from those humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, with it it is drawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what is done with a clamp used to pick up naphtha in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, as you want to prohibit humidities in the bladder, introduce the extremity of the clamp into the humidity, and pull with it that which is filled to the upper parts, because the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the clamp.
And then introduce the extremity of the clamp into the vagina as we have recounted in the tongue; and then pull the humidity with it, because that humidity goes to the bladder immediately, and the patient feels that.
Form of the subtle cristeri with which the bladder is cristerized, and it is that form:
And it is made of silver or of laton, of which the head is more or less like a small feather, and below it a canal is made inside it.
And then take the bladder of the patient, and place in it the humidity that you want to cristerize in the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong double ligament, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then introduce the extremity of the cristeri into the vagina.
And then stretch your hand over the bladder with the humidity with structure descent until the patient feels that that humidity has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and perforate it with all its roundness; and then introduce a strong thread into those holes, so that it is rolled; and then add the circle so that it is joined to the sofatur, because you put in it the water that you want of the humidities, and oils and waters.
And then you tie that on the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter .lx.
Of the extraction of stone.
We have already said in the division the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have said the stone in which catz operation with hand, and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is found in the bladder.
And you are narrating that with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly comes to children; and of the signs of it is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in it sand; and the patient feels his vagina, and many times it hurts, and then it is dressed; and with that, the anus feels like many of those.
And it is easier the healing of children of that than those who have reached fourteen years; and it is difficult cure in the old. But in the young it is easier because it is between those.
And of that one in which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, as we come to the cure of that, we must at the beginning of that which we modify the patient with the cristeri which extracts all the fissure which is in their bowels; because that fissure sometimes prohibits the entrance of the stone from the vesica, and the investigation of it.
And then place the patient on their feet and make them sit and lie down so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or which jumps from the place or sometimes.
And then make that censer between your hands prepared, and the hands of it are below the things of it, so that the bladder is entirely made declining to the lower parts.
And then pierce that and all that through.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you cut immediately with section over it.
And if you do not catch all of it from below your touch, then you must that you anoint with oil your said index of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the said middle if it is a young complete, and introduce that into their anus. And pierce of the stone until it is below your said. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that with your said, and expel that to the outside parts of where you made the section.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand extend the genitals to the upper parts, and with his other hand re-massage the cord which is below the genitals, in the part of the place where the section is made.
And then introduce a spatula well incident of which this is the form of it: And split in him what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, push to the left side of the groin; and the incision should be on that bone and your finger should be in the anus, and make a transverse incision, so that the incision outside should be wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that comes out of the bone to him as possible, and no more, because very hard compresses your finger which is in the anus the bone should the incision, and is forced-thrown its functionality.
And know that of the bone there is some to which its angle and margins are, so that the incision of it is made difficult by this.
And of that what is like a gland, and it is round, and it is made of it light incision.
Therefore if it is that one to which its angles and margins are, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not thus forced-thrown, then cover that you engage on that, or that you hold on that with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is like a file with which you hold on the bone, and do not escape from it; or that you introduce after it a subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you cannot on that, then you enlarge the track a little, and if you see flux of blood, cut off on strong that with vitriol trissat.
But if the bone is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then you cut on it; and then push a little on that; and similarly do so if there are more than two.
And if it is a very large bone, then ignorance is that you cut that with a large incision, because it happens to the patient one of two causes: or that it dies or that it endows him with a continuous distillation of urine, because of that the place is not of all consolidated.
But administer expulsion of it while it is forced-thrown, or engineer in the fracture of it with the forceps until you extract that in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with poultices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that. And place on that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rubbed oil and water, so that the abscess may be ceded.
And then turn the patient on his back, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you have untied that, embrocate the place with water and a little oil, and then cure that with a diaphaniacon gargle and a diazilicon gargle until it is healed.
But if in the wound happens a  caut, adherent and corrosive abscess, and of that semblance as if the blood is in the bladder frozen, and for that the urine is prohibited (and this is known by the egress of blood in urine), then introduce your finger into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it provokes the bladder to corruption of the bladder and of it putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and in opposition to all species, with that which you convene to it of the cure until it is healed.
And cover in the hours of all the cure that you lie both things and adjust the medicines which are laid on the place.
And if the bone is small and is in the middle of the thigh, and it is stuck in it, and the emission of urine is prohibited, then cure that with the water that I recommended before you reach incision, because troops accustomed by this cure are accused of incision; and I have already spoken of this, and it is that you take a perforator of felt iron, of which this is the shape of it:
of triangular extremity, sharp, stuck in a shaft.
And then take a thread, and tie with it the thigh below the bone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then introduce the iron into the thigh, perforating with facility until the perforator comes to that bone. And revolve the perforator with your hand in that small bone little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it until you make that of the other part penetrate; because the urine is immediately released.
And then press your hand on that which is broken of the bone from the side outside of the thigh, because that is stuck, and is forced-thrown with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not to your apparatus for any cause which prohibits you from that, then tie a thread below the bone, and another thread above the bone. And then cut on the bone in that thigh between two ligatures. And then extract that. And then untie the ligament and modify the congealed blood, which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary a ligament of thread below the bone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligament above, because when the thread is untied the egress of the bone, the coda returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for that it is necessary to you when you tie the thread above, that you elevate the coda to the parts above, or that it returns you must fulfill your compliment, and covers the wound as we have said.
Chapter LXl.
Of the extraction of a stone from women.
Stones in women are rarely produced.
But if a stone is found in any of them, then its cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is that the woman must be very much a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman well-informed who describes herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or is of the women having husbands.
The third is that you do not find a woman well-knowing this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the incision over a stone in women is distant from the place of the stone, because you indiges of a pre-wound incision, and in that one is fear.
But if necessity provokes you to it, then you must take a woman doctor well-knowing, and few are found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek a doctor who is skilled and subtle, or present a woman matron well-versed in the ways of women, or a woman who in this art is part of the art.
Therefore, do that present, and command him to do everything that you tell him, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; the reason for this is that he should regard if the woman is a virgin, then he must put his finger in her anus and want the stone.
Therefore, if he finds that, force that from her, and then command him to insert it.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and inquire about the stone, because she places her left hand over the bladder, and comprehends that with good understanding.
Therefore, if she finds it, then she must gradually withdraw it from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the sum of her virtue until it reaches the root of the vagina.
And then insert it again over that position of the majority of the vagina to the root of the vagina, of whatever part it is stopped, and the stone in that part, and the finger of it not be withdrawn from the stone, short of it.
And the incision be little at the beginning; and then insert the ray over that incision, and if he feels the stone, then adjust in incision according to the quantity which he knows that the stone is cast from that.
And know that the species of stones are many: for some are small and large, and lion and sharp, and long and round, and having ramps.
Therefore, you know how many species are of it by what you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust in the place vitriol trissat and put that for an hour until the blood is abstained, and then return to your operation until the stone is cast out.
And do that you prepare with you of the instruments the ones which are said in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by those in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is incised, then you put powder over the place and strengthen it with pills and stricture descent, and do not repeat that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for very likely the woman will die. And then cure the wound.
And when the acuteness of the blood is ceded after some days, and the place can be touched, then you return to your operation until the stone is cast out.
Chapter LXll.
Of incision over a hernia.
Hernia ayguoza is nothing but an accumulation of humidity in the white membrane which is below the codena of the genitals containing the huou, and is called the membrane.
And some times it is in the proper panniculus which has prepared it nature in the part of the huou, until it is certain that already is another huou; and it is the codena of the genitals between the white membrane which we have said, and it is not that but tart.
And the generation of this hernia is for weakness which happens to the genitals, for that to those is poured this matter, and some times it happens by percussion made over the genitals.
And this humidity is having many colors, for the color of it or is declining to citrine or to sanguine, or rouge, or is black feculent, or is aqueous white, and that is the most.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is this: for if it is in the white membrane which we have said, then the abscess is round declining a little to length as such as the figure of the huou, and appears the genitals, for the humidity contains that of all parts.
And if the humidity is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is round with part of the huou and for this man estimates that it is another huou.
And if the humidity is between the codena of the genitals and the white membrane, then catz below the centiment.
And as you want the knowledge of the color of the humidity, then you probe the color of the humidity in the abscess with entromes cayrat of which the form is preceded; and according to what is issued in the vestige of the entromes, judge of that which is in it.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of him with iron, then we command the patient to be flebotomized if this is possible, and times the body of him full.
And then he is laid on his back upon some cause a little high, and placed beneath him many cloths.
And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow on the right of him, the one who extends his rag to one of two sides to the groin of the genitals and to the part of the miracle of the belly.
And then take a spatula wide and split the groin of the genitals from the middle place by the length within close to the penis.
And be made the section according to rectum equally distant from the line that goes through the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white cup encompassing.
And excoriate that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not injure that; and your excoriation with the one that you excoriate by a wide partition that be suspended with the most and most subtlely scrutinize with the excoriation according to the quantity as much as possible.
And then perforate the white cup full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between two labia of the section with pincers, and extend the white cup to the parts above; and do not touch the groin encompassing, and incise the white cup in that manner that is to your possible. And incise that with its totality or in pieces, and mostly its side subtle, for if you do not scrutinize exquisitely the incision of it, it is not made safety that the water does not return.
But if the humor proceeds from that outside of its groin in the hour of your operation, then when you will have completed the section of the white cup, return deftly that, and then adjust the two labia of the groin of the genitals with suture, and then cure that thus as the other plagues, until it be healed.
And if you find the humor corrupted by another malady, then you must tie the vessels which are on the suspensory, and extract the humor, and then cure that with the water that we have said.
But if the water is aggregated in two parts at once, then you know that two are the hernias; therefore incise that partition according to that you have done in the other equally; and if it is to your view that it be an operation, then you do it.
And then you absterge the blood, and introduce into the sections wool submerged in oil or in rose oil; and place before other wool which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand that over the genitals and the miracle of the belly; and place above cloths folded and powders, and tie those above with a ligament which is according to this form:
And then take the cloths and be humpled of wool carded according to this semblance; and be made the extremities with which is pressed of cotton or of wet wool, and be added with structure in the braguier of the breeches, and one of the extremities presses from the buttock inside to the two, and the second presses to the part of the penis, and two extremities over two cushions below and two other extremities over two angles, and all structure be adjusted in the braguier of the breeches.
And some times this hernia is medicated artificially with cautery in place of section with iron; and it is that you take cautery cutellar subtle and that you incise with that the groin of the genitals, and it is ignited according to that we have recounted until it be discovered the white cup containing the water, and then you take cautery according to this form: And it is assembled to a Greek letter.
And then perforate with that white cup, and it is ignited until all the humidity be thrown out.
And then extend the white cup with pincers, and excoriate with pincers, and excoriate with subtle cautery ignited; and incise that according to that is to your possible until you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself of the humor that the fire not touch it.
And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from the flow of blood, and better than operation with section.
But if to you causes contrariety abscess caut in the hour of section or in hour of cautery, or flow of blood, then you must cure that contrariety that does to you by that, with cure which convenes to him according to that is said.
But if the patient is fearful, and does not await the second operation for its horror, then administer perforation according to that we have recounted here; and it is when it is certified you, by that which we have said of the significations, that that hernia is watery.
Then you must make the patient lie on some elevated cushion, and then perforate the abscess in the lowest part of it with a wide spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And be the aperture wide until it runs all the water.
And then place on the place cotton and tie that and leave that, so that it runs the remaining of the water. And then cure that until the plague be healed.
But if contrariety is in the emission of the water in that hour you perforate that: and that is not done but for that the white panniculus in the orifice of the plague makes contrariety and prohibits the emission of the water, then you must put in the plague a probe or instrument with which is extracted the water from the hydropites, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the opening of the plague a small one.
And know that the water returns, and it is watered again after about six months or around those; and as it is watered, then it is pierced according to that same manner, that the patient may pass his days thus.
Chapter .lxiii.
Of the section on fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section on this hernia, there is fear of losing to harm in the greatest dispositions; for to me it has been seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better.
And I am remembering the operation in that and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that the abscess arises in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and this is done for many causes: either by acute superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not attacked in it pain, and it is a serious abscess.
And very few is the abscess calcified, of which the color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And some times it is made by knotting of the arteries, and by inflammation of those thus that already is perceived the remembrance of it, or by inflammation of veins.
But that which is by inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you compress that with your fingers; and do not cover that which you touch.
But that which is made by inflammation of vein is not dispersed of it any cause of you the compression with the fingers.
And it is already possible that on this species there is made a section and on the other meats; and it is that you insert the code of the genitals, and then extend the fluid to the parts above, and extract that from the white ciph, and deliver the suspender of the vessels, and tie them, and incise the suspender as much as you deliver that from all parts of the parts of the fluid.
Therefore, if the fluid is already in those meats consolidated, then you must extract the fluid and incise that.
And if there is adherence between any cause of the ciph, or between that which is between the vessels, then you must deliver all that adherence and incise that by a round incision.
But if it is the birth of meat in the place of the adherence which is behind, then you must incise all that which is of it, and extract the fluid as we have said.
Therefore, as the operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and take care of that with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
Of the cure of hernia that is of the vite.
The vite is an abscess enveloped by some envelope resembling a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult movement exercise and walking on the patient.
And in the cure of this illness is by fear for that of which it is preceded remembrance.
However, it is necessary that they say operation in that according to that I did the first.
And I say that you must make the patient lie on a raised bed; and then pull the suspender of the testicles to the parts below; and then take the code of the genitals with your fingers with the vessels that are probed to the groin; and hold those other ministers that you, and extend those with vehement extension.
And then incise with a wide, sharp spatula by a transverse section in the right of the vessels until the vessels are uncovered.
And then excoriate from all parts as much as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And then put in those a needle which is double-pointed, and tie that in the first of the places in which you have hit the vite, and tie that other time in the rear of them. And then incise those in the middle place by a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is added from the fetid and corrupted humidities.
And then cure the wound with the cure of the other wounds in which you want to be healed generated so that the vessels which nourish one of the two genitals fall, for it is not evil for that.
But if the vite is hit to all the vessels, then the testicles must be extracted or that the testicles be choked by those vessels, so that it be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they be established, or that be choked so that it be not helpful to those.
Chapter .lxv.
Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
The advent of this hernia is by a section that should be in the ciph extended over the belly of the part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, for that descending the bowels of that rupture ad to some of the bowels.
And this rupture is either of the ciph or of excision of it, and this happens to these two species for many causes: either percussion, or seizures, or clamor, or elevation of any heavy cause, or semblance.
And the sign of that, when it is by extension of the ciph, is that it happens little by little in long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess equal between ves the preon for so that the ciph comprehends the bowel.
And the sign of it is when it is a section of the head, because at the beginning it causes a violent pain suddenly; and it is a different abscess that appears after the codena proper appears, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and its body to the sides of the head.
And sometimes the intestine is forgotten with the cloth, and this intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is made with flatulence, and sometimes it runs in the bowel slit, and here it is retained, and this is a great detriment to the patient, and sometimes it causes a bad pain and more intensely when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the species of this disease with iron there is fear, because whoever it is to be avoided the hunting in that.
And the way of the operation of that is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand to the sides of his cavity if he obeys his return, and then he is reversed over his belly between your hands, and elevate the legs of him.
And then stretch the cord which seizes the cord of the testicles to the sides below, and cut the cord of the testicles all along; and then fix in two lips of the section hooks according to what you indicated to open the section with those.
And if the section according to the quantity that to you is possible that of that the huou be forgotten.
And then scrape that scalp which is after the cord of the testicles, until the white hard scalp of each part be discovered.
Then you introduce your finger into that which seizes the testicle, into that which is between white scalp, which is after the cord of the huou, and between the second scalp, and dissolve with that adhesion that is in the part behind the huou.
And then with your hand the cord of the testicles to the sides before, and with that extend the white scalp on your left hand, and elevate the huou with the scalp to the part of the section; and command the minister that extend the huou upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a completed solution.
And seek with your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white hard scalp. But if you find of it any cause, then you peel that to the belly after.
And then cut in the part after the cord of the testicles by section of which blood runs and heals thus as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And then administer wool immersed in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the binding which we have recommended (and sometimes the white scalp is cauterized, which we have said near the incision fear of blood flow, because many times those occur) and leave the binding until by itself it falls.
But if the hunting of it is late, then of hot water be embroiled, and place it on that until it falls as we have said.
And then cure the wound with the other cure of wounds until it be healed.
Chapter .lxvi.
Of a Wind Hernia.
In this hernia no one has been seen that has been dared on the cure of it with iron.
And the first ones said that it is made as we have recommended in the hernia that is with vi; which is that you tie the vessels near the section over that with facility of it; and then dry in the middle place around the abscess with that which opened it, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound as we have said until it be healed.
Chapter .lxvii.
Of the Disruption that is Made in the Anvils.
Sometimes there happens a rupture in the anvils as we have said, and emerge the place.
And do not let the genitals any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if they let, that is little; and return it in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with that, a fissure is adjusted in the scalp until the intestine descends into the scalp; and this happens by the extension of the scalp which is in the anvils as we have said, the cause of which is that the scalp is extended, and then it is softened and the place is abscesses and emerges.
And the care of him is with cautery as narrated before.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and the patient lies on his two hands between his legs, and then the place of the rupture of the emerging abscesses is dried with a section along the width according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then tighten the white bandage that is under the loincloth until it is uncovered.
And then take the ray and place it on the prominent place of the bandage, and press it to the navel of the belly.
And then stitch the two prominent places on the end of the bandage ray, and adjust with the suture one of them with the other.
And then extract the end of the ray, and do not cut the bandage entirely, nor extend the wound, nor any other cause as you have learned in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the cure of the wounds, and as you cut the threads, purify that and restore the wound while it is consolidated; for the bandage is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, for it is more proper to health.
Chapter .lxviii.
Of the softening of the scrotum.
Many times the scrotum of some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is fed by the regard of it.
Therefore, it is necessary for him who is asked in the cure of it that he make the patient lie on his two hands, and cut all the scrotum which is softened over the natural scrotum; and then that he adjust the two lips with the suture.
And if you want, sew at the beginning the superfluity of the softened scrotum with three stitches or four and with firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then cure by the cure of the other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall.
Chapter .lxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but for cause it is written to me that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two ways, of which one is so that it is in the knowledge of the doctor when he is asked about it, that he knows the cure of it to whom it happens; and the other way is that many times we have need of castration of other animals for our benefits, as for those, as for goats, and for sheep, and for pigs, and for similar animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by fissure to section.
But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the beast to be cut in hot water while its genitals are softened and are limp and that they hang. And then take those with your hand while they are resolved and do not appear after the touch.
But in castration done by fissure and section, when you have the beast and press the scrotum of it with your left hand.
And then lift the suspensor, and cut over each testicle with a section between two testicles processed.
And then cut those as much as you will have each excoriated. And do not leave on those of the bandage any cause, but the fine bandage which is over the veins.
And this manner of castration is better the one which is done by attrition, for attrition firmly leaves no cause of the testicles for which the beast desires coyt.
And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lxx.
Of the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: one is that it appears in that which separates the space in the scrotum of testicles, in that which is between two testicles figures as a cunh of woman in which it is.
And sometimes from that comes urine the which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
But in women it is a species: and it is that the cunh of the woman over the pentalith is as two testicles of a man a little of all diminished at the front part as well as the prepuce of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of the men and of one species of the women. And it is that when you cut those adjusted flesh while it effuses the impregnation of it, and then that you cure those with the cure of the other wounds.
And in the second species of men of which yeys urine the which is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation in it.
Chapter .xxi.
Of lenting and of prominent flesh for causes of the women.
Lenting is firmly adjusted over natural causes while it is stressed and is made less noticeable; and sometimes it is magnified in some women so much that it is spread as in men and interferes with coitus.
Therefore, you must have the excess of the liquid with your hand or a spoon and remove it.
And in the last incision, mainly in the front of the root, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then care for it with the cure of the plagues until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn that nays in the horrifici of the mayre entro that umple aquel, and fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa of coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove that nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro that sia sanada.
Chapter .lxxii.
Of the cure of alratica.
Alratica is that the cone of the woman is not perforated, or that the tract is small. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to illness which has preceded, and that is made either by flesh not properly adjusted or by a subtle or thick ciph.
And it is made either in the front of the mother, or in the sides of her, or in the upper part of her, or in the lower part of her, and prohibits  coit and pregnancy and childbirth, and very much prohibits the menses.
And the knowledge of that is made by examination of the metrona, if the oppilacio is apparent, promptly; but if it is not apparent, then you search for it with your fingers or with the ray.
But if the oppilacio is by a subtle ciph, and it is proper to the two labia, then you cut and disrupt that.
And it is that you place on the two labia powders, and then place your fingers, indicating with both hands at once.
And the woman be on her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two labia with force so that that subtle ciph be broken and the oppilacio be opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that on the location, and wash with warm water every day so that the incision location is not consolidated.
But if the ciph is thick and thick, then it is that you cut that with a spatula of lead or with a leaf of myrtle.
But if the oppilacio is by carnation, then suspend that with a spoon, and incise that.
And be at your disposal the medicines that cause to cease the flow of blood by biting, such as ahacatia, and dragon's blood, and incense, adjusted with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead needle so that the plague is not consolidated lightly.
And keep that for some days and administer calgua of the li sec.
And then be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents happen in the mother's nativity of other carns, and then it is that you incise according to this manner. But if this is due to a  carnos  abscess, the carnos abscess which is in the mother not be made contrary to iron in any manner.
Chapter .lxxiii.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botor that happens in the cone of the women.
Hemorrhoids so appear from the orifices of many veins within which of those corro flow blood continuously; and as so old hemorrhoids and are made theyls.
And already I have said in the division the species of those and their signs, and say so those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the front of the mother and do not appear to the feeling, then in those no cure be made with iron.
But those which are in the orifice of the mother on which cats feeling, are those that are cured.
And so that you put the woman in a lying position and then extend the tail with the forceps, or with rough cloth, and incise those with the razitz.
And then pulverize over those of the blood flow from one of the incised powders biting, such as acacia and similar to those.
And then apply their feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
And if the blood flow persists, then make that  sezer in decoction of sumat and of the skins of millegrains and of guaias and of similar things.
And then take barley flour and mix that with honey and wine and make a plaster with water on the back of her.
And if the blood is incised, it is good; and if not, make adhere with two ventouses, and to the nipples their escarification.
And then take wool and submerge that in the juice of coriander or in the juice of arnagloza or in the juice of guarravier with wine tinted and make adhere to the location; and then cure the location with engentz until it is healed.
And take care of that one inside that is healing.
Chapter LXXIV.
Of the perforation of the eye socket occurring in the mother.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the mother, as well as boils and abscesses, and ulcers and buboes and carbuncles and fistulas, hemorrhoids and varicose veins and boils and other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these ailments and the kinds of them and their symptoms, and their cures in the division.
And now I say in this treatise of abscesses, the one that comes in the mother when it is of abscesses that coalesce and heal, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is done with iron.
Therefore, consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that redness and if it catches on that feeling, then do not touch it with perforation, and care for it with that which helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
And then have the woman lie on a bed that has two beds; and recline on her two and adjust her feet to the part behind the belly, and her thighs be spread, and place her arms behind her shoulders, and tie her with a bandage to that which is convenient.
And then the matron follows from the right side and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the eye socket is opened, the form of which will come in those causes that will be done afterwards.
And then when you want to administer this instrument, you put it with the ray on the eye socket of the woman, and that which from the instrument enters into the eye socket, no be more than the eye socket, and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the eye socket, then have you place powders on the texture of the eye socket so that the instrument be prohibited from all instruments in the eye socket.
And have you place the handle that runs in the instrument from the upper side, and that the minister hold the instrument and revolve the handle until the orifice of the eye socket is opened.
And as the excision appears, and is touched with the hand and is clean and moist, then have you succeed that of the head of it with a spatula.
And as the pus is evacuated, then have you place in the wound a mesh submerged in rubbed oil or green oil in which there is some stickiness; and place the calix in the section in the eye socket.
And place a cloth over the eye socket and on the penile wool clean submerged in water in which there are boiled mallows.
And after it is cured in about two days with the rinsing which is convenient to that until it is healed.
And some times the eye socket and the wound are washed in such a way that it is christened with water and honey, and after with water in which is boiled licorice root or long-stemmed arnica, and after returns to the rinsing.
And if the wound is deep in the eye socket, then have you be prohibited from the cure of it with iron, have care for it with that which we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach the midwives in what manner the living embryos should be medicated when they are second nature.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of the natural birth by the signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman expressing in the parts behind and desiring to smell the air, and above that she is lifted by that which is above her from the part, and hastens the emission of the embryo, then you know that this part is second nature, and it is the emission of it on its head, and the second one with that or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then have the belly of it be compressed so that the embryo descends lightly when it descends on its head, they give it the second one, and it is washed of those superfluities with good modification.
But that which is another this part is unnatural and not laudable, because when the embryo is emitted on its feet and the body of it is emitted before the head of it and the feet of it, and the hand of it one, or at the foot of it, i.e., or it is emitted the head of it and the hand of it, or at the belly of it, and strong it is converted on its neck, and similar to the figures of it not laudable.
Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
And I have shown all figure of those, and what kind of birth is in those by so that it be signified by it and be state upon it.
When the fetus is emitted on its head by natural egress, and that is vehement on the woman and is made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of it already debilitated, then make that seizure, or what the women have it, and evaporates the conn of it with fenugreek cooked and with humid oils.
And then the midwife enters between the said parts with a small spatula and fends it with it, or seizes it with her nail until it runs that which is in it of humidity. And press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then the woman should be smeared with a mixture of ptilli and fenugrec with a knife.
And then command her, then the one who is giving birth, to be compressed and make that stir with conditions; and keep her mouth and her nose closed for an hour, so that the fetus is expelled quickly.
And if the two limbs of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then you must reduce those with ease little by little. But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a cradle and lift her legs up, and then shake the cradle on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the shaking.
And if the limbs are not disentangled and the fetus dies, then cut those and extract the remains of the fetus or tie the body to her hand with a cloth and extract it with equality, for that will be expelled.
When the fetus is on its feet, then you must push those upwards, and then turn the fetus small, and then that you align it, and then that you take a leg of it and extend those little by little.
But when it is born between the thighs, then you command her to expel, and make that stir with conditions, for it will be expelled if God wills it.
And if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little until you place it again in its natural figure, for that will be then expelled with easy extraction.
And if it is prohibited with all that we have recommended, then take a mixture of althea and dissolved gum, and beat everything in the mortar with a good beating, and then apply it with water to the woman's groin, at the bottom of her belly. And then make that poultice in boiling water, until it reaches the hypogastrium.
And when the parts of her are softened, then make a fumigation of myrtle for her and place it under her. And when the fumigation lasts for an hour, then you make her lie on a cradle, and then make that stir and extract her mouth, and take that away, and press the lower part of her belly with gentle compression, for the fetus will be expelled quickly.
Extraction of the fetus laterally while holding one of its hands. It should be attempted to reduce the hand, but if that cannot be reduced, then elevate the woman and make her walk.
And if walking is not possible, then make her lie on the sheet, and shake her thighs with vehement shaking, and then administer ointments as I have said and recommended from poultices.
And if the birth has come, then make her lie on a cradle, and then study about the reduction of the hand, and align the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman stir and command her to compress herself until it is expelled.
Extraction of the fetus on the back with its hands spread out and its face on the side of its mother. It is necessary that the midwife has the hand of the fetus and then turns it little by little, and that it is done with ease.
And when it is done and as much as it is aligned, then place on her groin what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
And then command her to move little by little, and when you have done that, then make her lie on a cradle and command her to be inclined on the right side, and then command her to compress; and make that stir with conditions. Exit of the prepared fetus on the side.
When the horrors of the mother descend in this manner, consider, and then you cut the second with your nail until it is evacuated of its humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you cut that of the navel, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then push the fetus to the disentangled parts until you place that second one that should be, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and it will be expelled with easy extraction, if God wills it.
The exit of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins, or sometimes even three or four, are born, but this is strange and should be considered; however, it is due to nature, not life.
And count those, whether they are multiplied, one after the other, and are separated by the navel, distinguish those among the ligaments in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are born as if it were a natural and light phenomenon, and sometimes by a non-natural phenomenon as we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult in childbirth and come to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you care for them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skillful and does what is done with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and is ingenious according to every figure according to what is prepared for her by the ingenuity bringing to health.
Remembering that which is formed in the womb from embryos and is aborted.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten, and it has already been verified that one woman aborted six, and another gave birth to ten, the cause of which was made by the measurement of the glorious wise men.
And all this cove that is in the science of the midwife, that is very important to that appearance of this, and therefore, it is paused to this as much as cove.
Chapter .lxxvi.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you cure the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of the medicine and it is not outside, and you are forced to use operation with your hand, then you must consider if the woman is of sound virtue and is not among those accidents by which she is feared for loss.
Then you must have the woman lying on her back on her two, and her head inclined down and her thighs raised.
And the minister has those of two parts or is tied on the bed so that the body of him does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with humid oil and mucilage of althea and fennel and the seeds of lily.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then she inserts her hand with ease into the mother, and then she searches with her hand in the place where the forceps are in the fetus.
And convenient places in this: therefore you consider if the fetus is prepared that descends on its head, and then you place the forceps in the heels of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or below the beard, or in the fork of it, or in the proper places of the back, or below the hypochondria.
But if the descent is on the feet of it, then in the penile, or in the middle of the back.
And you must have the forceps with your right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand with ease and place the forceps in one of those places which we have said, until it reaches the left cause.
And then pause and place in the opposite position of it another forceps, or the third if it is necessary, so that the traction is equal, and it is not extension according to its rectum alone.
And may it be good to all parts, so that the delivery of it be eased as it is done in the case of the eradication of it.
And you must in it that which is between them that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then you must have the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them skillfully and revolve with those that are retained.
Therefore, if the part of the fetus is delivered, then the forceps are changed into the place which is most high; and do so until the whole fetus is delivered.
But if the hand is outside the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by the constriction of it, then you must have a cloth wrapped around it; and then extract it until all is delivered, and incise it either at the junction of the hand or in the groin.
And so you must do in the other hand and in the two feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is an accident to it constriction in the delivery, or it is in the head of it water adjusted, then you must insert between the fingers of the scapula spine and split the head and extract the water, or that which describes it with an instrument which is called "alundat", the form of which will come with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is next.
And similarly do if the fetus is of a large head by nature: and then you must incise it with the algematu, or that which presses it with the alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with the forceps.
And if the head is pulled and is constricted by the collarbone, then it is cut so that the moisture which is in the feet be poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor obstructed by the bones, then you cut the head as soon as it is possible to you.
And if the belly's bottom is festering or is in it hydropsy, then you must pierce it so that the moisture which is in it flows out.
But if the thing is on its feet, then the traction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is lighter.
But if it is constricted by the belly and the foot, then you must extract it with a cloth which you will have enveloped over your hand, and you will make the belly and the foot so that water runs out of those.
But if the other limbs are stayed and the head is turned, then the midwife puts her left hand in; but if the mouth of the mother is closed, then she puts her hand in the perineum of the mother, and seeks with that the head, and pulls it with the fingers into the mouth of the mother, and then puts in it a hook, or two hooks, and pulls it with those.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted by an abscess caused by a boil, then it must not be operated on; rather, it must be treated with an infusion of humid, fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the thing is on the side of the body, then if it is possible, it should be lanced; and it should be administered with the water that we have said in the living fetus.
And if that is not possible, then it should be incised in pieces, and extracted.
And you must leave no cause of the second birth.
And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer the water that we have said for the cure of the abscesses caused by the mother.
And if there occurs a flow of blood, then send them down to styptic waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in whose belly was a dead fetus, and then over that fire another pregnancy, and then over the dead fetus, another. It happened to me a long time ago an abscess in the navel; and it inflated so that a fire opened, and it began to throw out pus.
And I was called to the cure of it, and medicated it for a long time, and the plague did not consolidate.
Then I placed on it some causes of plaster of strong attraction, and extracted from it a bone, and after a few days passed, and extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, as in the belly there were no bones.
And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore I continued to treat the abscess, and extracted from it more bones, the woman existing in her usual dispositions, and already living in that manner for a long time, cured of it a little pus.
And I do not affirm that it is strange, but that in this there is science and help to what the physician artifices with his hand for cure administers.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of the verge with which the mother is opened:
This is the form of the stretcher in which the blades are inserted, to which insertion there are two verges in two extremities of two feet. But however this verge must be more subtle of strictor, and be made either of ebony or of wood of boys.
And its width of each shaft is two fingers and the margin of each is one finger, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle place of the two shafts there are two adjustments of that same shaft, which are already fastened, of which the length is the majority of one palm and a little less, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little less.
And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it be opened with those when you revolve the two prescribed verges.
Other form similar to that more subtle and lighter:
It is made of ebony or wood shafts according to the likeness of forceps. But however at the extremity of it there are two additions as it were, and the length of those additions is as one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And as you want with those to open the mother, then you make the woman lie on the sheet with her feet dangling, open what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mouth of the mother until the midwife makes it so that you want.
The form of the verge the which the ancients said:
Form of impellent with which the fetus is pushed:
Form of friendship which is contained the great head
And it is assembled to forceps whose teeth in the extremity, so as sometimes, and some times it is made long as forceps according to this form, so as sometimes, which has teeth as teeth of saw with which is incised and contained. Form of friendship little:
Form of an anchor having a spine:
Form of an anchor having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two extremities with which the head is cut off:
Form of two spatulas wide:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied the species of that and are prepared the artificers, as much as is lighter to their operation and more art of men by their quantity.
And in works of those instruments already whatever it is of you apparelled, because the necessity of those is inexcusable.
Of extraction of the secondine.
When the secondine is retained in childbirth, then it is necessary that you command the patient to retain her breath, and then make that stir with condition, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of it and over the nostrils of it, and if by this it is brought out, well is.
And if not, then you take a wool and perforate in the cover a hole and place in that herbs burning the mouth of the mother, as well as  calament and rue and anise and chamomile and sicados arabic and cinnamon and centaury. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the wool, and place that over the fire.
And then place a tube of cane in the mouth of the mother, and keep that inside that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then make that stir as we have said, and the secondine is thrown out with velocity.
But if remain after this cure and it is not brought out, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of althea, and then introduce that into the cone and caress with that the secondine, and as that is found, then take it and extend it little by little. But if it is annexed in the perineum of the mother, then introduce her hand as we have recounted, and when she will have found the secondine, extract it little by little according to rectum so that the mother does not feel the traction vehement. Lift so that it be changed to the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recounted the cure with stir and with medication of the wool with herbs.
But if it is not thrown out with all the causes which we have recounted, then guard that you do not fatigue over that in iteration of abstraction, but rather that what is brought out of it to the mouth of the mother lies to the cloth of the woman, and then sterilize that with enguent and tetrafarmacon; for that will make it rot that near some days and will be dissolved and will be thrown out.
But when it may be possible, it is of it elevated bad odor to the head, and to the stomach, and that ledeys the patient; and then it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered to it.
But some of the Ancients already are proven sub-fumigation of nazitort and of figs dried.
Form of instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated ofves the retention of menstruation and of the secondine:
It is made of wire or of brass.
And it is placed the subtle extremity in the cone and the wide extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation is placed over the embers of the fire.
And keep that inside that the sub-fumigation be consumed and iterate another.
Of cure of the anus of the unperforated child.
Many children are born and the anuses of them are not perforated, those which already have a subtle and opilated. Therefore it is necessary to the midwife that with her finger she perforates that cicatricle; and if not, perforate that with a sharp spatula, and guard that it does not touch the lacert.
And then place over that wool infused in wine and oil; and then cure that with enguent inside that it is senat.
But if you fear that it is opilated, then place in the hole a tube for many days, and remove it when the child will want to defecate.
And already accidies opilation of the anus by consolidation of plague or of abscess; therefore it is necessary that that consolidation be incised, and then it be cured with that which we have said of the cure and of the lead.
Of cure of the fistulas that become from below.
The fistulas that become in the part below pus low and nodulation and thickness which become near the anus outside or in the space of the one part.
And it is a fistula or ulcers.
And because that node is antiquated and runs from the moist white humidity or subtle pus, and sometimes from these fistulas some penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by what is emitted from them by the egress and by windiness; and sometimes the patient uses the egress, and very often it is emitted from these worms.
And sometimes from these fistulas, in the space, they penetrate into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and sometimes from these they penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the knot of the hip.
And in which it is known that a fistula penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate, is that you put your finger inside the anus, and you introduce a subtle probe of thread or iron into the fistula when there is no turgescence.
But if there is turgescence, then introduce into that a subtle probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all, nor do you process from the tract any cause of egress or worms or windiness, thus as we have said, then you know that it is not penetrating, and then you turn to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the vagina, then the signification of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it so that the place with medicine may be consolidated.
But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the hip and causing pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe penetrates here if there is no turgescence into the hip, and causing pain in the circuit of the part; and that from it pus is always yielded; and that it does not work in that medication, nor is it consolidated with an enema.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure of all, and the cure of those is the work and vanity of the physicians' leaves upon which they are founded.
But in that which is not penetrating and not antiquated, healing with iron is expected according to what I have told you, and what I have already tried and proven.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their two sides and elevates their legs onto them, the thighs being inclined to the belly of them, and then introduce a probe of lead, or thread if there is turgescence in the fistula, until you know the place where the probe penetrates.
And if that feels the patient around the buttock, then cover that when you introduce your finger into the buttock.
And if you feel in your finger the probe already by itself penetrating, or another thing that you feel between your finger and that skin or flesh, then you know certainly that that is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, for it is not in that healing, as we have said.
But however, some say that it is healed in some men tart.
And of the medication by which is expected help in it is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it is preceded, and introduce that ignited into the fistula until it reaches around the buttock; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those fleshy parts adjusted to the fistula have been cauterized, which are like the quill of a bird's feather.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border until all those fleshy parts that have been cauterized can be covered, and then cure that with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, well is; and if not, then it is not healed in any time by other cure.
And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the buttock, and between that and the probe which is veiled by flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula in that which seizes the surface of the pudendum, then dry the pudendum from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying by the probe, and in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the probe reaches, and by the probe is liberated and catched.
And then purify those fistulous fleshy parts which are assembled to the quill of a bird's feather and do not break from those any cause.
But if flux of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when you were inserting those fleshy parts, then the best that may be and of the light pus instrument is to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts good two habits: it is the cauterization of those fleshy parts adjusted, and abscess of the blood and excretion of the humidities.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border or in cauterized tripe until the place gets brace, and then cure the plague with enemas of flesh-hardening and consolidating.
And so medicines in which there is astringency and excretion; when then it is restored it is already healed and you do not fear iteration.
But if the fistula already reaches into the preon of the buttock and is elongated from it to the surface of the body, then introduce your finger into the buttock and inquire with that.
And therefore if you feel the probe and between you and it is veiled by skin or flesh, and it is proper to penetration, then there is no operation in it but according to the way of trust and of hope.
This cause is administered in him in one of three ways: either that cauterize that as we have said; or that succeeds that within that you can achieve the concavity of him so that it is possible to you to intervene the qualcas and the cure propdana; and do not process mot am seccio so that no incides le lacert containing le cuol, and that accidisque over the malaute eyssiment of the egistio ses voluntat; and then cure that am that we have said quar fort leu sira sanat; or that elongues that velament and mondes that pus that seccas that within prop le cul, as we have said, or am tenta or am another instrument of acute extremitat, and aprop mondifique those carns fistuladas the ones that so in the seccio entro the one podes am percrustacio; and aprop esforsa te to far la restauracio of tota la plagua am seccio, and if the orrifici pus desus is not consolidated, and romangua the fistula uberta in the partida del cul, and sira pus leugier per le malaute. And in some cases the fistula is finished in this manner: it is when you intervene the tenta in the fistula, and it is in the latz of the cul around the surface of the body with the codena and in the margin of the cul, the hours then take tenta of perforated extremitat, which is as if needle of preparantz the hearts according to this form:
And intervene in that faithful envolopat of v fiels or around those; and aprop intervene tenta with faithful in the fistula within that you can achieve the concavity of it.
But if it is penetrating in the margin of the cul prop dedintz, then you extratz the faithful of that trauc as if you intervene the tieu dit in the cul; and extraguas the extremitat of the faithful and adjusts the two extremitatz essemps, and estrenh each one, and leyssa aquo for a day or for two, and when more incides the faithful in the carn, estrenh be that within that those carns sian incididas the ones that so between doas extremitatz of the faithful and that cajan.
And then cure the plague within that it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orrifici of the fistula is not penetrating, then do that penetrate, in some manner that it is to you prepared, since not in the preon, for that it is not to you that fassas aquo for that no incides the lacert; and aprop do that within that it is healed.
The form of spatum spinos am lo qual is fenduda the fistula: the curvitat of the qual is mot aguda and the other partida is no-aguda, for so that no incides aquo that is not necessary, as times.
Of suture of hemorrhoids in the ones that corra sanc in the inscizio of those.
Hemorrhoids so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi that it is of carbos, o quays those sian cum a gras of rasim. And of those so petitas and grans, and that the sanc corr of those tostemps and is una, and so motas, and so fora·l cul, and in the extremitatz of it.
But empero those that so foro le cul so segon the mes of pauca humiditat, of those that corr aygua citrina or a petit of sanc am cos continuabla, and so segon the color of the cos.
And the cure of that which is dedintz the cuol is that you command the malaute that se assela and that se exprema within that the cuol yesca and the emoroydas apparescan to you. Then you te coyte and suspen am uncis or that you have those am the tua ungla, and aprop incides those deves the suas razitz.
But if the uncis so not tengutz in those for the humiditat of lor and mollificacio of those, then take those am drap aspre or am coto or am flassada of lana, and extratz those am les tieus ditz, and aprop incides those and polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop the inscizio, per that sian ad those in loc of cauteri; or cauteriza those segon that is precedit in le capitol of cauterizar. And aprop cura those am the other curecio entro that they sian sanadas.
And if the cul no obezeys a egressio, then cristerisa the malaute am cristeri in the qual sia mordicacio petita, and sia lavat am aquel aquo that is in the cuol and that obezesca a egressio leugierament when the malaute s’esprem.
But if the emorroydas so defora le cul, then the cause of lor is leugiera, and is that you prenguas those am the tua ungla, or that you prenguas those am unci, and incides those, and aprop cura those am aquo that havem dit entro that they sian sanadas.
And that which avoreys inscizio, cove that you aministres suture of lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat and intervene that in agulha and aprop extratz the emorroydas to the partidas dessus, and fay that penetrate am the agulha in the razit of the autra part, and envolveys the doas extramitatz of the fiel in the partida pus ofejs of the agulha, and so latitudinalment; and estrenh the emorroyda am strectura fort, and aprop noza the fiel and extratz the agulha.
And do this to all, and leave one of them uncooked, so that the superfluity of blood runs from that one.
And place on the buttocks a cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerot; and place that on the buttocks and command the patient to rest. And then leave that inside the box; and when it is dried, cure those with ointment or with another cure inside the box.
And since they are old and do not heal in this medicine, then when you have those with the point of a spatula or with your fingernail, while they are made moist and are hosted by the pus that flows from them, which prevents them from consolidating; and then cure them when they are consolidated.
Then you must remove those with a razor pus vehemently that the first one when blood is drawn and are excoriated; and then cure them when they are healed.
Know that almesamir, it is called, and is not if not a red knot according to the color of the body resembling a head of a clavicle, and it is made in all the body and mostly in the parts below the feet and at the knees, and therefore by those pains you must know the ailment.
And therefore when it is incised that which is in the circuit of the claw, and it is held with the forceps or with an anvil, and it is eradicated from its root; and then cure that.
And if you want, cauterize the following as it is preceded in its chapter.
But of the wart is a small eminence rough fistulated round on the surface of the body, and many times they come in the most of the children.
And the cure of it is that you extend and cut that, or that you tighten that with a thread or with a pellet inside a box. And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
But a formica is a small eminence,  feutrada or fistulated thick on the surface of the body, going to the groin, and when the ant touches it, it is felt in it resembling a bite of an ant, and it is made around the body.
And the cure of it is that you take a quill of eagle or of vulture, and it be strong, and place that on the formica while it contains the circle of the quill of the parts of it; and then revolve your hand with the quill while you cut that which is in the circuit of the formica, and place that in the groin of the flesh, and that you eradicate the formica from its root.
And if you want, do this with a quill of iron or of steel according to this form:
Let the upper part of the quill be drawn to subtlety, dull (so it is not perforated), enveloped so that on the finger the apprehension of it be blinded and the revolution of that.
And if you want, cauterize the formica according to what is said before in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter of cauteries.
Of the form of the instruments that are administered to give christening.
Sometimes christening is done with silver or with lead or with iron melted or malleated; and sometimes it is done with those instruments small and large according to those to whom they are administered, that which is administered in the cure of the small children be small; and of those whose buttocks are rough or painful, the christenings of those be small.
The form of the large and few christening:
The head of the quill of it from above in which the pouch is tied be wide according to this manner; and be to it distinction the one where the pouch is tied as it is sometimes.
And the extremity of it from below, which is inserted into the anus, be dull (so it is not open) much lion, drawing to subtlety; and in one of the sides of it be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and be the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and a little thicker.
And be the pouch in which are placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheepskin, and the root of it be a palm.
And be perforated by many holes as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes the thickness of the finger.
And then insert into those holes a strong thread of cru thread which be of ten threads, or about those; and adjust with that the pouch; and when it is placed in it the pouch, be straight in the head of the christening between two distinct ones with strong constriction, and then christenize with that each hole: But the quality of christenizing with that is that you fill the pouch with the medicine, that it be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and guard yourself that it be not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient be laid on his back, and raise his legs up and place below him a cushion on which already are the men or a bolster; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with album of hen or with mucellage of fenugrec or of similar; and then insert that into the anus with facility, and then the minister grasps the pouch and expresses that with two hands and at the same time with vehemence until it be evacuated into the bowel all that which is in the christening; and then extract the christening and the patient lifts his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to vomit, he should have as much as he can; and if he sleeps with it all night, it is more beneficial.
But if you treat him for diseases of the solution of the belly and his vomiting, then you iterate the cautery while it is healing.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or festering abscesses, then be the cautery very subtle and lion, of the cauteries with which the children are cauterized.
Of the cure of plagues.
And I have already said in the division of the cure of plagues what was convenient to the book, and I say so the cure of those with my and medicines according to the complement.
Therefore I say that the plagues are diversified according to what by which the plagues are made and according to the place upon which the plagues fall.
And the causes for which many times the plagues are made are such as a bite of a viper, or incision of a sword or of a dagger, or percussion with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
But the plagues that are in the places of the body are such as a plague which falls upon the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the arm, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I am recounting the cure of some plagues so that you pause that reasoning and rule over the other plagues.
And I begin with the plagues of the head simple, for the remembrance of the composite will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is by a bite of a viper or similar, and the wound has already been cleansed alone and it is a great plague and fears about that patient having an abscess, then you cauterize and perform cephalic phlebotomy immediately, and do not delay this; and extract from that of the blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other cause prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood that is emitted from the plague is little.
And be the phlebotomy on the opposite side of the afflicted area; and guard the patient from repletion and from wine and from coarse food.
But if from the minutia any cause prohibits, then let the food be lessened and do not approach to meat nor to wine.
And place on the plague, if to it there occurs an abscess cauterize, coat infused in rose oil or in wine in which it is steeped.
But if it is certain of an abscess cauterize, then place on the plague, if it is recent with its blood and the air has not changed that the powder which I will recount shortly.
And if the air has already changed that, then place on the wound until it is healed.
But if the plague is great or is by incision of a sword and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted by pessaries, then adjust those with suture according to that I will recount of the suture of them.
But if the plague is already discovered of the bone and skin, and there is no retention of it but a small suspensory, then incise that and apply to the plague with medicines and restore the flesh to the place of the wound, and command the patient to be cautious of foods in which there is grossness: caps and forms cooked meat and similar to them, until it is composed.
And if there is a putrefaction in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that and throw it away, and then cure that.
But if in these plagues an artery or vein is present from which blood can flow, and it is not incised by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that it is not incised, then you incise that with a spatula, or lick that; and if necessity provokes that what we have said does not confer, then you cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; so that you pulverize over those this powder, because it consolidates before the air changes them.
And the manner of the powder is this: take olive oil, one part, of dragon's blood, two parts, of cauterized earth, three parts; be all three ground and sifted, and of it be the wound filled, and be constricted by good constriction until it well adheres over that, and be coagulated with the blood.
And after strengthens that with pessaries and leaves it, and do not untie it while it is so that it is not apostematized, for no medicine is extracted from it until it is healed.
And sometimes do this alone cauterize, when it is not to you in present olive oil and dragon's blood.
And already do this same operation in the great plagues when it is necessary that it be placed over them and be tightened, and are recent plagues with their blood, those which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then it is not understood in the position of this powder, but rather cure those with what we have said, so that you place over them some digested poultices, or that you place over them powder of barley flour with water and honey until they get a poultice; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if an accident occurs with a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract it with your hand.
And I will say the cure for skull fractures in that which is venomous.
Of the plagues of the neck.
But if the plague occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in medication, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in its place, but that its cure is avoided with what makes vehement styptication, as ziniar and zegi that is vitriol and similar to their nozo to the nerves and against that. And do not put on the wound any cause of all cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the most hot of all the members.
And if that is cured with light medicines, as it is washed with sweet water, some herbs infused in rose or un-rose oil, and when it is washed with sweet water and the other pebbles minced according to this manner, and humid gauze.
But if the wound is large, then administer suture, or shorten the lips of it, and then cure that with powders until it is healed.
But if to the wound is depth or it occurs in the lowest part of the body, then perforate that in the most depressed location.
But if in the wound is already incised artery and is obtained flow of blood, then separate or dry that, or tie that, or cauterize that if necessity provokes to that.
But if already incised the vertebrae of the throat or all, and are saved the veins of the neck, then you adjust the lips of the trachea with suture over the tube of the throat and do not touch that; lift that and return that to its natural figure, and then strengthen that with decent structure, and leave that for some days; and then cure that with gauze in which is styptication and excitation until it is healed.
But if the wound already in the bone has been made inprice, then strike that, and if in it there are fragments of bone, extract all those that you can of them; and what to you is not apparelled, leave that until the wound is healed, and it is separated and the discharge of it is alleviated.
And if the wound is recent then pulverize on that powder which is recommended to you. But if in the wound is made fistula, then cure that with that of which the remembrance will come in its chapter.
If it is percussion of lance or of sword, and times of it the depth, then consider more if of the wound there is ventilation when the patient is ill; then know that the wound is mortal.
And if in it there is no depth and the wound is recent with its blood, then you put on it in the first hour powder, and do not strengthen that so that it is not the blood retained in the depth of it and that returns to the heart and that augments the patient, but put on it attractive gauze, and untie that twice a day.
And if the gauze is not to you present, then you put on the orifice of the wound old cloth so that it sucks that which is of the humidities; and make that the patient sleeps on the wound so that it runs that which is in it adjusted.
But if already of the wound are passed three days or more and there does not occur to the patient spasm nor tremor of heart nor stricture of the ale, and times the other good dispositions of it, then know that the wound is saved; and therefore cure that with calguas and with the other cure until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is excused, and already all time is open, then know that already is made fistula; cure therefore that by its chapter.
And if the wound is by incision of sword or of lance, and is simple in the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure that with that which is preceded by suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if already has been made inprice in the bone, and so already of it are incised pieces, then you turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound is healed, that the extraction of them is alleviated.
And of the other wounds accidents in the other members the judgment in cure is the judgment of that which we have said.
Of the wounds of the belly.
The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or little, or middle.
And small disruption is made difficult by other manner, and it seems that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not try of the intrusion of them to their place as soon as possible, because it opens and is thickened for that the entrance of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best incision is the middle one, because in that one the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, as it is in the two species mentioned before.
And know that the suture of the belly is done in four ways, but two sutures are common that are used in sutures of the other wounds of the body.
And two other sutures proper are used in the others, but they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you each one with exposition and explanation.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the hernia through that, and it is difficult to reduce that, then it is done in one of two ways: or by the smallness of the incision as we have said, or when the hernia has come inflammation because of the cold of the air.
And therefore when this is so, then you should poultice that, immersing a sponge or cloth wet in tepid water, or which you have boiled in water with squill, and cypress, and spikenard, and apply that to the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes do this with wine which has astringency, and it is better than water alone in the resolution of the inflammation.
And therefore when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the hernia with water in which are boiled alder and mallows, for by this it is alleviated the pain of it with little cause.
But if the pain of it is excused with this cure, then widen the incision a little with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first cure is better, when it is proper that it is not a section, and it is not occupation to dry it up when there is no need and lack.
Of the instrument, this is the form of it:
One part of it is sharp, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is subtle, and not as subtle as a spatula, but blunt a little.
And therefore when the wound is amplified and the hernia is outside, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the form of its natural, in its proper place, if it is possible on that, because it is better.
But when the incision is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you place the head and feet higher than the middle parts.
And similarly if the incision is in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your understanding and your consideration always in that way so that the part in which the wound is is higher than the other.
And thus it is necessary that you administer this in the large wounds and in the middle wounds.
And in the small wounds, place that which is prepared by you, and make that it be ministered between your fingers, which has the incision all with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then uncover from that to that which you see the suture any cause to another.
And this is the common way of suturing: one that you take the needle, or count of needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and then lay it from the end of the incision of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle one, or another that you do not put thread in the two extremities of the cord, with two extremities of the  ciph, which is below the cord of the parts of the fingers, until you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already joined two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the ciph, and are made four orders.
And then strengthen with thread double in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes of two parts at once, and then join the two lips and the wound by decent joining; and then lay the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in that, and then tie that with thread as you tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the whole constriction of the wound.
And let the needles be medium between thickness and subtlety, because the subtle needles slightly cut the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to enter into the cord, and therefore for that reason they should be medium in subtlety and thickness.
And do not let the needle be fixed in two extremities of the cord properly, so that the flesh is not slightly cut and that the wound may be healed before its consolidation.
And do not be prolonged in suturing so that the wound may be hindered from consolidation.
And then cut the extremities of the needles so that they do not prick the patient's sleep; and place on the suture powders expanded of all parts, which have the extremities of the needles; and leave those until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And these kinds of suturing with needles in this way is most convenient in the small wounds, because it suffices in the suturing of them one needle or two or around those.
But the second suturing is common: and it is that you administer with suturing the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the ciph, in one time, with a needle in which the thread is enveloped equal in subtlety and thickness.
And when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, reduce the needle from that same part from which you began, so that the thread retracted is taken from the higher part to the wound, so that the suture is like a suture of cloth with which the cloths are tightened.
And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suture is for men.
And with this suture, you sewed the wound that was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been plagued with a knife, and the rupture of the wound was greater than a palm, and it was swollen around two palms of the intestine of the middle part, and the rupture was in the middle of the limb; and therefore you reduced it after that the intestine had been pierced by the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and I cured it and it is healed; and after that, it is visible for months, and it is converted into its dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by miracle it was healed, because I did not cure it with ointment, because it was in a place where ointment was not found nor any medicine, but I placed on the wound a clean cloth twice a day and washed it diligently with water of honey until it was healed.
But I say two kinds of sutures proper according to the narration of Scripture.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the chain, and insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
And therefore, as the needle penetrates the chain and in that middle laceration according to rectitude and length of the whole body, and leave the extremity of the ciphac in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate in the other extremity the needle from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the middle.
And then, as you have made that penetration, then you make that penetration another time in that same extremity of the middle from the front part to the back part; and leave the extremity of the ciphac that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity from the back part to the front part.
And make the penetration with that one with which you make that penetration in the ciphac in the extremity of the mirat which is in the part of it while all that penetrates.
And then, as you begin from this middle side and stitch that with the extremity that is of the ciphac in the other place, and extract the needle from the chain which penetrated, and then reduce that one in that chain and body the extremity of the ciphac that is in the other side with this extremity of the mirat; and extract that one from the chain which is of part of it.
And do this one time and another, and do this one time after another until you stitch all that is front according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you stitch with suture of pellicies with which you stitch the hairs, in this way that you stitch the ciphac one time from the part of the extremity of the chain, and that you leave that other time inside while you make it completed.
But the second kind of proper suture which I call Gualia, and this is of service of it and by it recommended, is that you stitch that one according to similarity with which some medicants stitch that one, in this way that they join all part to its corresponding part to it convenient by nature; and they apply the extremity of one of it and the extremity of the mirat to the other extremity of it, and that is done according to that which I recommend to you.
So that you place the needle in the extremity of the mirat to your own from the front part, and make that penetration to the back part in that same one, and leave two extremities of the ciphac; and then, turn the needle and make that penetration from front to back in two extremities of the ciphac.
And then, turn those ones each one, and make that penetration each one from the back part inside to the front part in two extremities of the mirat others that are in the opposite place.
And this manner of suture is better than the common suture lighter, and it is the suture of which I have previously mentioned recollection.
This is the sermon of Gualia.
And some said to me, suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so is that you insert in these ones each one a thread, and begin with the insertion of the needle of that which you must, and make that penetration into the other place according to suture of those with which they stitch the hides similarly.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle part of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than of the other places of the belly.
But the judgment of medication of the wound is the judgment of the other wounds.
Which cause is because when you congeal the wound recent with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the intestine and stitch it and adapt it decently, then it rests upon that encrusted powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then it rests upon that some ointments which are at your presence while they make hard and they join the threads, and they are consolidated ciphac and mirat; and then cure it as is the cure of the other wounds while it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines, then place a poultice on that spot, because it begins to sweat, to have a bad smell, and changes those two times a day, just as I have taught you, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medication in many dispositions when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague will communicate to the main members, then you must submerge wool fleece in oil of good quality, or in rose oil, and place it on the circuit of the places that are between the angles and leave the dressings.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the bowels, because many times this happens, then cauterize that with a black stiptic vi, and more so if the ulceration has reached the bowel and is made an opening penetrating into its cavity.
And know that the one that is of the thick bowel is of lighter healing than the one that is in the subtle bowels.
And it is of difficult healing because the bowel that is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from plague that falls upon it at all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of the magnitude of those that are in them, and because of the subtlety of the body of that one, and because of the proximity of that one to the nature of nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the plague is the cloth, and you get that recent, reduce it according to your recipe with which you reduce the bowels equally.
But if it has passed to it space and it is already made green or black, then you must strengthen that with a file on the place that is blackened by it, so that blood flux comes, because in the cloth are veins and arteries.
And then, having incised that which is other than that ligament, place the ends of the file pendant from the place left by the plague, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it, and you must the removal of the cloth and emission of the sweat of the plague.
Reminder of the plagues when they happen in the bowel.
When a rupture occurs in the bowel and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some men, because for that reason I saw one who had been plagued in his belly with a lance thrust and it was the plague on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and he from it had discharge and flatulence.
Therefore, I followed the cure of him, since he was not confused in the healing of him, but I continued to treat him subtilily until the wound was healed and the place was consolidated.
And I saw that the place was already consolidated, I put upon the patient that he should not be troubled by an accident in his belly; and he did not become ill because of that accident and he returned to his usual dispositions of eating and drinking, and then he went into the bath and he was exercised in his walks.
And already some experienced ones have said that when a plague occurs in the bowel, and it is small, then it must be bound in this manner: and it is that you take worms of large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and place a worm of those that has the mouth open on the two lips of the plague; therefore when it takes on those and strengthens its mouth, cut off its head, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another worm next to the first one, and do not cease doing this with worms one next to another according to the quantity of the whole plague.
And then reduce those and cover the plague; and remain those annexed heads in the bowel until the bowel is healed; and do not occur to the patient any harm.
And it is already possible that the bowel be bound with a subtle file which is made of the bowel of beast annexed to it, because it is more in needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these files of bowel, and it be well skinned, and then bind the extremity of it with file of linen, enveloped, and then introduce that file in needles and cover with it the bowel, and reduce it in the rupture.
And this manner of suturing with worms is nothing but according to a way of trust and of hope.
But if the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle bowels, because then it is not brought but subtiliation, and it is not healed of it at all.
Of the cure of zuech and fistula.
Know that every plague and abscess when it is inflamed and becomes old, and it is made an ulcer, and it is not consolidated and sweats all the time and is not cut off, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is called a fistula and we call that azukem.
And fistula according to truth is a fetid, hard, white knot, with which there is no pain and to which the cavity is like the cavity of a bird's bone; and for this reason that one is called alcus rizatz, that is, bone.
And it is in some men humid, the one which sweats; and very soon the humidity is cut off in some hours. And some times this humidity is much, and is little, and is thick, and is subtle.
I have already shown all those causes, the signs of them, and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
And I will tell you how to cure a fistula which is made by operation with a knife.
And know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for some of them reach the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the head, or the intestines, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the vertebrae of the spine, or any of the joints composed by composition, as between the hand and foot; and of these, some give rise to proximity to the principal member and its counterparts.
And therefore of these fistulas that are of this manner, those are of the diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and occupation with them is work and ignorance.
And if it is of the fistulas any one the depth of which does not reach those places that have been said, and you wait and confide in the cure of it, and you want to arrive at knowledge of it, then take a probe or a piece of iron, and if the fistula goes straight, and inquire about it with it.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of fine lead, because lead with the lightness of its body is eased and curved of its tortuosity.
And if the fistula is having many horrible things, it is not possible for you to signify upon it with a probe.
Therefore, irrigate the orifice with its orifices, because the moisture by which you irrigate it should go to the other orifices and run from them.
And then inquire exquisitely, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if here has bone or nerve, and if the concavity of the fistula is distant or proximate, or if it is a fistula to which there are many orifices and this above all with the sum of your strength, with your interrogation, with which you interrogate the patient, and the invention of the pain you derive your compression with the hand over the area, and similarities of the significations and causes accidental to the abscess.
And since you have stood upon all those causes with true station, then come to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if the fistula is apparent proximate or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which I have told you.
Then you dry the fistula according to what has been said before of the narration of it, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the veil and of similarities, and cure that while it is healing.
But if the fistula is of distant depth, and is straight, then you must cut that into the preon as much as you are able, and then modify that of all its corrupted flesh; and then administer poultices wrapped in acute medicines, and introduce those into the concavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do this with it some times until the acute medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the concavity of the fistula of the corruption.
And then restore that with unguents which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it according to what we have recounted.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify that, then you inquire about it and dry it according to what we have recounted, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member as we have said.
But if the bone is to you discovered and there is in it some corruption and blackness, then you root that out until the corruption is wholly hosted; and then cure that with what makes it flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and throws back as it was doing, then you know that you have not arrived at the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you uncover it again and exquisitely make the root and purification of it with the rearmost strength of your own, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, well is it; and if not, then you know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore to you in that there is nothing but to leave it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to pull that out, then you pull it out with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
And if there are many bones, then exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and of those leave none behind with your strength.
But if to you causes any contrariety of the humors, and in their incision there is no fear nor error, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are there, and deliver the bones.
But if to you is not preparation to take out the bones from your hour, then pause over the ulcer that which you can put on that ulcer, and leave it until that is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the ulcer that it not be consolidated, and be constricted the section which you have incised in your operation.
Having, if you fear, pause over it a poultice submerged in its trissate with oil, or a poultice submerged in Egyptian unguent, or in one of the green unguents, because when they will soften those ligaments, and the bones are of their separation the ablation, and of those attractions is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone like the thigh bone or hip bone or similar to those, and what is corrupted of it is only the surface, then remove that with a razor only as far as the blackness and corruption remain, and then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted of it is a large portion, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close that and cut it all inward to the place where the corruption has reached, and then cure it inward until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you make a man in his thigh to put that as a sample and assistant over your operation.
Take a young man around thirty years old, who has an accident in his thigh, and from the parts of the body, the evil is over the matter of the body until the matter reaches the thigh, and it is matter of abscess with a large abscess, and it is not due to an external cause.
And therefore take the time with it for the error of the doctors until the abscess is open, and materials are moved from it, and its cure is approached until the thigh is fistulated, and there are made in it various horrific movements, all of which throw out pus and the humors of the body.
And therefore the cure took many months of doctors for about two years, and not in those was there wisdom but in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the thigh of him and the materials that were running from him those horrifically for a great course; and already the body of that man was all swollen and the color of it was yellow.
And therefore I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone with it.
And then I and carefully examined all the orifices and found them to reach all parts of the thigh.
And then I took my knife and cut into one of the orifices where I described a part of the bone, and I found that corrupted, and it was already terrible and corrupted and degraded; and a part of the thigh was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I sealed what was discovered to me and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I judged that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I excised and sealed, and I had already removed it.
And then I placed the restoration of the wound with medicinal consolidatives for a long time, and it did not consolidate.
And then I iterated and discovered over the bone second time over the first discovery, and I found continuous corruption with the bone.
And I sealed what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I made a fair cure for it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered over it another time and did not cease to cut the bone little by little particularly and perforate the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I cut around a palm of it, and that I extracted with its marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it consolidated slightly and healed.
And it was not necessary to iterate in the operation of him and the section of him except for the disposition of the fragility of him and for the paucity of his tolerance and fear of death, for he was afflicted in all hours for superfluity of evacuation syncope evil.
And therefore healed is by whole healing, and nothing is in the place of bone hard flesh; and it is made good the disposition of him in his body and returns the virtue of him; and it is converted in his dispositions and did not do to him contrariety in walking nor harm in any cause.
But if the bone is eminent in the place of the body already pulled, then when you succeed that in this manner: and that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that eminent bone, and command someone to extend it upwards; and place that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then tie that over the flesh that is left of the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh to the parts below, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to seal so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
And place a board or table below the bone decently, for when you do this it is not forbidden the saw that does not cut the corrupted flesh.
And cover that the sawing be over the corrupted place little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, and force the sawing of it another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, abates is one part continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh of all parts altogether; and then place a board below, and then saw that of the first part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continued.
And be the sawing according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in it reason but engine.
And if the corruption is in the part of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, cover that you inquire the corruption in what manner it appears to you, and that you open that, and cleanse that according to each disposition which is to you possible, and in case engine be rectified to you, when it does not do to you contrariety vein or nerve.
And know what are the instruments and saws to cut these bones, according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and the greatness and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; for that every time you prepare for every kind of operation, the instrument convenient to that operation.
And know that that operation signifies to you about the kind of instrument of which you indigeysses; when you are great study and long and knowledge of the ways of this art, and witness of ways of diseases, for then you already have by yourself what is convenient to them of the instruments to every disease.
And you so a you forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will put as simple with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experiment on the others. Shape of saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Shape of a chisel: Let the head of this chisel be according to the shape of a star-shaped key, and the points of it be according to the shape of the points of the awl.
And it is not convenient unless with that they are confricadatz the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or the mouth is wide open.
Shape of a smaller razor:
Shape of a flat razor:
Shape of another saw decently made: it should be made with an arc of it as high as possible and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of boy knife decently made. Shape of it:
Shape of a razor which has a concavity:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another razor of curved extremity:
Shape of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Shape of another smaller chisel:
Shape of another chisel; this one resembling a chisel, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Shape of a chisel which is convenient for the ratio of that which is perforated of the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and of acute extremity.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly as all the causes that we have said of razors and chisels and saws.
Of incision extremities and the serration of the bones.
The extremities can be cut either by intrinsic cause or by extrinsic cause, or as you will have medicated that corruption by cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the limb which you do not strike by any cause, then you must cut that limb into that which the corruption is, so that the patient escapes by that of death or of malice which is a greater defect of the limb.
And the sign of that to whom it happens, is that the limb is made black before it is cured that fire has already burned it, or it can be said that the blackness is near before the putrefaction of that one enters into that limb that it seizes it and that it nourishes the whole body; and therefore, you must cut it.
And similarly if it is a cause of corruption by percussion of some venomous causes, such as a scorpion of the sea or a viper or a rutela and similar ones.
And if the corruption or the percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters into the hand.
And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you cut it from the root of the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption so that it nourishes in the wrist of the arm.
And if instead of that, then you cut the arm into the armpit at the junction.
And if instead of that, the corruption passes and sometimes it surrounds the armpit, then in that is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause another to that in cure is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly do of the foot when corruption replaces the toe of the foot, then you cut it into one of the joints.
And if it takes hold in the arch of the foot, then you cut the whole foot. But if it reaches into the thigh, then you cut the leg into the junction of the thigh.
And if the corruption has already reached the thigh, then in it there is no remedy but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the manner of cutting the limb or of sawing it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part furthest from where you want to cut, and strengthen another ligament over the place; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, so that it is like a spatula until all the flesh is uncovered; and then cut or saw.
And that it be laid cloth of linen from all parts so that it does not touch the place itself, and that it comes to the patient the lesion adjusted and abscess cauter.
But if blood flows when you work, then cauterize the area carefully, or place some powders on it to restrain the blood; and then return to your treatment before it is completed.
And then bind the affected limb with a bandage as convenient, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you what happens to a man in his foot, this same accident which I have told you, which is when blackness occurs in his foot with a burning that was assembled like the burning of fire.
And that corruption occurs first in his toe before it spreads throughout his entire foot.
And then that man prepares for himself to put pus that he might feel the cure going to the limb with the violence of it that throbs with pain and burning, and the ulcer spreads into the joint, and fire heals.
For a long time that same corruption occurs in the toe of the hand that I have indicated.
And then it comes to me, and I am pierced to feel that superfluity with what I place on the hand of the medicines, and then the purification of his body; and the superfluity does not return and it begins to go to the other toe before it begins in the hand.
And he begs me to cut his hand, and I do not want to do that, hoping for the repercussion of that superfluity, and more than that, I fear that the incision of his hand will be dead, because the virtue of the sickness was over the killing.
And since he despaired of me, he returned to his land, and it came to me that that man prepared and cut his hand entirely, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration except so that it may be helpful regarding what happens to this illness, and that its meaning be known and according to which it be treated.
Of the cure of sinews and the quality of clysterization with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus, and then it is ruptured and perforated, and pus is discharged from it, and the place remains empty like it was a vessel, and the skin that is above it is as fine as cloth, and it has not reached the back corruption, and it has not imprinted on the bone or on the nerves or on the ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
But however, if the space is prolonged until the corruption imprints on some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure of it is that the skin is incised entirely as it is revolved, and mostly when it is fine and made like cloth, and it is cauterized so that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin adheres and that that corruption has not achieved further consequence, and in the skin there has passed through a face, then you cure that with clysters.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the brac that you see is of a fetid odor, then you clysterize that with an Egyptian medicine which is of oil and wine and ginger receiving equal parts, and they are placed in a vessel, and they are boiled over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and clysterize with that the sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then you extract that with a spoon; and do this for so many days until the sinus is purified and the stench is removed.
And sometimes it is clysterized with ash water, when you do not have this medicine present; and it is that you take the ash of vitz, and put water on it; and then you collect that and clysterize with it until you confess that the sinus is then healed.
And if the illness does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then clysterize that with water and honey and a little crushed ginger, and clysterize that with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey is that it purifies and washes, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
And as you do this sometimes and you confess that the sinus is already healed, then clysterize that with water that makes flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take of the dyphthenon and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine; or that you clysterize with some medicines and other gargles that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise of gargles.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow in which the clyster nozzle is not received, then you enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and place in it a poultice wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the lips of it with suture and leave it for the quantity in which between the clyster its addition.
And if the orifice from which the pus flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the lowest place that is in it so that the pus flows downwards, because when the pus is constricted in the depth of the sinus the flesh is generated in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the environment of the bone as low as you want, then perforate it so that you prepare the limb with the preparation by which the arm flows lightly according to what is to your apparel and that no cause of the arm be retained in it.
May that which is over the orifice of the sinus, which you remove every hour so that what is adjusted in it of the arm may escape. And so that you know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is undigested.
And thus you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is thrown over the orifice of the sinus already adheres, or approaches adhesion, then you may remove it on the third day, and when you remove the patch, then change the cloth for another and renew the poultice.
But if from the sinus a little space away there are subtle viruses, then do not despair of their adhesion, for the healing of it approaches, for there are some men in whom the generation of flesh in their wounds is slow, and of those it is done the contrary.
And if from the sinus after many days there is undigested arm emitted, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is the prolonged cause, then you adjust in drying the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as a diaphaniac poultice, when in it there is adjusted superfluity of addition of zegi.
And the last of the cures is that you take diaphaniac poultice and dissolve it in rose oil, and on it put a little bit of honey in its substance, and then mix that with it, and use of that.
And already it seems in that action, when there is no arm, diaphaniac poultice, honey when it is cooked until it is thickened, and use of it; or that you take frankincense and aloes and incense, and grind everything and pulverize it over the honey when it is on the fire, and then line it with water over cloth and stretch it over the sinus; and line it with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and pulverize it over cloth and stretch it.
And sometimes are administered with it the long and root of celestial lily (and it is celestial lily) and flour of herbs and centaurea, and use of those simples or adjust them, grind them and sift them and pulverize over the honey which I have recommended; and use of it.
And if the sinus is prolonged, and is not healed by this cure, then know that the corruption is in the bone of it, and already make inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with fistular cure, as has been said above.
Of the cure of panaritium and ingrown nails and finger incision and section.
Panaritium is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the finger of the hand or of the foot, and often it arises in the other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, or it is an abscess of a cautery abscess, or it is corrupted, and throws out arm while it corrodes the roots of the nail, and often corrupts that whole, and often it spreads its corruption to the bone until it is to it a fetid odor, and the extremity of the finger is made numb, and the color of it is made dark.
And therefore when you will have that with the water that we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then you cover that you cut with iron all the superfluity that is remaining from the nail and then cauterize the wound with water, for cauterizing a little is helpful in that.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail voids already compress the flesh to the parts of the finger, and they begin to prick it and let it out, then you cover that you put a fine ray under the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and impel it up and cut it with ease, and put on what remains of the flesh of the medicines comburent corrosive until it is all removed; and then cure it with poultices until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already entered the bone, then you cover that you cut the bone and extract it, for no time is it healed that there is in it the corrupted bone.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption going into the finger, then you cut it in one of the nuts according to how it is pressed its recollection, and then cure it until it is healed.
But if to the nail a blow or friction, and there is in that violent pain, then you cover that at the beginning you should cauterize the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula with transverse section from above down, and guard yourself that the section does not reach into the flesh that is under the nail, for you will make the patient to have violent pain, and will cause the birth of the flesh adjusted superfluously in the place; and then cure that place with water that gives relief from pain.
But this is adjusted, which is born in the hands of some men, very strong is the flesh, and very strong is it in their bones, or very strong is it in their nails.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth of them in some nuts of the said. But that one that is born in some nuts of the finger does not hurt, and this one that is born in the joints very strong is hurting.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is lighter, and that you incised that you must its root with a spatula.
But of that one that is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore guard yourself from the abscess of it.
But in that one that is born in the finger of the nuts, because you incised at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw with one of those saws convenient to that, and then cure that inside that it may be healed.
But consolidation which happens to the fingers between their movements often or by birth of the man that nails in this way, or by consolidation of plague or by combustion of fire, or by similarities, therefore cove that succeeds that consolidation inside that the fingers return to their natural form.
And then pause between their cloths of them infused in oil rubbed so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between those, or pause between those a lamina of subtle lead until it be consolidated as cove.
And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you dry that consolidation as it is prepared and convenient to the figure of the member.
Of incision of vices, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and they are veins convoluted thick full of melancholic superfluities which come in motion of the limbs of the body, and the major advent of them in the legs, and most in the legs of the travelers and of the laborers and of the porters.
Therefore cove that you administer purgation of the body of black bile some times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
But the cure of them with iron is according to two manners: one is that it be incised and that the black blood be thrown out, and the other manner is that the vein be elevated and that all be extracted.
The section of it is according to this manner: embroca at the beginning the leg with warm water mot until the thick blood be resolved, that is feculent of the leg, and then strenh the leg of the patient to the most sovereign part of the thigh into the part behind the knee with a bandage, and then dry the vein in a place, or in two, or in three with ample section, and then elevate the black blood with your hand from the part behind the leg into up, and down into down, until from the blood be issued the quantity that you want and that times suffice, and the which will take the virtue of the ailment.
And then tie that, and command him that abstain from the foods black bile engendering.
And iterate the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that night to the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you that raze the leg of the patient, if in it there are motions, and then put it in a bath and embroca the leg of it with warm water until it be blushed and the veins be exuberant; or that it be exercised by strong exercise, if bath is not to you present, until the limb be scalded.
And then secsa the code in the right of the vein by section in the long or in the behind of it of the knee, or in the pus bas of it of the talo.
And then open the code with uncis and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears to the feeling, and is of the appearance of it that times that rug declining to blackness.
And therefore cum evazeys and from the code you times that white that be cord.
And then you put below that the ray until it be elevated and be thrown from the code, and sospen that with onci orp leon.
And then secsa another section about that section for three digits, and then excoriate the code from the part above of the vein until it appear.
And then elevate that and incise that in behind section of the talo, and then extract that and elevate that until it be issued for the second section, and then extract that of the section that is above that.
And fay that until you extract that from the section that is pus sovereign or pus higher of all the sections, until all is issued; and then incise that.
And if you disobey to you ad extract and elevate, then intromet a needle with faithful fort double and ligua that and extract it, or intromet behind it the ray and revolveys your hand to all parts until in be thrown. And guard yourself that it not be incised; for if it be broken, it is fayt to you difficult to elevate that mot and it is come upon the patient for that nocument.
And cum that all total auras fora-gitada, then pause upon the place of the plague lana submerged in wine and oil rubbed and oil no-rubbed, and cure that until it be healed.
And if the spine is contracted and has a curvature in its wrapping, and is not straight as we have said, then you must make incisions over that entire curvature and the places of its wrapping, and then suspend it with hooks while you elevate it entirely.
And guard yourself so that you do not cut the vein and that you do not damage it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and serve your prudence in this.
Form of the incision made on the dried spine:
It is not sharpened like the hooks nor is it of sharp extremity so that it does not damage the vein; and it is of gross flexibility like a lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; it has in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
Of the extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is engendered in the legs in hot lands as in the Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India, hot and arid of little fertility and in which there are no herbs nor trees.
And it is strongly engendered in other places of the body other than the legs.
And the gestation of it is of putrefaction that comes from the bone as if venom from within the body of serpents and worms and scarabs and worms engendered between the bone and the flesh.
And the sign of the reception of its coming is of this vein that accidies in the leg inflammation vehement; and then the place is vesicated; and then as the vein issues from the place of that vesication which seems to be rooted from a plant.
And therefore, when it appears from him the extremity, then you must wrap around it a piece of lead, which weighs one drachma. Within two drachmas, and no more, and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
And as many times as you see of it any cause to the parts outside, wrap that in lead and bind it. And if the matter is prolonged, then you must make an incision of it and wrap the remaining; and do not cut that which is rooted until it is issued forth, for if you cut that it is contracted and enters into the flesh and causes abscess and pus to occur in the place and bad ulceration.
Therefore, it must be treated gradually and extracted little by little, until it is entirely extracted from the back of it and no cause of it remains in the body.
And from this vein it is issued in some men that it is in its length of five palms and ten, and already it has reached me that one issued twenty palms.
And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, then introduce the ray into the tract of it and perforate it with a long tract into the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure it by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many ramps, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and veins to it many orifices, and it is issued from each orifice a ram.
And therefore cure it as we have said in the division and with what is said below.
Of section above worms generated under the skin and it is called the bovine pain.
This malady is called in some lands the bovine malady because it often happens to oxen and it is a worm few in number the one which is born between the bone and the flesh, and it goes in all the body up and down, and is shown in the feeling of its increase from limb to limb until it disrupts the bone and issues forth.
And the generation of it is by putrefaction of some humors as if they were worms and serpents and earthworms and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for the malice of it, because when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and it has reached the brain, then very strongly it weeps in it and enters and destroys the brain, and this happens many times.
And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done unless you know its ambulation and appearance of it to the feeling, and then you must tighten what is above it and what is below it with a bandage and constriction strong, and then dry it above and extract that.
And if it is rooted in the flesh and does not come out, then you must pause cautery with fire on the place until it dies, and the major cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached the head near the brain, then tighten above the eyebrow with a strong constriction, and then dry it, and extract it; and let the patient use of modification of his body with medicines evacuating putrid bad humors, and guard himself from foods that generate putrefaction.
Of section above the pain nafir.
This malady is called in our land nafir, and it is pain which comes in some limbs, and then it is changed from limb to limb.
And I have already seen it as I will tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and because it was for an hour, I saw that inflammation go as if a worm was moving up to this, but lighter than being a worm, as if it were living silver when it runs from place to place.
And then I felt the pain in that place and it felt like a muscle, and then I pressed there for an hour.
And then I corrected in the other arm until I reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to myself that I should turn it all over her body as I saw; and it was too marvelous of the permutation of it and the speed of member to member. And I had already seen this before in my own veins in that manner, however, I have seen many of which the pain being mutated from limb to limb. But I did not see this in the veins as in the woman.
And I did not think it to be this but rather because the woman was old, or so of dry body and of exposed veins, and in this appearance at the feeling that windiness mutated.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retro-cure in those who are delicate and with moist bodies of well-fed veins.
And as you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not to you apparent in the vein as we have said, then you strengthen over that and leave it lightly and softly over that until that windiness is constricted, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it in your veins, then you cure that with expulsion of the body and with that which you expel windiness, and charms those with fetid pills and with pills of serpent and the like.
Of extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they are shot, for their diversity is that of those that have large tips, and small, and concave, and blunt, so they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have shafts.
And of the signs of the servant is when it hits in it an arrow, and it passes through the bone, and it is emitted from the cyphra which is above the brain, for it accides by it soda vehement, and scotomia, and vertigo, and roaring in the legs, and inflammation and roaring of the tongue, and spasm and permixtio of understanding and vomiting of bile, and fort leu is abscindida the word and is destroyed the voice, and it is emitted from the place of the plague humidity white resembling dust, and yeys of it resembling the liquidity of the flesh.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then you abstain from the cure and the extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart, so it is near the left nipple, and feels with that which is put in a hard cause, and it is not a void cause; and fort leu the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the hand, and running of the plague black blood, and seizes that coldness of the extremities, and sore cold, and syncope; and therefore know that death descends all over.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung so are the spitting of blood from the plague, and the vessels that are near the throat are inflamed, and the color of the patient is changed, and he expires great spirit, and demands the traction of cold air.
And if it hits the arrow in the ligament which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small bones, and it is made the leg great with vehement pain and with sighing, and not bad all the members of the muscles.
And if it hits the arrow in the stomach, then fort leu yeys of the plague food somewhat indigested.
And if it hits the arrow in the belly, and it is put in it, yeys some wound of the plague, or the cloth, or the bowel which is dislocated, and there is no hope in the cure of it extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder, and it is emitted urine, and it processes from it some cause to the parts outside, and fort leu is pain upon the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
But the other members as it is the face, the neck, the throat, and the shoulders and the auxiliaries, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the rib, and the leg and their likes of the members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit vein nor artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may signify by them on your healing.
The cause is, that in a man struck by an arrow in the lacrimal of his eye in the root of his nose, and you extracted that from the other side, leaving the gray of the eye, and it is healed, and does not hurt in the eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was struck by it in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be obtained from it except for a small extremity with which it adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head in which there were no eyes.
And the Jew healed, and did not hurt in his eye at all.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was struck by it in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one that has eyes; and therefore I incised upon it between two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; and therefore I skillfully moved it, and then extracted it, and the Christian healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who was struck by it in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and therefore, since forty days had passed and there was no change in him whatsoever from his dispositions, I incised upon the arrow and maneuvered it, and he healed, and did not hurt him at all.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow was lodged in his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and since it had been there for about seven years, he removed the arrow from the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman who was struck by an arrow in her belly, and the wound was consolidated within her, and it had not changed in her dispositions in any way, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man who was struck by an arrow in his face and the wound was consolidated, and he broke the arrow, not feeling much pain, and he looked quite well.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes who was struck in the middle of his nose, and it had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And I was called to his healing after the arrow wound within three days.
And then I examined the wound of the arrow very carefully; and then I inquired about it with a subtle probe, and I did not feel it; but I felt it prick below the right eye, and therefore I suspected that prick was because of the extremity of the arrow.
And I plastered the place with a plaster which has attractive and digestive virtue, confessing to myself that the place would become a pustule so that it would appear to me the place of the arrow, so that it would dry up on it.
And he did not hurt in the place at all, signifying that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster on him for many days, and he did not hurt at all; and the wound was consolidated meanwhile, and he broke the ailment of the extraction of it for a space of many days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and recounted this to me.
And then I placed on the wound medicine acute and corrosive for many days until it opened, and with the probe I felt it, and examined that, and retrieved the extremity of the arrow, which adhered to the shaft.
And then I adjusted in the appearance of the wound for that acute medicine until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the arrow, and it took me time with that for a space of time within four months.
And then since the wound had been amplified, and it was possible for me to intervene with forceps in it, and to remove it, and not to be obliged to do it with a cutting, then I did not cease to skillfully and ingeniously maneuver on it with methods of engineering, until one day on it with methods of engineering I began to hang it with forceps skillfully made, according to how they will come in the form at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the ailment healed completely, and he did not suffer in it in any way.
And I recount to you the quality of the extraction of some arrows so that you may pause this rule and signification upon what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not comprehended with narration nor do those comprehend it in the book.
And the wise artificers compare with few about much; and with what is present about what is absent; and finds novel operation and novel instrument of the descent of the foreign causes of the art when they occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not forth-driven from the members in which they are placed but according to two manners: either by traction of the place in which they enter; or by the contrary of the other part.
And that one which is driven by the place in which it enters, is the arrow proceeding in fleshy place, and it is thrust and forth-driven.
And if you do not obey the cutting at the hour in which it catches, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it can be relaxed, and the traction of it and its egress are relieved.
And if it is stuck in the bone and does not obey your efforts, then leave it for a few days and repeat it with traction and movement every day, and it will be dislocated.
And if it does not obey your efforts, then after a few days, cover that with a sharp needle in the circuit of the arrow in that bone from all parts, with a subtle thread, so that the place is amplified by the arrow, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body, and is hidden from feeling, then you inquire about it with a probe, and if you feel it, then pull it with some instruments which are convenient for its traction.
And if you cannot over it because of the constriction of the plague and the length of the preon, and here there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then you cut on the plague until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is to the ears that it is held, then you cut the flesh in which it is stuck from all parts with all the skill that you can do; and engineer on that, if you cannot over the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and torsion of those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use with a twist of your hand with forceps at all parts until it makes that obey; and subtilly with subtle skill that the arrow is not broken and that it is made to you difficult traction of it and of that extraction.
And if you cannot over it in your hour, then you leave it for a few days until the parts that are in the circuit of it can be softened, and then repeat it when it is relieved. But if to you a contrary flow of blood is made, then you administer what we have said of cure in its chapter.
And guard your virtue of incision of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer skill in every manner to you possible of the evasion of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and tardiness and firmness as I and to you recounted.
And therefore that you may make contrary the arrow so that the patient be according to the figure according to which you must the placement of the arrow in him, for it is more helpful. But if that is not to you possible, then you administer what is to you possible by the figures.
But the arrows that are dislocated by the contrary of the other part, or that have already from it proceeded any part to the parts outside, or make difficulty the extraction of the arrow by feeling of the part above the codename proper and sometimes that eminent; therefore you cut on that; and be the section according to the quantity in which they grasp the forceps; and then pull that, for it is made lighter to effort.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lame contrary until the arrow presses in the bone, and amplify to itself, and then extract it.
And if not, leave that for a few days, and then repeat it until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you impel it with it.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulse, then you introduce and that, if it is blunt, a curved instrument so that between the concavity of it in the tail of the arrow and then impel it with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then you impel it with a strong instrument entering into it, for the arrow is relieved by that.
And if the arrow is envenomated, then cover that with all the flesh in which is the vein, if it is to you possible that, and then care for that with what is convenient.
And if the arrow catches in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and is near so that you touch that with the probe, and it is to you possible to cut on that, then cut on that and guard yourself from incision of vein or of nerve, and extract it, and then close the wound if it is indignant, and cure that until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled:
Let the extremities of them be like the beak of a bird that are made like a saw when they grasp on the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of those are made many kinds, great, few, and small, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and its paucity, and of the width of the wound, and of the constriction of it.
as if with a ray so that the entry of it into the concave arrow is eased and it is impelled with that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy of which it is customary to phlebotomize .xxx., of which there are in the head .xvi., There are two pulsatile veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples appear; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of two heels that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle location of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guidegi that are in the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are .v.; because of those, one is cephalic, and it is the wild latz; and the people call "the vein of the head," and dull, and it is a median vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and that one the people call "vein of the whole body," and basilica is the vein which is placed in the domestic latz, and it is called "citillar," and the vulgar people call that "vein of the belly"; and funis of the arm, and it is placed above the focil, and that is the one in which it is phlebotomized, and it is the one that appears on the poutz by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest said, and there are two ramps in it.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of those is that which is below the curvature of the denolh of the wild latz; and the second is sophena, and the location of it is below the leg of the domestic latz; and the sciatic vein, and the location of it is below the leg of the wild latz; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
The benefit of the veins that are near the ears is for ancient catarrhs and emigranea and sahafati and ancient bad headaches.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: that it be rasped the head of the patient, and that it be rubbed the head of the patient in the occiput in the location of both veins with a broad cloth with good friction; then tighten the patient's neck with a bandage until the two appear and the locations of them near the ears in two depressed locations of the head; and you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here it feels with a tenta.
Then you take the pointed lance, and it is that which is incident, and then you introduce that below the vein in the codena until the phlebotomy comes to the bone. And then you elevate your hand with the vein and the codena to the upper parts and you cut the vein with an incident incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make it out of the blood as much as you want.
And then tighten with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
And already it has preceded at the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
But of the two arterial veins that are in the temples the benefit of phlebotomy is for ancient emigranea and evil and assiduous ophthalmia and body of acute superfluities effused to the heels.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck a lot until the two veins appear to the feeling by manifest appearance and it is demonstrated the pulse of them below your finger; and then you feel with a tenta.
And then you elevate the codena above the vein to the upper parts with your finger indicated, and introduce the phlebotomy incident below, and elevate the vein upwards; and cut it as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood run according to the quantity of your need.
And then untie the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place over that coat and poultices and tighten that above with a strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
And already has preceded the remembrance of them, and of those the incision, and the traction at the beginning of the book.
And therefore the benefit of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic to the ancient ailments of the face and to emigranea and rigor and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is according to what I recommend to you; it is that the patient tightens their neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then you take the instrument which is called fossori of which this is the shape of it:
Hold the point eminent which is at the head of the fossa above that vein and strike upon it with a penche or with another cause in the manner of it, and leave the blood to run according to the quantity which you want; and then untie the perforation of the patient and strengthen that while it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with a fleubotomist lat, however, no cove that the fleubotomist is of acute extremity as the others, rather it is of blunt extremity, and fleubotomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is proper and strong it would break in it the fleubotomist when it is subtle.
But the benefit of the two veins that are at the lacrimals of two heels by scabies of the heels by rogor and sebol in the heels, and to the ailments of the face.
And the quality of the fleubotomia is that the patient strengthens the neck with a bandage, and then fleubotomize those, and you be standing over the head of it.
And be made the fleubotomia according to the transverse along the longitude a little with fleubotomist a little, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the fleubotomist is subtle, very much the extremity of it is broken.
And then make run of the blood as much as is to you necessary, and pause over those cuto, and strengthen those for a night, and then untie those.
But the fleubotomia of the vein of the nose is conferent to acute fever and to soda vehement, and to the ailments of the face and emigranea and rogor that accideys in the face, and more when it is ancient.
And the quality of the fleubotomia of it is that the patient strengthens his neck and then take his nose with your left hand, and take the fleubotomist subtle long and place that in the middle place of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the sentiment here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cover that you ultimes your hand on the fleubotomist little by little and make run of the blood according to your necessity; and then tie that for a night, because that is restored lightly.
But the benefit of the fleubotomia of the two guidegui is to constriction of ale and to commencement of leprosy and to many ailments and inpetige and bad ulcerations corrosive as well as herpotromeno.
And the quality of the fleubotomia of those is that the patient strengthens himself with each one in his neck with liament; and stay the artifices over the head of the patient, and the patient be sitting on a sella.
And then fleubotomize the vein along with fleubotomist ample little by little; and then extract of blood according to temperate quantity or according to what you times of necessity that is ad to it; and then make semblant of the other vein.
And then untie the liament and strengthen the two veins with strictura migiera so that the patient is not prefabricated, and leave it until the morning when the plague is healed.
And the benefit of the fleubotomia of the algerich veins, conferreys to small apostemas and pustulas of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcerations and fissures, and to bad ulcerations that are in the nose and in the circuit of it.
And the quality of the fleubotomia of those is that you make cezer the patient before you, and strengthen the neck of it with a bandage, and then revolve the labias of it and regard to two veins of which the one is of the right of the labia and the second of the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each one of both, and this may is because in the circuit of those so veins little black; and therefore inscideys each one by inscizio inscident.
But if dubitacio is of you, and you do not know which one of those is, then you enter to inscizio of the major of those, and of the pus manifesta of those.
And make the semblant of the two veins that are in the labias desus.
But of two veins that are dejos the tongue the juvament is to the fleubotomia of the cephalica to prefocacios that are in the guolayro, to the ailment of the uvula, and to ailments of the mouth.
And the quality of fleubotomar those is that you follow the malaute between your hands before the solel, and elevate the tongue of it, and regard ofjos the tongue, of the un latz of it vein and of the other latz vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
And therefore fleubotomize each one; and guard you that you do not ultimes your hand in fleubotoman those, because ofjos those so arterias.
And your veins that are fleubotomadas in the coyde are in those that corr costuma in all the men, and the fleubotomia of them is fayta according to two manieyras, or pongen am the fleubotomist mirtilat or olivar to subtilitat declining; or secsar am fleubotomist cutellar, and apelha si alnessil, and this is the form of it:
Let the patient's arm be as if it were, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full that appear thick, and to those that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this flebotomy is of less latitude and of more subtle extremity, and it is necessary to flebotomize subtle veins that contain subtle, citric blood.
But the benefit of flebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: that which extrates the blood of the illnesses that are left the throat and the neck, and from that which affects the feet and the belly.
And it is necessary for the flebotomist, when flebotomizing that, to guard well and be over-fearful in that, because after it there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy, he will cut that artery and there will flow fluxes of blood, so that he who flebotomizes that with flebotomy pungent, should raise it as if it were an incisor.
And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you leave that one and that you change to the other, or that you seek some branch of it; or that you flebotomize in the place of it, at the end of the arm, because that one is manifest; and cut that one with flebotomy incisor as we have said.
But if you want the flebotomy of the meister vein, then it is necessary that before the stricture of the arm you touch the place between that you know the place of the wrists, and then press on it with a finger; and then lift the arm and cut the vein with concave section with flebotomy incisor as we have said; and guard yourself that the percussion for some space of the place of the artery.
And when you see, as if you were strengthening the ligament, inflammation in the place that you have pressed with a finger, then that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if you see the blood flow in the flebotomy as if it were of a child, and the blood is subtle, then you know that it is of the blood of the artery; and then you stop and place your finger over that for a long space; and then oppose your finger, and if the blood is cut, because it has been cut several times, then you strengthen the arm and leave that.
And guard the patient from the moccio of him, and be over-fearful of him and do not harm him for some days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not cut, and you see that you must not present medicine to that, then you cut the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is contracted, and the blood is cut; or that you take a strip of fig, and fen that, and take the one majority and strengthen that over the place of the vein at the stricture descending to the ligament and to the pulses within the other day.
And then if the blood is cut, it is good; and if not, then cure that with the water of which it is preceded to the memory of the place of the polveras cutting fluxes of blood.
And the abscizio of the blood of it is difficult in many dispositions because of the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
But of the fusca vein the flebotomy is a benefit that extrates the blood of the superior part of the head and the part below the body; because for that it is composed of branches of the basilica and of branches of cephalica, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the flebotomist that one be over-fearful in the flebotomy of it, because after that there is a nerve; and therefore if it adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy and touches the nerve, it will cause stupor to him, and it is difficult the healing of it, and fort he is not healed of all, And this nerve many times appears to the feeling; and if it is hidden to some men and it is subtle and is not shown, then it is necessary that you pause the flebotomy with the one with which you flebotomize with section of incisor, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein in the length.
The benefit of flebotomy of the cephalica vein is that it attracts the blood of the head and comforts the illnesses of the heels.
And it is necessary in this properly, if you want that the flebotomy be done with flebotomy olive or with flebotomy myrtle; because it is the most safe of all the veins, because it is not below it artery nor nerve.
But however, fort he is apostemat in some men, when it is not flebotomized in the first percussion, but do not note in re that apostema.
The first of it is that you should know that flebotomy is not administered unless in the preservation of health and for the hope of it and the precaution of the coming of illnesses, and that it should be flebotomy in one of the veins that are in the body, that is: cephalica, fusca and basilica; and that it should be flebotomy at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when there appear signs of repletion.
And a phlebotomy should be made on the third day or at the first hour after three hours have passed of the day.
May the phlebotomy administered be done when it brings convenience and necessity, either at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
And let it be known that a child should not be phlebotomized before they have reached fourteen years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month and up to the seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized if they have already passed sixty years.
And as anyone who wishes to be phlebotomized in any way, let them cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's enema, if there is a large amount of fecal matter retained, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities into the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the main limbs.
And let not those patients who are nauseous, excessively hungry, or suffering from illness or drunkenness be phlebotomized until they have recovered from it, nor those suffering from dropsy. And more so, let phlebotomy be feared in cases of colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, and multiplication of coitus, labor, and exercise of fasting or vigils, and from any cause that dissolves the virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
And before this, consider in the subtle modification of humors, if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And before this, consider in the subtle modification of humors, if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And perform the phlebotomy on the foot at the hour of terce, as we have said.
And see that the foot of that person be guarded on that day from all evils, both animal and corporal, such as anguish, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, such as labor and superfluous pain, and coitus and similar acts.
And to his bed, let them make present the causes in the use of which custom of men, with aromatics and scents, and with balsams and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And let the phlebotomist follow on a cushion that is softer than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
And then extract his arm, and rub it with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and then tighten the ligament with a strap and wrap it two times.
And let the stricture be temperate, for if the stricture is not equal, or the stricture is with superfluity, then prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is with softening, then prohibit the body of the blood from rising.
And after the stricture, let him who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together between them while the veins are inflated, and are declared to the touch.
And after the stricture, let him who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together between them while the veins are inflated, and are declared to the touch.
And therefore, for this, let the phlebotomist be halted and be solicited in all these causes.
And after the phlebotomy, if the vein is opened in one go, then well is it; and if not, then repeat it another time after that place a little, or upon it with a festoon, if the place is not inflamed.
And if the place is inflamed, or the patient is frightened, then leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligament, for if it is strongly pulled, it will draw the abscess, nor enter into a bath.
And after this, repeat the phlebotomy if the need arises.
And if the opening is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that there will not be the quantity of blood that you desire, then repeat the phlebotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the opening a little, and do this with a festoon before the place is inflamed, for the place is inflamed in many men because of a little opening.
But if you see that it is already inflamed, then do not repeat upon it, for excuse yourself to no cause; and place upon it some portion of the wound of olive oil, for it alleviates the flow of blood. And it is better in this place that olive oil and that other oils.
And similarly administer the wound of olive oil in every phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize the veins, with the prohibition of the flow of blood, and do this with tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is placed upon the place, for the blood is refined and is revolved when it is thick.
And if a large abscess is generated at the site of the phlebotomy, which happens several times, and especially to those who have not been bled but only this time, or at the opening of the small vein, then you cover it, and place on the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, for it is dissolved.
And cover that which is done to the bleeding of that vein with the completion of it or of another vein.
And if, in the area, for some days, there remains some blackness or greenness, do not notice it; and if you want, place on that some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or calament or something similar to it.
And several times abscesses and swellings happen after phlebotomy of the basilica.
And therefore place your hand over it, and if then you feel softness under your compression, then that eminence is bad and evil; and therefore guard yourself that you place on it any cause of what they have said, for it might flow strongly from the artery.
And make a poultice with water in which it is styptic, so that the place may be endured, and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
And cover that you extract blood from every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color of the blood as it appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow until it is red; and similarly if you see it thick, then you let it flow until it is thinned; and similarly if it is acute, until the sharpness of it is gone.
And cover that to one who is full and strong and needs an extraction of blood in one time, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomy be wide.
And in one who is frail, let the opposite of that be done, and cover that you extract it in several times, and that the cut be narrow.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of the vein is that it be the transverse section, not the puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and from the incision of nerves, and is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And to which it is customary for syncope to occur after phlebotomy, and cover that you cure that before the phlebotomy with a little bread soaked in wine of millegrains or simple oxymel scalded; and extract from the one blood in three or four times.
And if it is a cold complexion, then before the phlebotomy, prepare a poultice soaked in a myrrh syrup or in a honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or in a syrup flavored with aromatic and fragrant odors.
And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy, and the cause of it is the emission of too much blood, then cover that you prepare a poultice in water of meat and a very fragrant syrup; and use of aromaticity with some incense, and let the patient's feet be warmed with it.
And use of the other causes that have been said in the division in the chapter of syncope by evacuation.
And he who wants to evacuate his arm and dissolve his blood gradually, cover that to him whose phlebotomy is by moderate evacuation, and whose virtue is cold, that he evacuate the blood little by little, so according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
But he who wants to evacuate his arm, and take out his blood a second time, and whose body is strong, then do so about seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
But he who wants to draw the blood from his body in the opposite direction from the part that it declines, cover that it be evacuated on the second day or the third.
But that body in which there is a lot of blood already scalded and it is acute and causes fever, cover that it be drawn from it blood in one time and a large quantity be thrown out and the opening be amplified until syncope occurs, because you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and that you place your hand over the wrist of it according to the body of the blood, so that it does not die in the place of syncope, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not cover that when you want to untie the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is made difficult to emit the blood, that you press upon it with vehemence and bend it slightly, because that is too bad.
Have the blood flow until it is phlebotomized properly; or remove that with the sharpness of the phlebotomy that is coagulated blood in the orifice of the vein; or place upon it of tyrian ointment, or of sazennia, and compress that with a light compression until the blood is out.
And if the vein is apostate, then leave it and do not touch it until the abscess is settled.
And if necessity provokes you to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then you bleed that over that place or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the fusca or of the basilica, when those are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient inserts his hand in warm water until the vein appears clearly and visibly.
And then tighten the bandage on that limb with stricture; and perform phlebotomy according to the small transverse, not longitudinally or according to the length.
And be the incision wide and be your phlebotomy the one with which you phlebotomize that one on the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you repeat the hand in the warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
But if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the repetition of the hand in the warm water, and the measure is placed the body of the blood in warm water in time of winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all the others, because it has no pulsating vein, nor nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein of the right hand is good for the diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that you tighten the limb or your hand, because you have placed it in warm water, until the vein is inflated and clearly demonstrated to the viewer; and then perform phlebotomy transversely; and if you have incised that of all, do not let it bleed.
And preserve that you do not end your hand with the phlebotomy, because it leaves the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
And then repeat the hand in the warm water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not repeat it in the warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited from flowing.
And as it is extracted the blood according to the quantity of need, then you place on the vein oil and salt, so that it may not be consolidated tightly; and similarly, you should do in every straight vein.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of that of the left hand, is that it is good for the diseases of the spleen.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of him as you have done in the other.
And the benefit of the saphenous vein phlebotomy is for the ailments that are in the part below the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menstruation, and for ailments of the lungs and ulcers of the thighs and arms old, and their likenesses of ailments.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient inserts his foot in warm water and makes friction upon it until the veins appear clearly; and lay upon the joint of the foot a bandage; and the place of the vein the talo apparent must the said point, and from that it branches out in the surface of the foot many veins.
And therefore phlebotomize the widest branch or below the camba, where the talo is, because it is better and safer.
And if you phlebotomize that on the surface of the foot, then you guard yourself from the nerves that are below that on the surface of the foot, and place your phlebotomy with the one with which you phlebotomize by the transverse, as if you wanted to incise it.
And be the phlebotomy voil.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited; then you repeat the foot of him in the warm water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then repeat with the phlebotomy in a little, because the place is safe; and do not fear of him malice, but that you guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do of the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
And of the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is below the cavity of the left part.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of it is for pain of the hip when it is for blood caused.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient enters in a bath, and fastens and tightens the thigh of him from the side of the wide above the talo above four fingers in a long, subtle bandage, so that it appears not otherwise than by that.
And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize it according to each engine that is to you possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise it by incision or secces it by section, because the place of it is safe.
And it is in many men well-known; and if you feel that, and it does not appear to the sense of all, then phlebotomize some branch of it, and it is the one that appears in the back of the foot opposite the auricular and the annular.
And guard yourself from the nerves, and make run of the blood the quantity that you want.
And then untie the bandage and place on the place of the phlebotomy a poultice and tighten the place, because lightly it is healed.
Of cupping and the qualities of using those.
Cupping is of horns, or of glass, or of iron.
And ventilation is done in two ways: one of them is with incision and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without incision.
And this ventilation that is without incision is done in two ways, whether it is with fire or without fire.
And the ventilations that are administered with incision and extraction of blood are fourteen places in the body, of which one in which ventilations are placed is the occiput, and it is the back part of the head; and the middle place of the two parts of the neck together; and ventilations of the chin below the mandible past the mouth; and ventilations of the two shoulder blades; and ventilations of the hypochondria, and it is above the end of the rib; and ventilations of the two armpits; and ventilations of the two groins.
And ventilation does not extract blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not capture the virtue through those, as it is captured by phlebotomy; nor is it advisable that ventilation be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity provokes ventilation for illness or for continuity, let us administer it at every hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and in any time that is.
And therefore when times in any of those causes, and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command ventilation to be done more than it is passed from the day two or three hours.
And the benefit of ventilation of the neck is that when that confers gravity to the head and to that which is poured into the eyes; but it is advisable that that be near evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventilation is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
And it is not good to use it for those who are of cold complexion, or in whom there is catarrh, because it gives great harm to those.
And for that reason it is not advisable to use it for the elderly, and in whose heads there are cold ailments.
But to those who are continuing over it is done oblivion; and for that reason it is advisable that you command the ventor to pause his hand a little with the ventouse at the parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But ventilation of the armpit is in the place of phlebotomy of the vena fusca and the basilica: and for that reason it confers on asthma, and on the constriction of the ale and on the scissura of the sturment of ale, and on cough, and on repletion.
And it is advisable that the armpit ventilation be pulled a little, because if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the ventilation of the groin confers on the pains accident in the head and on ophthalmia, and migraine, and pre-focacio, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And it is advisable that you command the ventor that he not press his hand with incision so that it does not pierce the artery and accides flux of blood.
And ventilation below the chin confers on alcohol in the mouth, and on corruption of the gums, and semblance to those of the illnesses that are in the mouth, and stand in the place of phlebotomy of aliheric that is in the two lips.
But the ventilation that is done on the two shoulder blades confers on caphatan, which is made by repletion of heat.
And the ventilation of the two parts of the armpits confers benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, so it is of the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, because that attracts the blood of all those veins more numerous that are in the flesh, and those small veins of the other veins more gross until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the ventor that too much he not proceed in incision, because the place is denuded of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventilation with which it is ventilated over the buttocks and confers on the hemorrhoids of the anus and on the ulcers below.
And it is advisable that you command the ventor that it be a large ventouse, and that it be of iron, because the place indigenous of strong section; and strong lew are called subtle ventilations and it is scarified with incision.
But ventilations of the legs are less by minutio manifestation, because they draw the blood of the whole body, and confer on old pains of the lungs and of the uterus, and of the bladder; and they provoke the menses, and confer on bothor and ademil; and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and of two groins.
But it weakens the whole body and causes syncope in many men.
And from the winds, the heat is proper to the heat of two legs.
And the quality of the position of the winds is that you pause the wind at the beginning, and suck it in with temperate suction, and do not prolong the position of the winds, but pause them lightly, and move them gently, and that the humors come to the place by equal advancement. And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the place already reddened and inflated, and that the redness of the blood appears.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and then consider in the disposition of the bodies.
Because that man who has tender flesh of rare pores, because you scarify him once and no more, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the wind-operator to amplify the scarification and proceed a little, and temper the suction with ease.
And if in the blood there is thickness, then you must scarify twice, because in the first scarification the way of subtilization to the blood and its liquidity is opened. But in the second, the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then the third scarification is made so that the last (is achieved).
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little, it suffices us one scarification.
And if we want the extraction of much blood, we scarify with many scarifications; and if we knew that the blood is thick, then we must scarify with a deep scarification.
And the term of scarification in which the depth of the incision is only so much.
And if that one whose incision is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, then the places of the winds should be anointed more gently, more open, more resolved; if it is in summer, as is oil of aloes or oil of violets, or oil of double amaranth, or oil of quince; and if it is in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of saffron, and to those similar.
And if the superfluity is thick, hot, then the oil should be of amaranth, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloes, or oil of fennel, and to those similar.
But if the wind-operator has wide pores of tender flesh, then he should be prohibited from oil, and he should have the places of the winds near his own application be washed with waters or with cold water of solastrum, or with quince water, or with water of borlaguas, and similar to those.
And he whose blood is of much humidity, washes his winds with sour wine, or with myrtle water and sumac, and similar to those.
And he whose superfluities are thick, washes his winds with old wine, or with water of sarsaparilla, which is marjoram, or of decoction of fennel, or of chamomile, and to those similar.
And the wind-operator should be guarded before bathing; he should be administered near the bath for an hour or two, and he should sleep near the wind-application.
What should be done to regulate the wind-operator before phlebotomy?
At the beginning, you should consider: if the wind-operator or the one who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and windy, and his blood is sharp and inflamed, then he should be given cooling causes, such as vinegar-soaked millet, endive with sour wine and lettuce, and secanabin, and syrup, and to those similar.
And pause their meals as much as possible, and birds' meat, and foods seasoned with vinegar, and to those similar.
And for him whose constitution is cold, he should be given to drink syrup of almiva, or syrup of alsecanabin of seeds, and sumac, and wine very fragrant between old and new; and that he should be commanded to use little drinking and eating, and pause his meals as much as possible, and eat little birds, and rabbits, and sparrows, and small birds, and doves.
And that on the day of wind-application and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the food.
And that some men should be given to drink in some hours,  tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, that is, muscat, or alcelita before the wind-application or phlebotomy, or near it, so that the main members be comforted and the blood be subtiliated; and that they should not take that scalfatz.
But the winds that are scarifications should be winds that are paused on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra, and on the navel, in the places of the groin, and the side of the hip, because these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not desired for those, but rather attraction of blood from the limb, as if you pause a wind on the nipple in the illness of blood flow from the blood of the nose; and use it so that it may be dissolved cold windiness of the limb, as if you pause on the belly and navel; because that thins the limb and scalfs it and removes the pain because it resolves the windiness.
And it is placed on the sores when they happen in their opening or boil, because by virtue of strong attraction the man opening and eradicates the boil from its place.
And similarly it is done when it is placed on the liver and spleen, when there is windiness in those enclosed places.
And these windinesses are administered voids with suction alone; and some times are administered with fire.
And some times are administered full of water  tebeza in the illnesses of the spleen.
And this is why the windpipe is filled and made larger, so it is water poured alone or water in which herbs are boiled for that purpose.
Form of windpipe administered with fire: its width of the orifice of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon is the majority of a palm; and it is in the place of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the majority of it, the tract be small according to the quantity that enters it a needle.
It is made of  eram rog or citron, of large margins, lion,  enguals and terses so that it does not lead the member of its position over it.
And in the middle of it a transverse bar of eram or of iron, on which a candle is placed with the fire.
And already this windpipe is larger than the one we have recounted; and the few smaller than that according to the illnesses and the state of him who uses it.
And the windpipes of the infants and exhausted are others than the windpipes of the young and of large bodies.
And the quality of pausing this windpipe with fire on the member is that it extends the fire with wood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and places it on the middle of the transverse bar in the middle place of the windpipe, so that the fire is ignited around the part behind so that it does not burn the body of the patient.
And then it is placed on the member of the patient, and the finger is on the tract that we have said,  into that when we have the windpipes and do not indicate that we show the finger and that it escapes the vapor on that tract, then the windpipe is immediately dissolved.
And then keep the fire according to its manner, and repeat that if it is indicated of that.
But in a windpipe that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse bar nor tract, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the member alone.
And this is the form of it: And this windpipe as much as it is larger, so much is better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in all members but in those members in which it is not possible to place windpipes, because of the smallness of those, such as the mouth and gums and similar to them; or in members naked of flesh, such as the finger and the nose and their similar.
And the quality of using those that have been found leeches that are in the waters of  poredura mundas.
And then they are laid the day and the night in water of  poredura mundas into that they are famolentas, and that no remains any cause in the belly of those; and then it is evacuated the body at the beginning with fleubotomia and with windpipes; and then it is rubbed the member of the patient into that it reddens; and then they are placed on it.
And as they are filled and case.
And if it is possible suction of the place with windpipe, it is more better in help.
And if not, then wash the place with vi agre and then with much water; and be rubbed and pressed.
And if the course of the blood is prolonged and the result of the leeches, then you put a cloth of it in cold water, and place it on top until the perspiration is abated.
And if the blood is multiplied, then pulverize on it vitriol trissat, or guallas and similar to them of the causes stipticas, into that the blood is abscissed; or are placed on the place the halves of favas excocicadas, and are laid into that the favas adhere to the place, and the blood is abscissed.
And now, if necessary, repetition of leeches, when it is possible to change those.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then be rubbed the place with recent blood or leave a needle in the places into that blood escapes; and then they are placed, because those when they feel some blood immediately adhere.
And when you want them to fall off, pulverize on them a little of aloen trissat, or salt, or ash, and they fall off immediately.
Thus begins the prolec of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine; and the restoration of fracture and dislocation accident in the bones.
Oh, son, know that these fools of doctors and the vulgar boast of this chapter and those who never at any time regarded the books of the Ancients nor read from them a letter.
And for this reason, it is made that this manner of the learned in our land is deprived; and you have not forgotten this at any time well of all; and I have not adopted this that I have presented, but for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, while I extracted the science from those.
And then I devote myself to experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my best experiment has been passed; because I have shortened this for you others and delivered it from the occupation of elongation; and I have shortened it at the end of shortening; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed in it many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as it has been done by addition of declaration, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summaries and collections from the broken bones, from those whose introduction is necessary before we begin the remembrance of broken and diverse members of each one. Therefore, I say that in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning is forced the artificers and to stay on the truth of those; so is you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art others than you.
And therefore I say that when you come across a fracture or dislocation or sprain or wound, then you must at the beginning apply yourself to phlebotomy or to drain that, or one of the two, if no cause prohibits, as is the weakness of virtue, or the one to whom you come across is a child, or old in decrepitude, or the time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then be content in his food of cold herbs and of birds' meats and of crabs; and forbid thick meats and to fill him with foods and of all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of a cauterized abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the limb.
And then return the patient to his first regimen to which he is accustomed.
And therefore, as the broken bone begins to be restored, then the patient must be fed with nutritious foods of nourishment thick and heavy in which is viscosity, as are foods made of boiled wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and fish, and bellies of cows, and eggs, and fresh birds, and thick meat and similar to those, and with this regimen is made coagulation of fracture more lightly and better.
And know that the broken bones when they are in the young and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their limbs.
May, however, nature adjusts and amnesties over the broken bone from every part any cause seeming to glut in which is thickness that adheres and strengthens that within as they are at once conglutinated and tied together, until they come to the end of fortitude and firmness, as fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits that of its works.
And for this cause it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all the other limbs are diverse among themselves.
And you come with remembrance of all species of fracture, explained in their distinct chapter from the other.
Many diversity of fracture in itself. And they are diversified the species of fracture of the bone in their own; for there is made arched fracture another that happens in them stars; and some times is made fracture according to the length of the bone: and in the fractures of the satagia and stars and additions proceeding and not proceeding, as is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and is fracture with plaque and disruption in the head, and is fracture small fissure.
And to every species is born or torment proper in the restoration of them according to what will come remembrance of them distinct in their places.
Many sign of fracture of the bone. And for this is known fracture of the bone: it is the tortuosity of it, and of that eminence and appearance of it to the touch, and of it when you compress that with your hand.
And therefore when there is not in the place apparent tortuosity nor is it felt when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
It is possible that there is tortuosity or small fissure, therefore you must not touch that with your hand and with compression of all; but pause upon it of the medicines of which will come remembrance near that moment the one that convenes to the place; and then be straight by subtle constriction.
And know that the place when it is curved and not split in two or anything else that does not happen in it, like it is sewn up all of its part, then when you begin of your time to rectification of it, you have to that it happens after pus caut.
And if it happens pus caut, then leave that for some days until the pus ceases; and then bandage that according to whichever manner that you can of lightness and of engineering.
And know that the restoration of it and the sewing of it is lighter than of the bone in which the injury happened.
And then strengthen that according to what will come the remembering of it.
But if in the bone there are injuries, then it is necessary extension of this broken limb of two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and the hand.
And be the your position with which you pause the limb loc engual according to its natural figure, while that the parts are extended of the broken limb, then you perforate that you make return those additions with engineering and according to whichever manner that you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your force that it does not happen upon the patient by your operation pain nor injury; and perforate yourself according to the your power that you apply one bone with the other its companion according to their best forms.
And cover that in that hour profitably you touch with your hand that, and if you see here any other cause, rectify that and bandage that for the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, as such as do foolish doctors that many times do happen pus caut by their operation, or do happen contraction in the limb as we have seen that by the operation of their foolish ways.
And the quality of the stricture of the limb tranquil is that which I recommend; for that you know that the broken limbs are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small as such as the arm and the hand and the foot and similar to those, then cover that the envelopment be of cloth very subtle.
But those that are gross as such as the thigh or the leg, then cover that in those be envelopment wide and hard, for the wide liament connects the great limb and strengthens that of all part with equal stricture, in this way that in it no blemish enters.
And then begin, then your evacuation of equation, pause liament convenient to that, upon the place of that fracture with three envelopment or four according to that the limb merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the liament.
And then come to that at the part most sovereign of the place of the fracture, and strengthen less that not force the your stricture with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture. And then elongate yourself with envelopment of the place of the fracture a little, and mollify the stricture little by little, until that you take from the place a great part.
And then take another bandage and envelop that other time over the broken place with envelopment, and then come to the envelopment to the part further from the fracture; and be your operation in the stricture of the envelopment and in mollification of that according to that we have said in the first envelopment below.
And then pause between the envelopment of stopa lion or cloth with which be equalized the tortuosity of the fracture, if in it is tortuosity; and if not, do not pause in it any cause.
And then pause upon it another bandage, and then bandage over these envelopment stars decently made forthwith, if in the place there is no inflammation or pus caut, and then pause upon it that which seats the pus that and that oste the inflammation; and leave that for some days; and then you strengthen upon it the stars.
And be the stars of the majority of wide cane race, and well formed wisely; or be of pine wood; or of palm ramps; and be the ample of each star according to this form and this figure:
However cover that the star that is paused upon that fracture be thicker and wider a little than the other stars, and the length of the star according to that is legible to the limb in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen upon the stars with another bandage according to your first stricture; and then lie below with faithful decently according to that we have said of stricture, and it is that be your stricture according to the place of the fracture most, and as much as it is elongated of the fracture, is less the stricture.
And make sure that the threads are of medium thickness and subtlety, and be of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of some fools placing their threads of cords of the rope, and it is a great error, when the stricture is outside equality.
And excessively fine threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to constrict with those what you want, and it is necessary that between the stitches there be at least a finger's width.
And if the patient is said by the extremities of the limbs near the stricture in the places, then place those of wool or carded wool inside so that it does not cause him injury.
Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a plague, and an accident occurs in the spine, and I will come with a remembrance in that in the second chapter singularity.
And know that every broken limb is not straight with stitches on the first day; the reason is that the limb, when it is large, should not be placed upon it with stitches, but rather after about five or seven days, or more, according to your certainty of the advent of pus.
And this is the manner of the plasters with which the Ancients restored, which are placed upon fractures and dislocations and twists.
The manner of plaster as a method of restoration of a fracture, convenient for many complexities and mostly for women and children, because it is of that which does not bring heat or friction: and it is that you take of powdered meal, and it is the marrow of the flour that depends from the movement of the mill on the sides of the mill.
And mix that thus, unless you sift it with egg white, and place the mixture of it not too thick nor subtle; and then use that.
Another way to plaster a fractured, dislocated, and twisted limb: take asafoetida, laudanum, acacia, enula, and mugwort, which is the root of wild millet, of all one drachma x; of frankincense and aloe one drachma v; aloes one drachma xx; all be ground and sieved and mixed with water, or with the white of an egg if the patient's complexion is cold; and then use this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores slightly broken bones, and confers strength to many men.
Another way to plaster a fracture and sprain: take mugwort and white althea, one drachma x; of frankincense and aloe one drachma v; of acacia, one drachma vi; of Armenian bol, one drachma xx.
All should be triturated in a mortar with much contrition, and sifted, and comfit with water or egg white and be administered.
Method of plaster to joints and separated bones from their places, and soothes pain that occurs in those and in fissures and fractures: take wool felt and submerge it in strong wine and boiled oil and place it over the location.
But more in this plaster there is not virtue of restoration, of pus coming out and expelling pains properly.
Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; conter them all and make a plaster of them.
A shortened manner of plaster administered that deserves the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining pus: recipe of root of altea, of chamomile and violets flowers, of ers flour, of all ana part .i.; All should be triturated and comfit with wine, if the limb is not scalded.
But if it is scalded, then mix that with moist coriander water or with water and use of it.
Another manner of plaster more strong in resolution than this first, when it occurs hard pus that deserves the restoration of the limb: recipe of root of altea and of seed of li, and of balaustia, and melilot, majorana, violets flowers, of chamomile, of all ana part i engual; all should be triturated and comfit with water of sauze or with sweet water or with wine, all according to the quality of the limb and the rest of the color of it.
But Ipocras does not say in his book that it be placed over the broken limb that deserves its restoration, but rather made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommends that it be of medium thickness.
But Gualia has seen that they be placed over the broken limb that deserves its restoration and the causes in which is dryness with little heat so as mirra, incense and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Method of plaster that soothes injury and pain: recipe of migat, of cezes, of human hair unshorn or feathers of bird, and of altea, and salt, parts equal; should be triturated and sifted and comfit, and be made plaster.
But the quantity according to which the bandage should remain and then be untied is that you consider if no pain or numbness or the bone is broken, it is not bad of its place, then you do not untie for many days. And if pain, numbness, or inflammation occurs in the place, then you should either loosen or untie it at that hour, and place a poultice on it.
And take a cloth of linen and a sponge of sea lion, humid, and submerge it in lukewarm water, and with that wash the place until the numbness and pain are appeased; and then let the limb rest for an hour; and then place on it wool cloth submerged in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and tie it on for a night until you are sure of a cauterized abscess, and that it rests the inflammation of the limb, and the pain of it is mitigated.
And then repeat that bandage, subtle and small poultice, and do not tighten it with your first constriction, and subtler with it until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess, the redness, the pain, the inflammation, and all the accidents are already mitigated from all, and indigested of poultice and bandage, then you repeat that as you have done at the beginning, equally.
And if no accidents occur to the limb of those that have been said, then do not untie it until three days or four or five or seven. And sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to what appears to you for the unbandaging of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And then adjust in the bandage more than in your first bandage, and adjust in the thickening of the food of the patient, according to what precedes the remembrance of it.
But if you see the place of the fracture already dry and thinner than it should, then you know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; and therefore embrocate it with lukewarm water, every time that you untie it; and let it be so for three days; and loosen the bandage a little, and by this operation, the nourishment reaches the limb, and it heals slightly.
But that which the foolish restorers of the fracture of the limb do another way when it is not restored at the beginning, according to what it should, and is restored according to tortuosity, is error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if it were straighter, that which they enlarged the Ancients in their writings and warned with it.
And I have not seen any of them do this, because it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
Chapter Second: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct, because some fractures are made by the blow of a weapon, and the blow thrusts all the bones into the skull, which is left the bone, as if it were done in the shaft, and for this reason this species is called ascial; or the weapon incides some part of the bone, and incides the flesh of it and does not pass the incision into the back of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute levatio.
And the plague of these two fractures is either great or small, and of fracture that is contortion or attrition; and the cause of it is percussion with a blunt or a sharp object, and their likenesses.
And this fracture is either penetrating that already approaches the pannicle which is left the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is either great or small.
And of fracture is that which is amalgamated in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason this species is called capillary fracture.
And it is fracture that is made either by a sharp object or by percussion of a sharp object and their likenesses, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter the parts within, and it is made in the concave place as if it occurred to the payroles of eram when it occurs to their percussion and it is the part of their entrance into the parts within.
And mostly this is done in the bodies of moist bones, as if they were the heads of infants.
And to all these species of fractures, there are pains as if they were stars separated. And I will come with remembrance of all this in its place.
And we shall know all these species of fracture by detection upon them and by inquiry of them by means of touch and examination of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary species is known by this that it is discovered upon the bone, and it is abstergit, and lined upon it with touch, because the fracture appears black.
But in the cure of fracture, consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest signification upon pain, as it is vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and swelling of the joints and redness of them, and likenesses to them in the greater dispositions, adopt that it is not healed.
And if you see non-current accidents, you hope for health, then you begin the cure of it.
The cause is that if the patient has come to you at the beginning as he is sick and this is in the days of winter, then you should study the structure of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study the structure of the bone before the seventh day, because what is left of the bone should be corrupted by the panniculus, and that the accidents that we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain, and it is in small pieces and attrition, then you should insert the fractured and rubbed part, according to what I will tell you.
And you shave the head of the sick patient, and uncover the bone according to custom and manner as you possibly can according to the figure of the wound, and that it be light on the patient.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flow of blood or pus, then you oppose it with what you have, and that is you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and olive oil, and make the wound rest until the pus is settled, and if you are sure of the blood flow; and then begin in the circuit of the bone and in its ablation.
And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
And one way is that you insert the bone with a straight chisel, and this is the shape of it: And then administer another chisel this, a little wider than the first; and this is the shape of it:
And then administer the wider chisel than the second.
And you should have a number of chisels of various sizes, some wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are at the end of the sharpness of their extremities, and are of Indian iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the chisel so that it does not break the head and damage it.
And if the bone is strong, hard, then you should perforate in its circuit before you administer the chisels with the drills, which are called non-deep drills.
And they are not called that otherwise because those do not reach the term of the bone of the skull to what is below it, for because the drill has a rounded extremity or margin on that which is left the head of it sharp resembling a margin or a small circle, which prohibits it from being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these drills a large number of which as many as convenient to the thickness of each bone, so that it be to you present in all parts of the skull the extremity of which is sharp, the quantity in length and brevity be according to the quantity of thickness of this part.
And this is the form of three species of drills: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the drill on the bone and revolve it with your hands until you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then change the drill to another location, and place it between all the trace the quantity of the thickness of the ray or environment of it.
And then insert with chisels that which is between each trace of the bone, and make it as subtle as you can on it in the end of lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for some instruments which you will have prepared for it, as such as tongs and subtle forceps.
And you should keep with all caution that the chisel does not touch any cause of the scalp.
And therefore, as you will have circled the bone perforating, and if it is continuous with it, and you have extracted it, you should shave and level that in the roughness of it of that which is in the bone with another instrument resembling a chisel, but however, it should be thinner and more subtle than the others chisels.
And if any pieces of the small bones and splinters remain, then take that with ease with that which you have of the instruments; and then take care of the wound with liniments and ointments which we have said.
And the other way of operation is lighter, far from pain, which says Gualia and the lauzec for great praise; and this is the sermon of it: It is necessary to you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone of the place in which is the fracture most vehement and most manifest, so that when you have discovered that part and you have placed below it the extremity of this chisel lent and agile of which this is the form:
And it is that the lenticular part is long and you do not insert any cause, and the sharp part is of it in two sides forward in length, as sometimes; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the scalp with the face of it incident acute in the bone.
And then strike upon the chisel of one part with a small mallet until you insert all the bone with ease as it is revolved, and you are sure of the panniculus that no accident happens in it that you fear in any way, and if the medicant14 was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
And now if any cause annexed to the bone of the panniculus in some places of bone, insert that of it with the extremity of that lenticular chisel, and deliver that of it with ease, because it is delivered of it its harm and its pain.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is separated or taken from the bone is the fascia of it, and remains in it roughness and subtle satagias, then when you remove that roughness and eradicate those satagias with subtle razors with which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it be possible to administer them in all places the most convenient of them and the most straight of them according to what in which you are losing your operation that broken bone and the figure of it.
And so that you administer in your reason with the tool with which you shave the bone at the beginning the most blunt of those razors, and then use the most subtle of it, and do not cease doing so according to continuity until you reach to administer the most thick and the most subtle of all of them.
But in any of the other fractures, small and subtle, so that you administer care according to what you perceive for the rectification of it.
And it is the cause that it is not  mastered over all those who have studied in that art. And this is about what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the panniculus is cut when you eradicate the bone, then so that you take cloth from it according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge that in rose oil, and place that over the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place that over the first cloth and do this as lightly as you can, so that you do not injure the cephalic; and then administer over that bandage, and do not tighten it except for the quantity that the wound has alone.
And leave that with this care for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess coming out; and then untie that and then administer medicines with which is superfluous dryness, as well as roots of flax and flour of errs, and powder of incense and of aristolochia, and similar to those.
And that you make of these medicines powder that be pulverized over the wound, as well as they are dried; and universally, administer in that all medicine of property of which is that it abstergesca and do not bite.
And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and that there be no in it filth of rinsing or other; nor do you allow virulence to be added to it; for when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that and you can corrupt that, and happens to the patient what evil malice.
And happens in the cephalic of the head, as of it is modified the bone and most when is lessened the cure of it, and it is blackness on the surface of it; and therefore consider then if happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious all adopted.
And if it does not happen blackness but of the medicine that is placed over it, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then so that you take of honey one part and of rose oil parts three, and in those liniments a cloth, and then place that over the cephalic; and then cure that with the species of cure that convenes until it be healed.
Chapter III.
Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken but two parts together, or one of those some times, for in it you have two bones, for the part left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not happen to it but attrition and tortuosity and sinuosity.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then so that you introduce the said little one in the one's nose, and that you align that fracture inside with your said finger, and with the said point outside, until the nose returns according to its natural figure. And be done that by you with facility, and guard yourself that no cause by that your operation over the patient pain.
And if the fracture is in the most sovereign part of the nose, and the said one does not reach to that, then so that it be equal with the extremity of the ray in which it is little thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the semblance of that.
And take care of you in the restoration of it in the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; and if not, then about the seventh or tenth of the repose of the abscess coming out.
And about introduce in the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth of it, if the fracture is in one part, or put two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and be in the splint thickness of such quantity that it fills the trough of the nose.
And say some of the ancient restorers that the splints be enclosed in border, and be changed in every day, but it is not seen to me; have that the piece be enclosed in album of hen comfit with powder of moli; and then leave the qualgua until the bone be set and be hardened the cartilage.
And some times be introduced in the nose, in place of splint, pena of auca pus that is enveloped of cloth of the lion; and be that already you the fracture of the nose most vehement and that the patient not be prohibited of inspiration.
And this cause is not to you necessary; and if you want, do that, and if you want, do splints.
And if another abscess occurs after cautery, apply a plaster with cerot or a cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
But if no abscess occurs after cautery, then cover the area with a plaster made of sesame flour and powdered quince seeds with egg white; and place a linen cloth over it, and do not touch it with any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then cover those with a cloth, and remove them with instruments that are suitable for those; and then close the fissure, and cure it with a liquid that mends and consolidates, and with plasters suitable for that purpose.
And if a plague occurs in the nose, then treat it with poultices and administer lead pipes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not accompanied by a plague, look then if the fracture is only outwardly, and is not broken in two and curved at the parts inside, then its cognition is lighter.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, have you introduce your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left mandible, then introduce the right index finger; and push with that the mobility of the fracture inside with ease to the outer parts, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; with that decency equal them.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated in two, then have you administer extension of two parts according to rectitude until it is possible the equation of it.
And if there occurs a commotion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those of which you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or lead; and place over the broken jaw cerot, and place over it a doubled cloth, and place over the cloth a large splint made decently, or a piece of sole equal to the length of the jaw; and tie that desus according to how you are equipped the binding of it and that the application is convenient, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use of rest and tranquility, and put the food of him soft and boiled.
And if you estimate that already is altered the figure in any manner, then you take off and untie that at the third day; and then rectify what is already altered of it and plaster it with powder of wool, with egg white, or with sesame flour, because you will have removed the cerot from it, and place over the plaster wool.
And thus when it stands annexed and adjusted that plaster over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, that you do not untie it until it is healed and strengthened the fracture; because many times this fracture is straightened in three weeks.
And if another time occurs abscess after cautery, then administer what we have said many times in the sedation of it until it is healed, and be removed that abscess.
And if the fracture is with a plague, then consider if it is a piece of the bone separated or stitches, then you subtile that you remove those stitches with what you consider appropriate in the removal of them from the instruments.
And if the orifices of the plague are strait, then you enlarge it with the fleubotom according to the quantity of your necessity.
And when you will have removed those stitches, and of those there is no sir removed, then you close the orifices of the plague if it is wide; and if not, place over it one of the plasters that you consider appropriate and cover it, until it is healed.
Chapter V.
Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Many times is broken the clavicle from the side before the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, or separated, or is separated in two parts one that does not occur stitches; and it is easy to the restoration of it; or it is so that it occurs in it stitches, and it is difficult to the restoration of it; or it is so that the fracture is with a plague.
And the operation in that, when the fracture is with a plague, is that you make to be present two ministers, so that one has the adjutori and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck with that part.
And then engulph the fracture with your fingers until it is made the form of it according to what you cover, and that there is no eminence little nor concavity.
And if you needed more extension, then have you placed below the nipple of the patient a support of cloth or wool, and be the greatness of it according to the quantity of your necessity; and extend and elevate the clavicle and bind the support with your hand until you engulph the fracture according to what you cover.
And if you cannot pull the extremity of the clavicle to the outer parts, because it is arrived at the preon, then have the patient be propped up on his neck, and place over the muscle of it a cushion medium in greatness.
And the minister presses the muscle of it to the lower parts until the bone of the clavicle is elevated that is in the preon in its, and then you rectify the fracture and engulph that with your fingers.
But if you feel pains in the collarbone and it is painful, then you do what you do on that and remove those pains with ease.
And if it is held in the bone, then your ingenuity makes an incision of it with one of the scissors which you have equipped for this, because you had placed below the collarbone the instrument that serves the chisel; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the form of it:
And it is similar to a chisel of which this is the concavity; and its width according to what you have need of it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
But the length of it be according to what is possible to you in the operation; that it have two extremities thus as sometimes, and one extremity be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the plague which you have incised when you have extracted the pain from the bone is wide, and it is certain of pus caut, then you adjust the two lips of the plague with suture.
And if the disruption is little, or you fear pus caut, then you plug the plague with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the scissura of the plague.
And if pus caut happens, then you put a cloth in vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it on top.
And all, that it not be painful the plate above the broken bone; and for so that you see the patient every day, that when the ligament is softened or sometimes the plate already be remauguda, then you rectify that and strengthen the ligament.
And then put the sleep of the patient on the neck of it, and put below the tip of it of his sleep in the night a small cushion; so that with that be elevated the assistant of it from the place of that, and therefore is elevated the fracture of the collarbone to elevation of the muscle; or be the arm of it tied to the neck of that.
And do not untie the ligament if you do not happen in the place promptly or pus, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to that, and adjust in the stricture and restore that and let it within that it is restored and be coagulated the fracture of the collarbone.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is made in less time than that.
Chapter VI.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula tart is broken in the place of the side of it and not broken of it but the edges.
And therefore when it is broken the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and it is not known but by touch, then according to what is the figure of the fracture forces you the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in all manner of engine the which is to you possible.
And then put on the place powder of mill with egg white and linen cloth; and then put powder of cloth doubled; and then put on it plate of subtle table according to the quantity of the spatula all or maybe a little.
But if below the plate is concavity in some of the places of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with linen cloth, and then put the plate according to equality.
And then strengthen above with humidity long with constriction decent and with firmness of the plate within that it not be remauguda from its place.
And consider the ligament in each day; and all times that it is softened, tie another time and strengthen it and equal the plate if it is remauguda from its place.
And put the patient on his side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And therefore when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and that you know for sure that that is of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone pes and put below the codena, then you split on it, and remove it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone of sadness of pus caut if it happens here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle of it and that must be set; but the extremities of it must be moved that they may be cicatrized and comminuted.
And of the accidents of it when the middle of it is broken, it is that it declines to the parts of it and happens to it great pain, and difficulty in breathing, and cough, and strong fever and vomiting of blood; and it is declared in it the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that it be laid the patient on his back, and place between the spaces of it a cushion; and then press on the muscles of it, and adjust the bones of it with the hands of two sides, and subtly in the operation of it and in the equation according to every manner that is ad this possible and that convenes ad this, until that returns the figure of the bone according to that cove.
And then place on it plaster and lint and place above the table of a subtle of gauze or of caligi and of their semblance in levitat, because that you envelop that in cloth; and then subtly in lian that over the broken bone that it not be harmful; and go to ligation according to rotundity to the back sometimes, and strengthen that with stricture decent; and then consider the ligation in every hour, and when it is softened strengthen that.
And if necessity provokes the desliament of that, you must corrode or pruziment, the pain, the abscess that happens in the place, then you cut and untie that and eradicate the plaster and rectify that which happens by that in manner of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster, if times to that the face; and adjust to it stricture until that it be healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of the back when it is broken.
Know that fracture of the back does not catch but in places thick that follow the back; and of the extremities of them of the part before, it does not happen to those contricio but by that because that they are cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not hidden to the feeling, therefore the inquiry of it with the said.
And the restoration is so that you align the fracture with the said according to the manner possible, until that it be aligned according to that cove, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if it is needed of that.
And if the fracture of the back is declining to the parts of it, then happens to the patient great pain and puncture, as well as puncture that happens to that one who has pleureci, and because that the bones put the veil; and happens to it difficulty of breathing, and cough, and vomiting of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Ancients were ingenious in that with many ingenious things.
And of theirs that is said: he who places foods of the patient that engendered inflammation and flatulence, because that the belly be inflated and be extended, and the fracture be impelled to the parts outside.
But we would not recommend that because that it not be cause lighter to generate abscess caut, if it does not happen; and if it already happens, then it already helps to that.
And they said some of them that it be placed over a windpipe and then that it sucks with force; and it is seeming to ratiocination, but however it is feared that the windpipe will drive the superfluities to the place by the weakness.
And they said some of them: he who the place be covered with wool that already is submerged in hot oil, and that be placed powders between the back until that it be filled, that it be the ligation aligned when it envelops that according to rotundity; and then be cured the patient with cure of pleurisy of food and of medicine.
And if vehement cause constricts the patient the one that does not suffer, and the bones put the veil with puncture leading, they fear over the patient, then he who cuts over the place, discover from the broken rib, and then place over that instrument that conserve the ciph, the remembrance of which is preceded, and that they cut the bones with facility, and extract that.
And then that they adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with sewing, and cure that with plasters until that it be healed.
And if it happens of the abscess, then you cut and put powders in hot oil and place over the place, and that it be cured the patient with that which cove to the abscess of the parts.
And be laid on the side on which he sleeps, until that it be healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fracture of the vertebra of the back and of the neck.
Sometimes it happens that fracture to the bones of the neck, and then it must be set to them, and seemingly to the vertebrae of the back. And as that happens to some and wants to know if it will heal or not, then consider, because if sometimes their hands already softened and stupefied and dead and cannot more those nor extend nor strengthen those and when you constrict those with your said or prick those with a needle and no feel in those pain, then you know that it is not healed, and in the worst dispositions it is mortal.
And if you feel those and constrict those with the said and puncture, then you know that the marrow of the bone is saved and that the patient will cure with cure.
And if you see in the neck vertebrae the appearance of this and you want to know if it is healing or not, then consider the feet of him.
Then if you see that they are already softened, attend to those humors that are occurring in the hands, and when you touch on their back, you feel a windiness and digestion, and sometimes it is raised on its back and wants to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not work in the cure of him.
But if you do not see any cause of those, the cause is better and less severe.
And the cure of him is that you pierce the seat of the abscess cautery and place it over the affected vertebra, rubbed with olive oil or with hot poultices; place over it sometimes during the day until the abscess is cauterized.
And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and strengthen over it with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and that he does not sleep on the part with which he feels pain until it is healed.
And if you see the separation of the bone fragments or any cause that is already separated from him, then cover that with a bandage and that you hold that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then cure that with some ointment of the herbs, until it is healed.
But if the tail bone is broken, and it is the end of the pelvis, then cover that with a bandage and that you hold that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then cure that with some ointment of the herbs, until it is healed.
And if you feel fragments of bone in him, then cover that, and hold that, and cure the wound with the cure that has preceded until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the Restoration of the Womb.
The bones of the pelvis are broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is nothing but a communication in the extremities of those and they are incised in the length and decline to the parts of the sides; and you see pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stunned when the fracture.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it is over the fracture as is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is in the extremity of it so only, then you align it according to how it is apparelled to you by equation align until it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long or that already declines to the parts below, then you make the patient lie on his belly until it is prepared to you the restoration of that fracture. And therefore when you have aligned it, place over it plaster, and then place over it a bandage of wool or of linen, and strengthen by stricture over which you do not fear puncture of fracture nor removal of the splint.
And align the concavity with what fills it until that presses the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or over his side.
But if you see an abscess cauterize, then you cease from extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is cauterized, and place over it what sits it according to what has preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it thus as you cover.
And if you see in the bone fragments or they are comminuted, then you treat them.
Chapter XI.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the  Arm.
The arm is that which is between the shoulder to the hand.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which is one that you take a splint of medium thickness according to this form:
And there are ties in two extremities two bandages, and then it is suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a chair; and then throw out his broken arm over the splint until it reaches the tip of it in the middle part of which is annexed the curvature of the splint.
And then suspend over it some heavy cause, or the minister extends it to the parts below; and then the doctor and that the fracture with his hands simultaneously, until the fracture returns according to what is covered.
And the other way is that the patient be raised on his neck and suspend the arm of his collar with a bandage; and then command two ministers that one of them holds that which is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the pus below of it; and each of them extends to its part.
And if you want the extension to be more strong, then you strengthen over the fracture with a bandage and over that with another bandage, and each of the two ministers extend to their two parts.
And therefore if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then cover that the half of the bandage is placed over the tip and the other below the fracture of the joint.
And similarly if the fracture is near the joint, then cover that the bandage is placed over that place and over that joint.
Gently guide that and its work, and as soon as it is guided according to how it is covered and applied for good application, then strengthen it so that it does not happen after a boil caut.
But if a boil occurs, then leave the constriction for seven days, and place upon it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the boil rests, and then strengthen it.
And the manner of strengthening it is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm upon that support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the support the arm so that the arm be in place of stars, unless any cause prohibits this from the broken bone.
And then use of stars.
And it is that you place upon the fracture that star which be pus wider and pus stronger than the other stars; and place between each star the width of the finger, and be the length of the stars according to the fracture with addition of three fingers of all part.
And then strengthen over the stars with the constriction which I have said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your constriction over the place of the fracture be more strait. And as much as is lengthened the fracture be the constriction lesser.
And therefore if you see the situation of the stars and the constriction as we have said in the hour in which you restore the limb to its situation, then you do.
And if you fear a boil, then you leave the constriction and the stars for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that nothing happens in the place proximate or inflammation; or is prohibited the food to come to the limb by disposition of superfluity of constriction; and therefore rectify all that as we have said.
But if you are upon confidence that nothing will happen from this, then do not untie the ligature until after three days or more.
And be the sleep of the patient upon their back, and their hands upon the stomach.
And place upon the support a cushion full of wool guided, and consider in all hour of the night or of the day that not be untied nor dissolved the figure of the broken limb, or that be the ligament softened, therefore rectify that all with your virtue.
And place the food of the patient according to the order which we have before said, in such a way that the food be subtle in the beginning until it is begun to strengthen; and then cover that the food of it becomes thicker.
For of custom of the support and of the bandage of it is that they be strengthened in forty days; and then cover that they be untied and be administered bath and be medicated with unguents those which rectify that.
And if the fracture is laid smooth, then you do not untie from that the ligature and the stars within a day or within two months.
Chapter .xii.
Of the Restoration of Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearms; of which one is small, and that is the one that sits the finger well, and the other is large and that is the one that is placed below the little finger, from the part further down.
And very often is broken the major forearm alone, or the small one, and very often they are broken together.
And when is broken the small forearm above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and the healing of it is lighter.
And when is broken the forearm of it below the fracture of it is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse of that is when are broken the two bones together.
Therefore if the bone which is broken is the small forearm above, then it is convenient to the physician, he must the restoration of it, that place small extension with ease until that be guided.
But if the large forearm is that which is broken, then cover that place extension more vehement.
And if the two forearms are together broken, then cover that you place the constriction more strong.
And cover that you place the figure of the hand, the restoration of it and the extension of it extended over a cushion, and be the wrist of the hand at the parts above, more out than all the other fingers, and the little finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be centered upon a pillow laid.
And be a cushion in front of it in the height or straight of it, so that the patient does not hunch over work.
And then the minister extends the arm from the part further down with his hand or ligament, and another minister extends above similarly.
And then the physician guides the bones until he reduces that according to the best figure that he can.
And if in the facture of the bones are splints, then you pierce to reduce all that in its place with your virtue.
And if appear in it a splint separated that punishes the codena and is not at your hope in the restoration of it, then you finish upon it and oust that according to the manner which we have said below.
But if the fracture is with a plague, I have already made a singular chapter about that, and therefore take the cure of that.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then line a cloth with cerate made of rose oil and white wax, and make it between thickness and subtlety, and strengthen the cloth above it with a subtle structure until the abscess is subsided; and then remove the cerate and place a prepared plaster of powdered mold with clear of egg, and then place stars; and let the star be the one that is placed on that fracture pus later and stronger.
And know that the name of the stars of the arm is seen in the major dispositons, or whether the fracture is in one focus or in two foci together.
And then place your structure over the place of the fracture, pus strong and pus vehement, and when more it is raised the extrictura to the parts above the fracture or to the parts pus basses of it, place the structure a little more soft according to that is preceded the rememoracio of it in the beginning of the capitol.
And the cloths that are enveloped over the fracture shall be soft cloths, moistened, and not hard nor rough, and the thread with which it is strengthened shall be of its own proper thickness between subtle and gross, as we have recommanded.
And consider the limb and the ligament after some days. And if there occurs any cause for which rectification is necessary, so as prudently the one which occurs to the limb, and then cover that you embrokes the limb with water cauda until that ceases that prudency.
And let the limb not be constricted until it rests, and then return the structure.
And if the structure is already softened and the bone is already remaugut and seems like those, then rectify all that with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb by superfluity of structure, for then cover that you soften it a little and let it for some days until it runs to it the nourishment, and then strengthen it.
But if to the patient there occurs no cause of those that we have said, then cover that it not be dislocated within about 20 days or thereabouts of those.
And then let the hand of the patient be suspended by its virtue of movement agitatius, and make him sleep upon his two.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or very well it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the compleccios and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter XIII.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and the fingers.
Know that to the thumb of the hand and to the knuckles of the fingers, tart ends must fracture, and do not occur to them but attrition many times.
And when a fracture or attrition occurs in the hand, then cover that the patient follow straight and in front of him lies it according to equality, and then place the hand of him over that extended.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the physician aligns them until they are conjoined with good conjoining.
And then cover that you place plaster and stopa, if no abscess occurs caut; and then place stars above according to the quantity of the place, and you have already enveloped that in cloth of it.
But if the fracture is in the parts of the fingers of the belly of the palm, and then make semblance of a sphere of cloth, and command the patient that he strengthens that with his palm fractured; then be strengthened with long cloth.
And be the star of leather with cloth in which it is levitated, so that the leather be applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to that cover.
But if the fracture is in the outer parts, then cover that you place above a star and another star of the lower part in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight; and then place the structure, as if the hand were revolved to the ratetta between the fingers with ligaments.
And if there occurs a fracture to any of the knuckles of the fingers, then if the finger is put, be aligned according to that cover and then be strengthened with the palm and if you wish, place to it a small straight star so that the fracture be elevated and not be mauguda.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, as in that of the middle place, or in the index, or in the auricular, or in the annular, then be aligned and tied with the finger that seeks that one; or be all tied according to continuity, and it is better; or place upon that a small star, as we have said in the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and then that one, the disposition of abscess caut and oppose — with your operation — to that which cover when there occurs any cause of those, according to that is iterated the narration of it.
Chapter XIV.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the hip.
The bone of the hip many times is broken and is declared to the sentiment according to that it is converted to the part in front and to the most sovereign.
And the restoration of it is made in such a way that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient be prostrate upon his belly and upon his face.
And then the minister extends the entire ligament to its parting according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is located at the root of the thigh, then the ligament is pulled towards the denticle at the parting of the pelvis, so that the extension falls upon it, and the other ligament is left at the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is located at the denticle, then the ligament is pulled towards the denticle, and the extension is placed at the parting.
And then the doctor aligns the bones with both hands until it is reduced according to the natural likeness and the bone is joined with a good connection; then cover it with plaster and a splint, unless an abscess occurs in the limb. But if an abscess occurs there, then you leave it for a few days until the abscess has cauterized, and then return to your cure.
The splint is made like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and remove any superfluity; and then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long pin between the thigh and the leg from the denticle to the parting, and the ends of the pin come from the sovereign parting of both parts, and then roll over the leg and thigh what superfluity of the bandage.
And then place on the thigh in the place of that fracture, splints, and place one splint on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the spaces between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the splint is coagulated.
And then begin with a strong splint on the middle of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as much as you move away from the ligament of the fracture, your splint should be smaller and lighter and softer.
And then extend both ends of the pin to the parting until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the splints on the other side so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
And then leave the splint on it, so that no corrosion, abscess cauterization, or inflammation or similar things occur in the limb; and if any of these things occur, then remove it carefully from there, and rectify what has happened as we have said many times.
But if the bone is broken in a way that it cannot be aligned, then you should align it as much as is possible; and if not, then cover it and remove that, and care for it with what has preceded the memory until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with something else that is adjusted to it, like we have said in the adjutori and the arm.
But however, in the restoration of it in this manner, do not cause the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, then apply something else to the other leg, then it is necessary that he limp from the one that is always.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few more or a few less, and all this is according to the diversity of the complexities and other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap of the thigh.
Know that a fracture of the kneecap of the thigh, often occurs, but it happens many times with a tearing.
But if a fracture occurs, then it is not but a fissure or a crack in its parts, and this is with a plague or a set of plagues, and above all this is the state with the feeling.
And the restoration of it is in this way that it is aligned what is broken of its parts with the said ones until it is joined and joined according to what is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
And then place plaster and place on it a round splint, if you need it; and strengthen it with a splint as convenient.
And consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in the other fractures, as abscess cauterization and similar to those, so that it opposes all accidents to what is convenient until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick, and it is named by the name of the leg; and the other is thin, and it is named fibula.
And it happens to some kinds of fractures that happen to both bones of the leg, and for that reason the restoration of it is made as the restoration of the arm, and the operation of it is one.
And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted to all parts.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg is converted to the front parts.
And if the thicker bone is broken, it bends behind, and it is of those causes that are not to your liking.
And then administer extension and equation and ligation of the splints according to that alignment.
But however, if the fracture of the leg is recent and has many bandages, that the extension be less and pus lighter, and alleviate with your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and when you tie the stars and that completes all your operation, then you will take pieces of wood of pine, which is placed below the causes which are placed in soles, and are made by shoots of palm; some of those which are of small thickness, and are not of the branches, and the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the bone inside to the pus below.
And then envelope on each strip in two envelopes according to the length of it, and place one on the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and be from the bone inside to the bottom of the foot.
And then tie the two straps in three places of two extremities and in the middle place, because with this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left side, and it stands for good station.
And already is administered a splint of wood according to the length of the leg; and be placed in it the leg so that it conserve that of movement.
And mostly, so that you do this in a fracture, and when with that is plague properly.
And then consider in each day the leg and study with it by behind study, and you guard it from abscess and from inflammation or other causes similar; and when it happens any cause of those, then oppose yourself to it with what you should do before that it be healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the talus and of the bones of the foot and of the digits.
To the talus there does not happen fracture of all; but to the bones of the foot there happens fracture some times; and to the digits of the foot few happens fracture, and there does not happen to them but attrition in the middle of disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot happens fracture and sometimes those bones be elevated above each other, then the patient places his foot on the ground prepared as if they were going.
And then place one foot on what is elevated of those bones, and then step on those, and press, and tie those until they return to the places.
And then place plaster and stop above, and place below the belly of the foot a small table to which are two heads placed.
And then strengthen that with the foot with structure descent, because you have enveloped that with cloths and with other causes of which you have said.
And when to it pass three days or four, then you untie the ligament, because you find the bones tied, or are broken or are dislocated, and the operation in those is thus as you know.
But if some digits are broken, then restore those, and tie those as I and recounted to you in the restoration of the digits of the hand. And then place on the broken digit a splint according to the length of the digit, and be plus wide of it a little; and below the foot this table which and to you recounted, and strengthen that with structure decent.
But if what is broken of the bones is two or three or more, then you place on each digit a splint of its quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table in the lowest part of the foot, and be standing on one of the heads of the table the belly of the foot so that it have with good retention.
And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which you have been told to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and oppose yourself to every accident with what you should.
Chapter XVIII.
Of fracture of the hip bone of the woman and of the bone of the pubic bone and of the groin of the man.
When the hip bone of the woman is broken, then make that cease in a bed laid down, and then incline that to the part of the back a little, and it be held behind.
And then the matron puts the hip bone of cloth, and be made in the hip of it as she hopes; and then the woman be supported, and elevate the back of her little by little, because all that is thrown away until it be before the part of the hip as she hopes and the broken bone returns.
And then place pillows on the back of her, and when she wants to urinate removes the cloth with facility and then urine, and return that according to the manner according to which you have seen that at the beginning, and then return to her first pillow.
And do thus for vii days or around those, because that is restored.
And if you want, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen over the wound of her a tube of cane; and introduce all the bladder in the hip of her, and then insufflate into the tube with virtue until the bladder be inflated within the hip, because the fracture returns.
And then be filled with cloth and stay for some days according to we have recounted, until it be healed.
And when the bone of the pubic of man or of woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and stitching of it what we have recounted in the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these proper fractures and which few understand, especially to him who has some study and use and understands this my book well; for that fracture means to you in the major dispositions of the right way in the restoration and in the stricture of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the groin of the man when it is broken, take a cloth of flax, and put the groin in it; and then put a bandage over it, and wrap it, and leave it for three days or about those, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the restoration of bone fractures when it is plagued.
It is convenient for him to whom a fracture happens with plague, and especially if the bone is large as is the bone of the hip or of the humerus, or similar to that, that you take care and flebotomize him as soon as the conditions of flebotomy to you or testify as we have said above.
And if the plague flows blood, then you must take care to the retention of it as much as you can pulverize over it with a trill, if to you another cause is not present.
And then as soon as you begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong that, if you do not happen to have an abscess.
But if an abscess happens, then you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is given, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, for you will cause to happen bad accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the hip uncovered, then you must take care to reduce it and align it with your hands with facility and with little extension.
But if the extension is not to you prepared and the equation of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands with this instrument; and the instrument is made of iron, the length of which is of seven digits or of eight and the width of which is according to the quantity of the plague; and for that it is necessary to the physician that he prepares of those three or four according to the quantity that you indicate to it in the cure in all species of fracture.
And let it be rounded, and let it have little thickness so that it is not bent, the comprehension over it during the hour of the operation.
And let it be of acute extremity at which be margin in its extremities; and let the underside of it be of tending thickness, and of the majority of it within to the parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", so it is the little palette.
Because it must be placed the extremity of it ascends elevated over the extremity of the bone prominent.
And impel it in one push while it returns the bone, and it is aligned with some equation.
And therefore strive to align the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of that broken bone is subtle, and does not take that instrument for good acceptance, then you must insert the extremity of that bone while the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone of all with that which we have recommended, then insert it with what you coney to it of the incisors which we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner it is to you possible.
And then smooth that which remains in the bone of roughness and of small scabs.
And as the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient feels a violent and leading pain, then you know that the bone is not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer to the patient great benefit.
When is completed your restoration which you do to the bone, and then submerge cloth in black styptic wine, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place over the plague cerot or other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause in it to happen poultice and corruption.
And then administer stelas in the hour of your compliment of the restoration of the bone, and leave the plague uncovered as much as you insert the tract with forceps and uses of bandages according to the quantity of the plague.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the plague with the fracture, for many times have done this the foolish physicians, and have caused to happen over their patients death or sickness corrupt or ulcerated, so it is healed. And if your stricture is lighter, softer, different from the stricture of the other fractures.
And if the plague is great or is a bad plague, and you fear over that some bad accidents which we have recommended, and you feel pain in the place, then you must not place over it stelas, but make to it an envelope of hard cloths in place of stelas and strain it with those.
And when after a day or two the plague begins, that in it there be engendered brac, then you remove from under the cloth which you had placed over it with wine, and then administer poultices, with which of our custom it is that we medicate the plagues, as well as poultices tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
And it convenes to you that you untie the bandage and consider the plague in each day morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and that the limb be prepared in such a manner that the poultice runs from it to the parts below with facility.
If many days pass with the plague and it is not consolidated nor is the arm separated from it, then you know that here are satagias of the small ones so that you inquire about the plague with a tenta. And of those satagias those that are separated remove and extract, those that from them are not separated and put the limb and make it occur pain, pierce you to cut those according to what to you is possible.
And if it happens to the plague a boil or ulcer, it is a stiomenios, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you must put on each of those with what convenes to it of the cure of which is preceded narration in its chapter.
And of this in which you must know the best way and you make present your own: when the bone is broken, elevate the limb as if the bone of the thigh and the auxiliary and similar to those of the large limbs, and that you do not presume traction of it, nor the extraction of it for many times happens by this death; have left that within that you can, for very soon it will fall by itself in about 20 days or 30. And then cure the plague if it is seen, and if not leave that.
Chapter .xx.
Of the cure of nodules that happen in the vestiges of any fracture.
Many times happens this nodule in the vestiges of healing of fracture, and mostly that it is near the joints, and it is deformed by it the figure of the limb; and very soon prohibits the limb of its natural operation.
Therefore, consider if the nodule is recent and administer in that medicines that have stipulated as if it is aloen, and ensis, and mira, and sercacollo, and acrassia, and similar to those; in this way that you take from that some or all, and confess those with vi stiptic, or with album of egg, or with vi agre, and put that on the nodule in cloth, and constrict those on it by good constriction.
And leave the constriction that do not untie that for many days; and then untie that and iterate another, until that the nodule is removed; or strengthen on that lamina of lead descentment, for lead has the property of removing all that is inflated in the limbs.
But if the nodule is already in a worse converted and strict it is and necessity provokes to remove that coytadament, and then cut that by the part most sovereign of it, and incise that the superfluity and eminent, or rat the one with some rezoris until that it is removed; and cure that until that it is healed.
Chapter .xxi.
Of restoration of fracture when it is restored and then that which remains of the limb subtle and frail not according to its nature.
When a fracture of bone is restored, and then that which remains of the limb subtle and frail, then that is not done but for many causes: of which one is multitude of solution of the ligament and of the ligament of it made not according to what it should; or for superfluity of constriction of the ligaments until that the nourishment be prohibited to run to the limb; or for multitude of superfluous embrocation; or for superfluous movement not in its hour; or for paucity of blood in the body of the patient and for weakness of it.
And cure of that is to give to the patient to eat and make the heart of it tender until that the blood be multiplied in it; and administer baths; and intermet gaug and leticia upon it.
And then put a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to it much nourishment, or continue embrocation of it with aygua tebeza, until that the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter .xxii.
Of the cure of bones broken when they are restored crookedly and prohibits the operation of them of that which it should.
When it happens to the limb already restored at the healing of it of tortuosity and eminence to the broken bone and nodule, and it is for that feeded of form of the limb, but however the limb is not prohibited of its natural operation, then you must not receive the word of that one who exists that member be of new broken.
But already there have been many foolish doctors and restorers the ones who have done that in our land; and this operation is very vituperable producing great fear the sign of which is mortal.
But if claudication and nodule are recent, then you must have them embrocated with aygua tebeza in which there are cooked mollifying herbs, as if it is the fuelas of altea and roots of it, and melilot, and similar to those; and be made a plaster with mollifying plaster as if it is diallaquilon well made; or that be prized mucillage of root of altea and be contused with gray of guanine or with oil of cirami, and be plastered with that; or that be prized fat figs and be trissated with fems of dove, and similar to those of the medicines that are named amermans consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved with assiduous friction lighter that be with the humid hands, and be administered movement of the limb to all parts at all hours.
But if tortuosity is already gone ahead and is made strong and converted is in worse and provoked is necessity to cure of it with iron, then you must have it the most desus cecsat and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and be incise that which superflues of nodule of that metys with the bone with subtils scissors, and be administered facility in that with solicitude and study.
Chapter XXIII.
Of the speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints of the limb, so that movement is prohibited, and the figure of the limb is distorted, and it causes great pain and injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately attempt to reduce it, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and it becomes very difficult to perform the dislocation reduction.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to be bad or stretched during the time of inflammation, because often it causes spasms and intense pain.
But when this happens, it is necessary that you apply a poultice to the patient's limb, and let it rest while the inflammation subsides; and then wrap the limb with warm water and oil, and then reduce it with ease.
And every limb should be treated with this so that the memory of the injury will come back to its place.
And you should already order the chapters on dislocations according to what was previously said about fractures; from the part of the body that is superior to the part that is inferior.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocated the two mandibles if not tart; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: that they are slightly displaced from their places by a small movement, and they are softened a little; or they are dislocated by a complete and complicated dislocation, so that they are softened at the junction where the saliva of the patient flows and that he cannot hold it or close his mouth, and his tongue is enveloped in his word.
But when the dislocation of it is slight, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself with little cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and complicated, then it is necessary that it be administered a reduction of it gently, and not be delayed at all.
And that the minister have the head of the patient, and meanwhile the doctor puts his index finger in the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw from inside his mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts his two fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others of his hands are outside with which he grasps; and he commands the patient to cease his mandibles and allow them to move from any part; and the doctor aligns the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
And if it is difficult to reduce it, and most of all if both mandibles are dislocated at the same time, then administer vaporization with warm water and oil, until it is made lighter the reduction of both and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And therefore, when they return and are aligned, and the mouth of the patient is closed and is not softened, then place on them poultices of cloth with cerot, and made of wax and oil rubbed; and then apply it with ease with bandages.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be standing between two pillows, so that he does not strain either to the right or to the left; and do not force him to chew for any reason; having his food be forbidden to him, until when the pains are reduced and the mandibles are healed, then allow him to chew what he wants.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and spitting, until the jaw is healed and sound.
And if it is difficult to reduce two mandibles when they are dislocated at any hour and are not converted to their places, then many times this happens fever and persistent diarrhea, and very often the belly of the patient is troubled, and very often and pure bile is vomited.
And when you see this, then you know that it is pernicious; and many times that person dies who happens to this within 10 days.
Chapter XXV.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the place inside by its continuation with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and this is declared to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then grasp the place with your palm with great force, so that it will return.
And then place on that plaster and poultices and strengthen that.
But the extremity of that which is connected and continuous with it, is not dislocated in any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and aligned according to what has been said and according to what is at your disposal.
And then place on that plaster, and poultices, and a splint, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And with this same cure is reduced the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated from the part of the thigh to the part below.
And the second is that it is dislocated from the part above the muscle, and that is done hard; and it is not dislocated to the parts behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated to the parts in front by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and thrust out to the parts below the thigh, and mostly in those in which the flesh is few, it is easily dislocated; but in those in which there is much flesh, it is thrust out with difficulty.
And often accidents happen to some men by a blow or fall, and the muscle of them is inflamed with an abscess, and it is cured by that which is already dislocated.
Therefore, it is necessary that you know this before you are over-certain of it, and then you will proceed in the cure of it.
And it is known the dislocation of it when it is in the parts below the thigh; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you find between those a manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and below the thigh the touch of the head of the muscle thus as a bowl, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his armpit, nor move it at all.
If it is dislocated from the foot or above, and you then feel a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation is made a light reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister elevates his hand to the parts above; and then he places his thumbs below the thigh of him, and elevates the joint with strength upwards to its place, and the minister elevates his hand, and extends that upwards; and then he places that below where it returns lightly.
But if for what we have said it does not return, and it is from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and administered a poultice that softens and liniments as if it were cotton wool of althea, and fennel, and melilot in water, and it be administered.
And then the patient be laid on his back and placed below the thigh of him, waiting for a wool that is equal between lightness and tightness, and the physician places his heel on the sphere, and elevates the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it is not moved to the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not moved to the parts below, for that instantly returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it this way: and it is that you make a man present who is taller than the patient, and standing on the part of that side, and interweaves his muscle below the thigh of the patient and elevates the thigh of him to the parts above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below his belly. But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that with him that another cause be suspended, so that the grave one, for the dislocation returns instantly.
And it is reduced easily in another way: and it is that a long staff be placed on the ground, the head of which be round in figure, as a mortar, that it be neither thick nor thin, and then it be placed below the patient; because so that being placed on the head of the staff, cloths be placed on the patient, and the patient stand according to the length of the staff, and then the hand of him be extended to the parts below the other part; and the body of him be extended from the other part with strength, for the joint returns to its place with velocity.
And if it is a difficult reduction of it for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a staff the quantity of which be in the length of two arms, and the width of it be four digits, and the thickness of it be reduced in the front of the thigh according to this form:
And on the rounded head, be placed cloths of linen so that the staff does not hurt the patient.
And then it be placed below the thigh of the patient, and the hand or arm be extended on the staff into the parts below, and the staff be tied on the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then the arm be placed on a step of a ladder according to the width, and the hand be extended to the parts below, and the other body be suspended from the other part, for the joint enters instantly.
And as the entering of it is completed according to whichever manner that is possible to you, then it is necessary that you place below the thigh a wool sphere of equal quantity; and then place a plaster prepared of powdered meal mixed with eggs and album of egg over the whole muscle, as if it were rolled upwards, and then a splint below the thigh with decent tightness; and the bandage be rolled over the plaster, and the hand of him be attached to the neck of him, and be left, and not be moved the hand of him for seven days.
And it is necessary that the food of the patient be little, while the member be comforted, for it is lighter to the healing of it.
And then the food should be given more near seven or five and exercise should be done; and therefore if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times because of humidity that has come to it or for another cause, then it is necessary that in that place cauterization be administered with three burns, according to what was said before in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament is loosened and the joint is not held firm, and the bandage and the constriction are reduced over it several times, and it is not held firm and it catched and cannot raise that arm to the upper parts, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is made with the foot and the knee or the parts behind, the reduction is made with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And let the other constriction be administered there, and cure that until it is healed.
And if it happens that near the healing gravity falls on the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient uses baths many times until that gravity is relieved and it returns to its first nature.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and that is dislocated to all parts, and more to the front than to the back, and its dislocation is not known to you until you are certain of the place or of the touch according to which figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip with its own place, that is to you declared manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that its muscle.
And you must reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an abscess comes to it, because if it comes to it an abscess, it is difficult the reduction of it, and it is not healed of all; and more so when it is in the back parts, because it is worse of all the other kinds of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many times they die from it.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of it be extended with two hands, and the arm of it be expanded, and the hands of the doctor be on the hip and below it, and he pushes the joint with the knuckles of his hands together, or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns as if it bends the hand with its hand, until it strikes the hip with the root of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and a strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that raising of the ministers so that it not be remaugut from the extension.
And then it be revolved the arm from all parts, because it is enveloped a cloth folded long over the hand of it, or ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that with some oil so that it be those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint with facility; and then pushes the joint with a vehement impulse until it returns.
And after the reduction of it, it is necessary that it be laid upon that plaster in which there is a sticking plaster and a concoction with album of egg, and it is extended with a descending constriction, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and it is left for some days.
And after it is loosened; and therefore if the joint is formed in its place, then you untie the ligament of it and leave it.
And if sometimes the joint does not become stronger, then you repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it is extended; and after loosening it.
But if it happens to it gravity after the reduction of the joint, and the disposition of it is in movement, then administer moisture in baths and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or rest upon the joint alleviated, so it is a matter of greasy motion; and then be bound, and leave it over the bones the day and the night. And after that, and put that in bath; and when it is dry, then you rub the joint with temperate friction, and then repeat upon that alleviated, so it is a matter of motion, once, and the second, and the third. Corruption has already arrived on the inside of the tooth, while it is still in the mouth.
And if you want, place upon that a piece of wet cowhide scraped with a knife and stretched over it; and do this several times, because that is humid and reduces it to its disposition.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the malassen, so it is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen of the hand some times is dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is lighter, and the contrary is of the other joints, but however it is necessary that it be velocity in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place be apostematized or that anything happens to it an abscess.
And the reduction of the dislocation of that is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the assistant extends the hand of that, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes that until it returns to its place.
But however, it must be considered if the palm is already placed in the palm of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand on a table, despite the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous, then the position of the hand of that intrinsically on the table, so that the hand of the doctor rests on that prominence of the joint.
And therefore if it returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that with a poultice, yielding the abscess and leaving it; and do not repeat this, for if not, you will not suffer nor can you perform the reduction of it more than days pass.
But however, the joint must be moved according to its tortuosity; and do not notice to the patient any cause, except that the hand is softened and cannot tighten any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then there is no way to heal it except that it be strengthened with a cautery near the location of it and firmly apply it, conferring any cause.
Therefore, when the bad limb is returned, then place on it the poultice which have recomposed, and let it be left and strengthened for 5 days; and then remove it and let it be left and the hand of it be exercised.
But if the movement of it is stayed and any gravity is placed upon it, then gently that with water and friction several times, until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the cure of dislocations of the said.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated in every part.
And when a finger is dislocated from those at the back of the palm or in the palm of it, then stretch the finger and push the dislocation of it with your thumbs, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that from the part which is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that and extend that until straight it is healed in that day.
And when night comes, bind that according to that narrative, and do not cease to unbind that in the day and exercise with movement, and bind that at night; and do this for some days until it is straight.
And do similar with this, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and bind that to that part and do with this your first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do with this when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocations of the vertebrae of the back.
When a dislocation complicated occurs to any of the vertebrae of the back or of the neck, and the moved vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that there is no cure, for death befalls the patient.
And a sign of this is that the digestion of the patient is outside of his will, and he cannot retain that; and many times are softened some limbs of him or two legs of him or two arms of him, or one of those; or is removed a vertebra from its place, for many times is removed and many times is made the removal of those in four parts.
Therefore that is already removed to the parts behind and is called gelbositis.
But the cure of it is that then consider if the gelbositis occurs from puerility, for then in that there is no cure nor from that there is healing of all.
But in that which comes from a blow or from percussion or similar to those, already the Ancients have said the ways of cure with verbose sermons, of which the most returns with prophecy; but I have already and abbreviated of that of which the little excuse of the excess of it, for my best proximity to the better understanding exposition, with which I have this exposed and formatted from diverse instruments of that with which I will show this and expose that.
And of those there is no cure except that which occurs in the back properly with what I have recomposed.
And it is that the patient be extended on his face upon a bed near a wall, and be extended below him a soft instrument so that the feet of him are not lifted.
And then a straight stick be placed, fixed in the ground at the extremity of the bed near the head of him, and another stick in the aviro the feet of him at the other extremity of the bed.
And the assistant holds the stick, and do not be stopped in a ditch; and another assistant holds the other according to that form.
And then envelop over the head of the patient and below the tillic liamen leon firm; and extend the extremity of the liamen to the stick which is above the head of him, and bind that in it; and then strengthen the other liamen over the hips of him the denols of him, and below the legs of him; and then adjust all the liaments and bind those in the other stick which is above the feet of him.
And then the minister, having placed the patient's leg in the position of the staff, and not having moved the two staffs and ligaments from their places where they are placed, but however not being fixed as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength while returning, or who places upon that a table, and then that he adjust upon the table his feet while returning.
But if it does not return in this way, then he takes a table of which the width or length is in the ratio of three cubits, and hollows out in the wall of which we have said that it is near the patient a place in which enters the extremity of the table. And then he places the majority of the table upon the spine, and the doctor places his feet upon the other extremity, and tightens well while the spine is contracted and that it returns to its place.
And if you wish, open with a turn the one that is revolved with the hand; and that you fix on the ground the head of the patient in the rear of the pug two staffs, the length of which is of an arm, and you put the head of him in the rear of the pug also two staffs; and let the length that is between each staff be a palm, and already is made in each staff a hole in which runs the turn, and each one is held fixed on the ground so that it is not moved.
And let there be also a round staff in which is the turn, and let it be revolved in the two holes of the two staffs.
And in the extremity of it is a hole in which is formed the staff, the length of which is a palm with that which is revolved; and in the two other staffs is similar to that.
And then tighten the ligaments that you have straightened in the feet of the patient in the hole which is of his head, and the ligaments that you have straightened in the thighs of him in the turn which is of his feet.
And then you place each turn and stay a minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor aligns the spine according to what we have said.
And as soon as the spine is returned, and the place is aligned, then you cover with a paste made with dried albumen of egg, and then with cotton; and then you place upon the paste a board of which the width is of three digits or about those, and the length of it is as much as it reaches the place of the hollow, and upon the part of the spine it lies.
And then bind it with the ligament which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment while it is healing.
And if there remain any prominence in the place at the end of the healing, then it is necessary that medicines be administered which soften and cleanse with administration of the board for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it is administered in that place a plate of lead.
And some times an eminence occurs in the rear of the spines of the two, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already protrudes because it is not necessary that it be done proscription to it with this medicine, because very strong it will make you happen death.
Chapter XXXI.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should not be called dislocation only, and do not occur to those that occur to the other joints of small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated to the inside parts, or to the outside parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the inside parts, and few to the front parts or to the back parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it to the inside parts is that, when you adjust the leg of the healthy patient with the patient, it is longer and the thigh is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his leg towards the knee, and it is the place that if the knee is positioned with a cauterized abscess, so that the head of the thigh has already arrived here.
And the sign of that one to which occurs dislocation is to the outside parts, is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of that one to which occurs dislocation to the front parts is that it expands its thigh according to its complement, but however it does not bend that which is in the thigh, and if it is forced to go and cannot go over that to the front parts; and the urine of it is retained and the groin of it is abscesses, and of the walking of it over the heel.
And the sign of that one to which occurs dislocation to the back parts is that it does not expand the thigh, nor can it bend that which bends the groin, and the thigh of it is shorter than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is of that place.
But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it is already fixed with that having it, then you administer reduction of it and it remains according to its disposition, then it is not in that cure of all; and therefore it is not necessary that in that one be done proscription.
But in the case of which the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then take hold of it so that you turn the joint and extend it to the inner and outer parts, and move it to the right and left, for it will return easily and does not require other care.
But if it does not return in this manner, then take that you prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of him from the back part, or with his hands, or with a bandage which is tied over the leg below the knee; and another minister extend the hand of that below so that he puts his hands below the buttocks of him; and then tighten with a bandage on the root of the groin, and hold another minister the extremity of the bandage.
And the extension of him or from the inner part to the shoulder or from the back part to the part of the loins.
And the extension of all those at once while the patient is elevated with his body from the ground and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that we will say of the proper cure.
In the reduction of it proper, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the inner parts, then the patient must be laid down on his side; and then place the bandages on the root of the groin in that place which is between the head of the groin and the place that is below the shoulder; and then extend the bandage from the part of the shoulder to the highest part of the collarbone.
And then another minister firmly grasps the arms of him, and presses the thick part of the groin of the patient and extends to the outer parts by vehement extension, for that it returns to its place.
And this kind is of the lightest cure with which this limb is reduced than the others.
But if it is excused upon you and do not obey the entrance with this kind of cure of all, then take that the two legs of the patient are tied together with a strong, light bandage, on both the ankles and both the knees.
And the length of each of them by the quantity of four fingers, and the leg of the patient extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient is suspended over the head of the pole, and that he is in the middle; and the length of him from the ground the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong young man to press the head of the groin, and that he is suspended with the patient another young man, and the other young man presses the groin with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in the proper reduction, when the dislocation is in the outer part, then the patient must lie on his back as we have recommended in the having the groin; and be tightened the bandage on the leg of the patient properly and on the feet of him.
And then two poles are placed, one at the feet of him, and the other at the head; and then poles adjusted in the middle of the groin are placed on which wet cloths are enveloped, so that the patient is not damaged because the pole is between the thighs of him, because of which the extension to the inner parts is not pulled.
And then each minister extends to his part, and the doctor with his hand engulfs the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then the leg must be extended slightly, and it is according to this same narration about groin; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the groin of the patient, and then he pushes that with the other hand, and with that pushing he pauses that extended to the inner parts to the part of the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then take that the patient must not be extended to the inner parts, and is elevated on the ground; having take that he is placed on a hard cause, as if the swelling of him is dislocated in the outer parts, according to what we have said of the placing of him on two planks; and it is on his back and the bandages are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And take that compression be administered with a board on the place where the joint is.
Therefore, as the reduction is complicated according to what take — and the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, and is that you extend from the patient two legs, and when you see those engulfs and the patient stretches his leg and expands that ses excusacio, then you know that the limb according to what take is returned — and then you adjust two things and pause plaster and extend with bandage so that the width is not bad in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or for four.
And then untie the bandage and the plaster, and compare one leg to the other.
Now, if you see those joints in alignment, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore let the patient go.
And if you see any cause for softening, then you return and bandage that, and extend that according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then unwrap that, and make that one delay in walking for some days, until it is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways, which is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inside parts, and to the parts forward to the parts backward; and to the front parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply their leg to the groin; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all ways of it is that you make the patient straight, so that he already extends his leg, if he can on top of that; adhere your two to the face of it, and place his foot between your feet; and then make adhere the shoulder of it to your palms, and hold those between your fingers on the shoulder of it with strength, and another minister extends his leg while the shoulder returns to its place.
And the sign of the return of it is that his leg adheres to the groin with lightness without labor.
And then bandage that and make the leg adhere to the groin, and then tie those immediately with a bandage for three days or for four, and then unwrap those.
And do not use the patient for walking for some days, until it is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension with ligaments of which in the cure of the hernia preceding narration.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle some times is sprained by small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to compliment, and the dislocation of it is made either to the inside parts or to the outside parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of the sprain of it is of lightness reduction, and it is that it be extended with ease with the hands and be aligned while it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to compliment, cover that you make the patient straight, and have that one minister strong and valiant of the part behind the back of it in the middle place of it.
And then you with your right hand the foot of the most sovereign part, and with your left hand of the part most below of the foot in the place of the ankle.
And then you pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left for two times, and then extend with the left; and push the foot of the foot with the right towards the groin.
And do this two times according to that we have counted.
And then push the foot of the foot to the groin the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Therefore if it returns in one time or in two according to this manner, and if you see the foot aligned, it is good; and if not, then on it iterates the operation, for that returns.
But if to you is prohibited the reduction of it with that which we have recounted, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and stretch a padded cloth on the ground firmly, and that it lies between the thighs of it, and you have already enveloped on it cloth so that it does not burn the patient.
And then the minister of it holds its thighs, and another minister extends the leg with its hands or with ligaments that lie on the collar of the foot; and then extend that each minister against extension of its part, and the cloth be extending between the thighs of the patient retaining that, so that the body of it not be pulled to the parts below towards its extension.
And then the physician aligns the dislocation with its hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh to the parts below, for the dislocation returns with ease.
And therefore when the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause bandage and extend that with ligaments firmly, and tie the foot with ligaments to the groin.
And cover that you fear or guard yourself of the nerves which are behind on the ankle, so that the ligament on that not be vehement and injure that firmly.
And then leave that for two days or for three; and if the ligament is softened, extend that.
And then unwrap that on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from movement for 40 days. But if it is forced to go before that space, it is not made secure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted on it, and then that which does not receive cure.
And if it happens to it abscess cut, then cover that you administer in the reduction of it that in the place where we preceded our narration, in another place of cure and of embrocation, until it is sprained.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toes.
That the one that is dislocated be wrapped with little extension of his work; and that which is not difficult, raise it lightly.
But if the dislocation is in some joints of the foot, then make the patient put his foot on a flat surface of the earth or on a table, and be standing thus as if he were going.
And then stand on his feet, and place your foot on that which is imminent from the joints, and then step on it with your foot with virtue until it returns, and that you see it already wrapped and does not appear in the eminence.
And then place under the foot of him a table that supports the whole foot, which has two ends, and then strengthen it with a decent and firm structure for three days; and then untie it and make him rest from walking for a few days, until it is strengthened and its return is assured.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the kinds of dislocations that are made with plague or with fracture or with any of them together.
When any of those causes happen, and you engage in the cure of it and in its restoration, many times the death occurs.
And for this, you should not presume over its cure, but rather the one who is wise in the art, of long usage, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not daring nor presumptuous; and that use in the beginning of medicines that cede abscesses, causing only so much, and leaving the patient to the divine judgment, but to the one whom you hope for salvation from perdition, with the alleviation of the illness, and in which you appear some hope. And therefore, strive as soon as possible to make its reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes an abscess.
And therefore, if the limb returns as we want, then administer the regimen which causes a cauterized abscess and cures the plague with what you deem appropriate from the drying herbs.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and happens in the bones separated, then you pierce the stem of them, and do in that what we have said in the simple illnesses of this which is preceded in the places of those.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the entrance in the ways of fear according to what has preceded you my preaching; for this is better you owe your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true body those in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasim perfectly of which may God be the benefit. Amen.
