O, sons, because I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by its completion the end is achieved in it, and by its expositions, and by its declarations, it is my view that you complete this for you with this treatise, which is a part of the operation with my hand, so it is my surgery.
Because the operation with my hand is prostrate in our region and in our time entirely deprived, whereas many perils the science of it, and its vestiges are held hostage; and there remain of it only some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been muddled and become subject to those errors and uncertainty because their clauses the understandings of it and is elongated the force of it and the art.
And it is seen to me that you bring that to life with the order of this treatise in that according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for that it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work as it may be by addition of the declaration, and by preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the cause for which no one is found a good artificer with his hand in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and that it requires the actor to be beforehand exercised in the science of anatomy, which reconciles Gualia because it knows the movements of the members and the forms of those, and the conjunction and the separation of them; and had the knowledge of the bones, of the nerves and of the cartilages, and the number of those, and the growth of them; and of the pulsating veins and of the quiet ones, and of the places of the emergence of them.
And for that it says Hippocrates that with a name it is not moved, but in the work little, and most of all in the art of the hand.
But we have already said of that in the introduction of this book; because whoever is not learned in what we have said of anatomy, is not evacuated that he does not fall into error for which many men die, thus as I have seen too many of those, because some are formed in this science and cast themselves from that their science and their experience.
Because I saw a foolish and inexperienced physician who had incised an abscess scrophilos in the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed while the woman died among the hands of him.
And I saw another physician who thought that the stomach of a man who had been in his state should be treated with a stone, and the stone was large, and it came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, for that man on the third day died.
And I had already been called to extract that, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient I knew over him that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was taking a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he was to a black man who was broken in his hip; and prepared the physician with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with splints and splints with strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And then he dismissed him according to his desires, and he relieved him, and he left him for some days and commanded that we untie the ligament; and so it was that the hip and the foot became infected, and it came to perdition.
And I was called to him, and I arranged to untie the ligament, and achieved tranquility and so he was relieved of his pains.
But however the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, for that I could not restrain it, and did not cease to wander the corruption in the limb until the patient perished.
And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after some days, until the malignancy of it was magnified upon his lord.
The cause of which is that the cancer is pure of melancholic humor, therefore it does not come to it with iron at all, but that it is in a limb which suffers that it be entirely held.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary to you that the operation with the hand be devised in two divisions: that is in the operation to which is associated health, and in the work with which there is peril in the major dispositions.
And I have already explained this in all places of this book in which I bring operation in which there is error and fear; for it is necessary to you that you guard this and leave that, so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and to dishonor you.
And therefore take your arms with diligence and with the protection of God, and your patients with happiness and with firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God, pursuing health and praiseworthy success, and leave the maladies terrible of difficult healing, and hold your arms from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: because it is remaining to your glory, and more so in the world and later to your sanctities.
Gualia already said in some of his monitions: "Do not treat a bad illness, so that you are not called bad physicians."
And now I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and the first of the first part. The first chapter, ordered from the head to the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of that which is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of incision and perforation, and of leeches, and of poultices, and of the extraction of arrows and of things similar to those, all chaptered and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of the cure of sprains and of things similar to those; chapter ordered from the head to the feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
I want you to say the quality of the judgments of that cautery and of its consequences, and in what completion cautery should be prohibited.
Therefore I say that the sermon of the quality of the judgment of cautery and of its consequences is a long and prolix sermon, and subtle by science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken of it, and they have disagreed about it, and to me a little of their sermons suffices, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I say that cautery commends itself to every complexion universally, which is in matter or has matter, except for two complexions, which are complexions with hot matter.
In the cold and dry complexion with matter, there is disagreement; because some say that cautery is beneficial to that, and others say the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that illness cold and dry with that which is hot and dry be healed.
And they say those who say the contrary of that, that cautery is made beneficial in all cold and dry illness that comes in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humors to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I say for the sermon of that, that experience has already to me some times discovered.
But however, it is not necessary that it should come upon this that which is already exploited and exercised in the chapter of cautery by previous exercise, and who has known the diversity of the complexion of men and the disposition of the illnesses in their own, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
But in the other complexions, there is no fear for you, and most of all in the hot and humid illnesses, because all the physicians are agreed upon those, and they are not disagreed in the judgment with cautery in those.
And know, sons, that of the secret of healing by cautery with fire and of the goodness of it, it is because fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member which is cauterized and does not reach the other member attached to it except with little consequence.
But the action of burning medicine reaches that in the members which are far from it, and greatly makes them come to the member illness of difficult healing and greatly to be avoided.
But fire, by its sublimity and of its substance goodness, does not do this except that it becomes superfluous, and it is already known to us by experiment and by the length of service of study in the art about the truth of the causes; and for that I am excused from the length of the sermon, and if it were not that it is not read in my book in this pause to you secretly hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and of its expulsion by which it expels the illnesses, with a philosophical sermon demonstrative, which would be acute in your minds.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to do cautery and pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because so that the consequence for the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of that which with the cautery is thrown, and most of all if the cautery is for pains or of necessary pains, strong and fistulous, which do not suffer delay because it is feared of those that come malice, which is greater than little consequence entering for time.
And thus do not catch in your minds, or, sons, that this is not estimated except by the vulgar people and the foolish physicians, because it is that to that illness which is healed by cautery is not reduced at all times, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not so as they think about it, because cautery is nothing but in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries the humors which are the cause for which the pains come.
But however, cautery superflues over medicine by the will of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that its illness returns at some time in the future, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of its illness, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of it from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and what has come to it in its acquisition in food and things similar to those; unless that illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and humors, as cautery of a tooth for pain and things similar to that, it is possible that in it it does not return that pain, but rather that it is done in small.
And more common speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a right speech, not that I understand it in it, because I think that it is no cure that profits with medicine nor with any other cause except cautery.
And the cause is the opposite of that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when they administer the methods of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause one administers cautery, and it profits to that. And therefore it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding that the common people and too many foolish doctors understand.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say that except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen that and found that it does not do that except in some bodies, and cautery with that is good and better than with iron as they said; but however when you do cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the roar of gold, and that prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust on it fire it melts the gold by the fire, and happens in the fire some plates for that the artisan catches for the occupation of that.
And for that reason cautery with iron is done more lightly and more directly to the rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter in cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that later the one who asks for it will know what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers on the humidity and coldness over the nerves affected by the accident of which there are two causes, so it is the cause of soda and multitude of rheumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the ears and of the ears flowing, and multitude of sleeping, and of toothache and of the throat, and universally of all disease that comes from coldness, as well as paralytically, soda and apoplexy, and similar in those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is this, that first you command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine the head modifying, for three or for four nights, according to what requires the virtue of the patient and the age of him and his custom.
And then command him to shave his head, and then make that place between your hands on a padded bench and that he place his hands on his feet.
And then place the razor of your palm near the nose between his ears. But however, as your saying of the middle place has arrived, sign that place with a tent, and then ignite the cautery olive of which this is the form:
And then place that on the place marked with a tent, in the manner that it descends, with which your hand be constricted little by little, and you turn that.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see already of the bone being discovered some quantity of the head, as well as the quantity of grain of ears, then elevate your hand, and if not turn your hand with that iron, with another of that, if it is cooled, until it is seen of the bone that I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve that on the place and leave that for three days.
And then place on it a cloth soaked in butter and leave that on it until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with tetrapharmacon ointment until it is healed.
And already they said that when the plague remains open, so much better gets the scar, because it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them said that it should be cauterized the bone inside the bone, and that the cautery should be kept until some part of the surface of the bone is burned.
And then it is scraped that which is burned of the bone, and then it is cured.
And others said that with the cautery it should reach the end, until it presses on the bone with force until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati small: And they estimate that from that place expire the vapors of the head.
And it should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
But to me, these two kinds of cautery have not been seen at all, except in some men according to their way of fear; and leaving that, to me, it is better for health, when it is; because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of it as well as we have testified in the other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
And the species of cautery first is more safe and better to me; and from that I use and with that work for health.
Second chapter.
Of the cautery of the head.
When chronic and prolonged pain occurs throughout the head and it is prolonged in the patient, and use of herbs, and poultices, and purgatives, and plasters, and guats, and cadels, and gualinas, and semblances, and most importantly if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that is recounted and does not benefit him from any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and is not frail and finds a lot of great friction, then cauterize him with another cautery besides that one a little. Then cauterize that one on the horn of his head with a cautery while the code is parted. Incise the code and uncover the quantity of bone which we have recounted and cauterize that with a cautery in the back part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and that is the place in which a cupping glass is placed. And alleviate your hand in this, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient by this finds a great deal of pain different from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And you say this cautery in its place, because whoever cauterizes with the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occiput are cauterized is more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
Of cauterization of a non-ancient hernia.
When pain in the head is felt, or pain extends into the eye, it should be evacuated with medicines that modify the head, and another cure should be administered, which I have said in the divisions of the illnesses; and if none of these are helpful, then cauterization in it is in two ways: either cauterization with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
But cauterization with burning medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and you cut it and remove the extremities of it from both ends. And then incise the place of pain in the temple with a lancet, as long as it is in that place, after the bone, while it is hidden.
And then strengthen over it with a stopper by descending constriction, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then untie it and remove the alum, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then place over it a poultice submerged in butter until the place heals.
And then cure this with gargles until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the two treatises of burning medicines.
But cauterization with iron according to this manner: ignite a cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a "claus clavilhs," because the head of it is as shaped as a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small eminence.
And then place over the place of pain, and keep your hand — so that the artery which is below is not burned — and revolve the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it that is burned by the specificity of the bone is as much as most of it, and elevate your hand so that the artery below is not burned, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
And then imbibe a poultice in salt water and place it over the place, and leave it for three days; and then place a poultice crushed with butter, and then cure with gargles until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize with the extremity of the scalpel according to the cautery, and guard yourself from incision of the artery in this hernia properly non-ancient.
Chapter Four.
Of cauterization of an ancient hernia.
When you cure a hernia with what we have said of the previous cure, and what we have said in the divisions of the illnesses, and if none of the cures are helpful, and sometimes because of the illness that does not suffice to him what we have said of the first cauterization with medicine or the cauterization with fire, then you must ignite the scalpel cautery while it is white-hot, because you signify over the place of pain with a line of length of which the majority of it, or which that one; and then pause your hand for one moment and strengthen it so that you may incise the artery and reach into the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is bad for chewing, and that the nerve which is bad for it is not burned, and that it does not become a spasm.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is incised, because in the incision of it there is fear, and especially to him who ignores what is done and is not studious and experienced; and leave the operation to him at the beginning.
And I will come with a remembrance of the regimen of the flow of blood accidentally from the artery according to its manner, in its place in this book.
And if you see of this illness that this cauterization does not suffice and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of cauterizing the artery, with a cautery having two handles, and this cauterization is better and more convenient.
Chapter V.
Of cauterization of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain due to inflammation, and it is cured with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have said in the division, and the pain is not removed, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one which has a point, of which this is the form:
And when it is pointed, ignite it, and it is moved around the entire ear like a wheel is turned, or in the circuit of each part if the pain is in each part. Lengthen it with the cautery from the root of the ear little by little, so that you feel the location with the tip.
And if the cautery of ten points in the whole ear, and which one, and then cure the places while they are healing.
Chapter VI.
Of cauterization of a tumor.
A tumor which is cured and by cauterization is only of the kinds which come by phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the kind which arises from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that kind of tumor with herbs and purgatives and washings, and if you do not find comfort in your cure, then you must cauterize the tumor with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little from its temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery for the opposite of the diseased part, because softening does not come except in the part that is healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with the cautery in the right of the extremity of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger, and pause your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the species of the cord is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the cutlery, the form of which is shown opposite. But however more subtle is that one a little as you see; and that handle in its place of superfluous thickness a little.
And then cure the place with the water that is opposite, produced until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of cauterization of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you cure that with the water which we have said and if you do not find comfort in your medication and the malady has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on top of all the horns of its head; and with cautery and the middle location of the head, as we have said; and with cautery in the nape of the neck. And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said before.
And it is already cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then it is cured with the water that proceeds.
Chapter VIII.
Of cauterization of oblivion made by flame.
When the patient is given at the beginning large herbs and pills of the serving modifying.
And then shave the head of the patient completely and place on the nape of his neck a plaster of cente described in the treatise of plasters.
And pause that some times, because that is the manner of cauterizing. And do water according to that same order which I have already said.
And therefore if by those he is healed, well; and if not, then make to him three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which are descending from the most superior part of the head into the part more below the neck. And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cautery with the water that proceeds.
But if you add more and the patient is water tolerant, then make to him a cautery in the middle location; and if you add more, then cauterize that above the two horns.
And then cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive according to the form previously given.
Chapter IX.
Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of the whole body.
When you process in softening the head with herbs and with the water which we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle location of the head, and with a cautery above all the horns of the head, and with a cautery above the rear part of it, and with three cauteries above the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the malady of softening of the body of too much that and the maladies tolerant and the malady is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries above the vertebrae of the loins, and certainly with a cautery until it is burned of the cord of it, and elevate your hand. And then carefully treat the one who is being healed, and this cautery olive.
Chapter X.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized, unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, if you modify the brain of him at the beginning with years and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is great and tolerates the excess of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer guarguarsmes and masticators to the servant, before that for a few days, with the blessing of the food.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize him with a cautery in the middle location of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery in the nape of his neck, and on each horn of his head cauterize. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize him with cauteries as I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And be cauteries olive according to what has preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then pause cauteries subtle according to this manner.
Chapter XI.
Of cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are humidities corrupted and phlegm gross, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we have said in the having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink water that purifies the brain of him according to what has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a decent tortora of him over the circle, and then place that in the middle location of the head.
And the patient be sensed cauterized, and be held from all parts.
And then pause liniment; and it is more worthy of bordering with wool of sheep. And warm that over the fire to temperate calefaction by measure, which the said suffers when it is most in him. And then put that in the middle location of the head of him in the circle, and let him enter that it be enfregidated.
And make water with the patient every week once, with the other regimen of him good as long as he is healed; or if you will, cauterize this by making small points according to the best of him, unless you have the hand with a cautery thus arranged: this is a species of cautery which wets the brain with equality.
And then pause that cot in wool or in gray of guinea.
Chapter XII.
Of cauterization of water descending in the heel.
When to you is declared the beginning of water in the heel by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to the patient to drink water that purifies the head of him, and guard that from all humidities.
And make that suzar in bath in degu for some days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle location of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of ysement of water in two heels, or of one latz if it is the beginning of the water in one heel.
Incide with cautery all the veins and arteries which are left the codena; and be the cauteries in that length in the latitude of the temples.
And guard yourself from fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see of him fluxes of blood, stop him with some medicine, which is to you possible.
And you will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and with abscess of those and caution of fluxes of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the cervix below two bones with two cauteries deliberately produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of cauterization of old tears.
When tears of the heels are old and by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluity frigid phlegmatic, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water falling in the heels, and with a cautery in the middle location of the head and with two cauteries in the cervix below two temples, and with two cauteries in the cervix below two bones. And if you need of addition, then cauterize that in all latz of the tail of the heel on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of cauterization of the stench of the nose.
When you medicate him with the water which we have said in the division and it does not profit your medication, then you equip and give to the patient the cochias to drink for three nights; and then shave the head of him, and cauterize him with a cautery middle with a cautery olive. And then cauterize that with a pointed cautery with two cauteries on the two eyebrows above the hairs a little.
And guard yourself from the arc that you do not burn that.
And of the pointed cautery this is the form.
Chapter .xv.
Of cautery of softening of eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or by humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in every part, and they be elongated from the temples. And be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid be cauterized.
Chapter .xvi.
Of cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs are converted to the parts of it and prick the eye.
When the hairs of the eye are converted to the parts of it so that they prick the eye, cauterize in those in two manners, whether cauterize or is with burning medicine.
If with cautery of it with fire, command the patient in front of it that he see his hairs so as those which they clean, until they be prolonged and equal; and if prick that you must their naisment, then you strengthen the eyes of it with a bandage so that it be not bad until the hairs be born.
Therefore, as soon as they be born and equal, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then send upon the eyelid of the eyes of it with tent, with a sign which be according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the sign near the hairs.
And then place coto enclosed in album of hen or in mucilage of ptilli upon the eye.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it.
And then cauterize upon the figure which you have sended, little by little, in many times, until be burned the surface of the code which is as fuella of myrtle, all apparent properly.
And sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already be contracted and the hairs of it be elevated above the prick of the eye.
And therefore elevate your hand and leave it for three days, and then place upon it coto with border until be eradicated the scar. And then cure it with enguent until it be healed.
But if returns for the hairs any cause to their naisment and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery upon that all as you had done first.
But if the hairs be in the eyelid below, then cauterize it until it be elevated to its natural place and be equal and that the hairs do not prick the eye.
But the cautery with burning medicine this is that you command the patient that he see the hairs until they be prolonged and equal, and then be made of cloth the form of a myrtle leaf.
And then take of known soap and of living cautery one. .i., or that, and then mix those causes well, and make it with festinacio so that it not be frozen; and then expand of it upon the cloth which is made as the form of a myrtle leaf, and place it upon one eye or both; and place below the eye coto enclosed in album of hen, and the head of the patient be in your lap.
And place the said upon the medicine and press it a little and not the bad until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for biting is in it as of fire.
And therefore as perseveres it that the throbbing biting, then leave the medicine and wipe it with your hand; therefore as ceases the biting, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if times the eyelid already is lifted as it be washed above the constriction with fire or with incision, for then it is well; and if not returns upon it of the medicine upon the place in which it has not put the medicine and do not degrade until be equal your operation and be contracted the eye.
And then place upon it coto with border until be eradicated the scar of the burning, and then cure it with enguent deafinicon or with another until it be healed.
And it is necessary to you, above your operation that you guard with pervigil diligence that in the eye does not fall re of the medicine, and if the eyelid apropos some days is softened and any cause of the hairs prick in the eye, then iterate your medicine upon that place the which of the eyelid is softened, and properly as you have done at the beginning, and then environ it until it be healed.
And this is the form of myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to the magnitude and the smallness, and therefore according to that is made your constriction.
And no one should be hidden the path of rectum to whom it is studied in this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of cauterization of fistula that is in the lacrimal of the heel.
When you cure a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of the diseases and do not confer your cure, then you must cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head on your knee, and hold the head of him some minister between your hands in such a manner that it is not harmed nor agitated with his head.
And then place a cloth soaked in oil or in a poultice of ptilli on the heel of him.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
Which is concave, as is the form of a reed or the feather of a vulture, from one extremity of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other extremity. And if you wish, it should be shaped as a tent.
But however, the one that is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it pus and dry it out. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold it with your hand a little distance from the cautery of the heel to the part of the nose, so that it does not burn your hand or the patient be agitated, and then place the cautery in the grains of the heel and corrupt it.
And therefore if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if it is necessary; and leave it so for three days, and then place on it a cloth with border and surround it with an astringent enguent until it is healed.
But if after eleven days it is not healed, then place on it a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and scraped according to what you have ordained in your chapter.
And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some first said: enter at the place of the fistula and end it and then place in that fissure a fine thread of which is the form: And melt in that the quantity of one ounce of lead; and hold your hand with the thread with good retention, and do not harm the patient so that the melted lead does not reach the heel of him; and when you place on the heel of the patient a cloth soaked in oil or in water, because lead burns the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said of the cauterization and the cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a traction from the nose and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose according to what will come in its place properly.
Chapter XVIII.
Of cauterization of the fissure of the anus.
Many times fissures happen in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
Therefore, as you cure those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and do not profit from your cure, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form which is described:
And it should be the concavity of it according to the fineness of a needle.
Then place that ignited cautery carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then cure that with cerotz until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there should abscess and then it breaks, and then it is antiquated, and it flows pus and a fistula is made, and then you cure that and do not profit from the cure, then you must ignite the cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then put that ignited into the tract of the fistula, and hold your hand so that it reaches the ignited iron to the bottom of it, and at the back of it do so once or twice; and then cure that with what we have said of the cure until it is healed.
And therefore if the pus is abscind and is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and host the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
Of cauterization of the teeth and of softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are aching, and you cure those with medicines and do not confer, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and then ignite the cautery the form of which will come near so that you place the point on the tooth and introduce into that the ignited cautery quickly, and hold your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being reached.
And then take your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to what you wish.
And then the patient rinses his mouth with salt water and holds it for an hour, then spits it out, for the bad tooth is stopped, the softened gums are tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Chapter XXI.
Of cauterizing tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to cold, or a worm is in it, or it does not respond to treatment with medicine, then cauterization is done in that tooth in two ways: cauterization with a cow's horn, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with horn is that you take a piece of cow's horn and heat it in a blacksmith's forge, and then take a stick and wrap it around the tip of the horn, and then immerse that in the heated horn, and place it on the painful tooth firmly, until it is seared.
And then repeat that several times until the force of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or a stick in the heated horn below, and place it on the aching tooth, and place a heated iron on top until the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
But however, cauterization with fire is that you attend to the handle of the iron or of the fire, and that it be in the center of it some thickness and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cauterizer, the shape of which will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cauterizer is seared; and do this several times because the pain will be relieved either on that day or the next day.
And cover that with the impression of that cauterizer, the patient rinses his mouth with good water and holds it for an hour, then spits it out; and this is the shape of the cauterizer.
And cauterize with whichever extremity you wish, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
Of cauterizing extrophulos.
When extrophulos are of phlegm and humors cold and are not obedient to digestion by medicines and you wish to digest those slightly, then you ignite the cauterizer whose shape is this following, having two open extremities so that the smoke of the cauterizer escapes from the other extremity, and place it on that abscess once, and another if you judge it necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cauterizer according to the quantity of the abscess, and then leave it for three days and place a stick soaked in water on top until what the fire has burned is healed.
And then cure that with gargles and poultices and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
Of cauterizing hoarseness of voice and constriction of the throat.
When the humors come upon the windpipe, and mostly when that is of cold complexion, then cover that the patient should be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that below the root of the goiter in the depressed place.
And guard yourself that you do not reach with the cauterizer to the goiter nor burn more than a little of its coating.
And cauterize that with another cauterizer below the junction of the neck at the last vertebra of it. And the cauterizer of it be a clove according to the previous manner.
And then cure that with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
Of cauterizing lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are of cold humors and the patient has no fever nor phlegm and it is an old ailment, then cauterize that with two cauterizers on the breastbone in the depressed places of the left and right; and with another cauterizer in the middle of the foot between the two malleoli; and let the cauterizers be cloves according to the previous form.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cauterizer that is called a point, the shape of which you preceded in the cauterization of ear pain.
And make points within those; and then cure that with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
And now let the cauterizer have three prongs for cauterization is done with this: in one instance you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
Of cauterizing the tingle that is the head of the  assistant.
When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to lubricous humors and it is not fixed at the time of its return to its place, and by a slight movement it is dislocated as it should, as we have testified, then cover that first you reduce the dislocation, and then the patient be reversed on his back or on his side; and then elevate the skin which is in the front part of the  citillic to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the junction is dislocated to the front.
And then ignite the cautery, which has two heads; and this is its shape:
And then cauterize the tendon while it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will then be that of four cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries.
And then place on the cautery porous cuytz with salt, and then make the patient adhere to the flatness, and the limb not be bad for any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is at the parts above and then it is done, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery clavilh or with a pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of cauterization of the stomach.
When there comes in the stomach fire and many humors that cause that to be extracted from its complexion and so multiply rawness in it, and if you continue the ways of cure and do not confirm it, then the time when the patient is on his two supinations, and extends his hands and his legs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery is left the foot for the quantity of a finger with a cautery clavilh, and with two cauteries left on the two sides of the cautery, until it comes to the figure of a triangular cautery; and elongate between those that are not adjusted that they will make a poyredura.
And if the depth of the cautery the quantity of the two-thirds of the thickness of the tendon.
And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form, and if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this be a cautery according to the shape of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be cauterized punctually with that which is scared of this cautery: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want with tension, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the points; and then cure that with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
Of cauterization of the liver fire.
When there comes in the liver pain from fire, or from humidity, or from gross ventosity, so that its normal complexion is thrown out by superfluous egress, and it is cured the patient with what we have said and do not confirm it, then the time when the patient is supine on his neck, and feel with tension three cauteries according to this form and this quantity, placed on the liver below the hypocondres, the side according to the decubit of a man.
And let the space which is between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the straight body.
And do not compress your with the cautery more.
And if the quantity of that which is adhered is the quantity of the majority of the thickness of the tendon, and there is no more adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet; and if he is not standing, then he is lying down, the one who has already extended his legs, and elevate his arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a cautery cutellar, when it is with your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself that you do not process too much in the cauterization, and let the thickness of the whole tendon be adhered so that it is adhered to the whole body and reaches into the bowels, because the tendon here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery.
When there comes an abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will suffer a great deal of pain and the pain will be acute.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with the pain is greatly acute and sometimes that already fatigues the doctors the cure of it.
Therefore, when the patient is turned on his neck; and feel the location of the abscess with tension; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled like a rag, the form of which is preceded on the other page. And cauterize with that cautery until all the tendon is burned, until it reaches the cypress, until it is healed.
And then cure that with the cure of the other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not use this form of cautery except for the one whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the many of which many diseases have been known; but with experience some times be daring on this operation, but however, leave that of us, and it is better.
Chapter XXIX.
Of cauterization of pleurisy.
They said the ancients cauteries of the roots of aristology to pleurisy fire according to this manner to be done, and this is that you take from the roots of aristology long dry a root long which is found, and let it be of the thickness of the finger.
And then submerge that in oil and place it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries, place one slightly declining towards the side that is below the beard, and with two cauteries in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the shoulder blade, declining slightly towards the sides behind; and another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the sides behind; and one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulder blades, and with two cauteries on the two sides of the foot, placing the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
And no cover that which you understand your hand with the cautery, but rather in the manifest of the code in work.
And already said some ancients that some of the men who use a cautery of iron similar to a ray and ignite that, and put that in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and be healed, so as we have said in the abscess of the thigh.
But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, because he dies soon it accides in the place fistula to which there is no healing.
Chapter .xxx.
Of the cauterization of the spleen.
When you cure the illness of the spleen with what we have said of the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize in it is according to three manners, all of which are right, of which one is that you make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the thigh, the figure of which has preceded.
And be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the thigh equally.
And do not cover your hand with the cautery; and the patient be raised over his two.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, so it is that you ignite the cautery having two vertici, which cause we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the code which is in the direction of the spleen the one that reaches the lying of the left patient.
And be the your elevation with which you elevate the code according to the length of the body, so that cauteries be made according to the latitude of the body.
And then introduce the two vertici, ignited, into that where with those you penetrate the code from the other part.
And then extract the cautery; and therefore are made four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with a cautery having three vertici.
And then you cure the cautery because it has been laid to throw away for too many days, because it is more convenient than the other causes mentioned in the cure.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of cauterization of hydropi.
Cauterize not in hydropi but in alcinte3 properly.
When you cure the hydropic with the manners of cure which we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then cover that cauterize with four cauteries in the circuit of the umbilicus and with one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the thigh, and another cautery on the spleen, and with two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and a cautery in the right of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the spicitut of the code.
And then leave the cautery open so that it throws away for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient of cure after the cautery with that which cover so that two understandings be added to it, and it be fed with the help of healing.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized is claveh according to the form of that which is used before, and that with which the back is cauterized is olivar according to what is precedent to its form.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of cauterization of feet and of the parts.
When the feet are apostematized in hydropi and are filled with watery serum, cover that you cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in nocrati that is between the auricular and the anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist that; and then elevate your hand, and do not return that of all, because the watery serum is retained.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on the two parts two cauteries, and in each part be made cautery with the extremity of the cautery cutting. And be the cautery according to the length of the part; and one below and the other below the middle of the part; and on each part two cauteries.
And leave the wound open ses cure for a long time so that no water is retained from it.
And therefore take care of those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of cauterization of the body of the belly.
When the body of the belly is due to cold and humidity within which the virtues, the digestive and retentive, which are in the stomach and bowels, and it is cured by these ways of healing and no conferreys, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization to exhibit virtues, then cauterize him with a large cautery on his stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries in the circuit of the navel subtle, with a subtle cautery clavilh; and with cautery on the alcatin above alozis great, or with two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humidities abound and the patient endures this, then cauterize him on the pentenilh and on the bowels, and firmly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfect cure of benefit from which you will not err.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors cold or of corrupted humidities, and are cured by what we have said in the division and no conferreys your healing, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus left spongy of the small and small triangular spine of the two, and with cautery below the navel cays for two digits.
And if you suspect that the stomach of him is cold and his food is not digested, and the face of him sometimes pale, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery according to what precedes; and with one cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen with a cautery clavilh, and leave the cautery for some time open, and then care for him while he is healing.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of cauterization of a boil near the abscess of them.
When you abscess a boil, then you ignite the cautery that is assembled to the ray. Then introduce that ignited one into that abscess, and ultima your hand until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if the boils are too many, then cauterize each one according to what we have recounted, and then care for them with what you confer to them of the ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the alcatin, it is more beneficial in healing.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature of them in the parts of him.
When nature does not obey the work which we have recounted in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, be healed with cautery.
Therefore, when one has a fistula in the nature of them, and it is old, corroded, and sania from it and corrupted humidities, and therefore that which is most worthy of cove is that you proceed with that subtle cautery, and then you know the quantity of the depth of it with the previously mentioned probe.
Then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. And then introduce that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the probe is inserted.
And iterate over that cautery within until those corrupted parts are burned once, twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And guard yourself from the burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or the bowels, then guard yourself from all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.
And then care for the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the materials are removed from it, and remain so for a long time, then you know that it is healed entirely.
And if the materials are not from it, then you know that it is penetrating or in the preon of it, or corrupted, or comes from those causes of which remembrance will come in its place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of cauterization of the boils.
When in the boils there is pain due to cold or by gross windiness, and by this the patient's body is inflamed, then it is necessary that you cauterize them on the boils with a cautery on each boil with a cautery clavilh of which I will recount the remembrance.
And firmly cauterize them with the second one a little, so that there will come three cauteries linear, and then they are more beneficial in healing.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of cauterization of the bladder.
When there occurs in the bladder weakness and softening due to cold and humidity so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize him in the part just below the bladder, the one that begins the hairs of the pubic region, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left side of him.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the amount of the not of the feet; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And cauterize the clavicle according to what is processed.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of cauterization of the thigh.
When there is heat and humidity in the thigh, and therefore pregnancy is prohibited, and the menses of the woman are corrupted, and the onset of them is delayed, and pain occurs in the area of ​​their descent, then the place should be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the place below the back, or with two cauteries, and the cautery should be clavilh.
Chapter XL.
Of cauterization of the dislocation of the hip.
When mucous humors are poured into the area of the hip, and are caused by the swelling of their place, and a sign of this is that the thigh is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is felt in its cavity.
Therefore, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the area of the hip with a cautery in a circular shape, as you will have felt with your finger in the circuit of the area as it is turned, and so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
And the cautery of which preceded the shape in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize that with three cauteries with a large olive cautery.
And make the cauterization according to the quantity of the thickness of the whole thigh; and take care of this so that it be healed.
Chapter XLI.
Of cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the area of the hip, and it is caused by heat and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said and do not confer, and this is ancient, therefore when you lance the patient of thick humors with fetid pills or with artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: the cautery with burning medicines, or the cautery with fire.
It is according to two scientific manners, of which one is that you cauterize that on the area of the hip of the patient with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make with those a good depth. And be the spaces the which is between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the cautery olive or large.
Sometimes, however, the cautery is on the middle of the top of the hip so that there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which the shape is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, the one that be containing and burning the thickness of the whole thigh.
And this is the manner of cauterizing in sciatica when pain is adherent to the hip and does not extend into the thigh.
But if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh on the place to which you feel the pain; and with one cautery on the  buttock for four fingers a little below the fleshy part.
And if the cautery is a knife-like one, and the depth of the cautery is according to the quantity of the thickness of the thigh.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends into the area near the toes, then cauterize there where you feel it with a cautery for three points or four or more if you judge it necessary.
And if the patient feels pain below the hip and towards the thigh, then cauterize there with a knife-like cautery.
And guard yourself in all cauterization that you do not end with the cautery as much as you burn nerves or large arteries, and that for this reason you are on the patient's evil no harm or contraction.
And I have already seen one and another of those who cauterized on the buttock and ended in the cauterization, and the leg burned inflated until the tumor reached the foot, and fire pierced and corrupted the whole foot. And then acidic strong solution of the belly, and then that leads to death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And some wise men said in the cauterization of the hip, the cautery of which this is the manner: make a circle of iron of which the circuit be the majority of a palm; and be its orifice according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
And from that circle be another third; and be the spaces the which is between them the quantity of the size of the foot; and be those circles opened in two parts; and be the length of those cais a finger or two fingers, and make in those marks of iron decently adorned in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then it should be set on fire in the fire until it glows red and throws sparks, and then it should be placed on the patient's back, the patient lying on their side. And therefore cauterize that with three round cauteries at once.
And then leave that for three days; then plaster that with wool and leave the wound open for too many days; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Says Albucasis: O, sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the terror of its appearance, and because we have found few who guard over it.
May the cautery to him who suffers it, and find with it the place of him.
But cauterize with medicated ointments, so that you make two circles having a perforated armlet in which they should put the handle of the iron door; let the length of the sides in the breadth of them be two nuts or whatever those are.
And if the space which is between some is the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and be open below and above, and be that they contain themselves between them according to this form:
And then place on the patient's back, the patient lying on their side, and compress your hand on the back of the patient; and then take some boiling water and pour it between the two circles, and the quality of that should be with the small fire little by little, and keep that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the biting and the burning of it— because that biting is like that of fire— until the biting ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the boiling water from the whole back with cool water.
And then leave that for three days and place on that wool until the blackness of the burning is removed, and leave that for some days, and there will run from it a discharge; this is the end in healing.
And then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or the leg, make for him a statue in it that contains water as it is made in the back equally.
And this is the manner of boiling water, and you have already written that in the treatise of the rectification of medicines. Take alkali and quicklime, each in one part, and grind them and place them in a new pot of which the lower part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters it.
And place below the bottom of the pot another pot inverted, and pour over that alkali and quicklime boiling water which covers them by a finger, and as soon as you compress them with your hand for good compression, and leave the pot that descends from it water sharp in the lower part to the inverted pot.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over other quicklime and another renewed alkali, because that one at that time is of strong force sharpness, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because operation makes of fire.
And so of the medicines some of which are cauterized much, as tezixic and honey anacrat and quicklime in sabot so that they are mixed.
And Gualia recounts of an ancient man the operation and cure with which the pain of the back and sciatica is cured, and magnifies very well to be of that, and says that there is no need for other cure, and that it is healed in one go as he recounts, for very strong was that one in bath and he has already seen it from that.
And it is that it is taken of certain green fig, and if it is not found green, it is taken recent fig; and much it is ground with a little of gray and it is placed on the back in which is the pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and it is tied.
And it is left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels the lessening of the burning.
And then put that in a bath and when the body of him is red, put that in the sun, because the pain ceases and it is healed.
And know that no one should use cautery with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
But already Escorides says that when with the wound of a goat the sciatica is cauterized, it profits him very well; and let the cautery be with him according to this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
And then take dry goat's wound and inflame that with fire until it is made charcoal; and place it on the wool and leave it until it is extinguished. And then repeat that, and do not cease to do that until the feeling of the burning reaches into the back and relieves the pain.
And this manner of cautery is called cautery of goats.
Chapter .xlii.
Of cauterization of pain of the two.
Sometimes pain is in the two by many causes, such as by beating or by percussion or by superfluous evacuation, and by causes to those similar, by infusion of matter cold and humid.
And cauterize only this single kind which is made by the effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the patient with pills and similar ones, which are made on the two sides where the pain is located three lines according to the width of the area, because you have ten in each line with cauteries or more, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of him.
And make cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries with a medial clavilh cautery according to this form:
Chapter XLIII.
Of cauterization at the beginning of redness.
Many times this ailment befalls the little children; and a sign of the beginning of it in children is that they happen upon their structure in the leg and raise and move it.
And it protrudes in the last vertebra of the spine and of its nodes that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore, when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that with a cautery that is circular according to this form: that presses the cautery over the whole part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you wish, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with the pointed cautery two or three lines. And let the points be close together.
And after cure the place until it is healed with what we have said.
But beware that cauterization is not administered in redness that is made by a spasm of a nerve.
Chapter XLIV.
Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, since gout caused by cold is cured with a manner of cure and not only the pains are removed, then the pains are removed by cauterization.
And it is that you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And let it be an olive cautery of which this is the form of it:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the ankles or to other joints, and this many times happens, then cauterize that over each tendon with three or four cauteries of all parts with this olive cautery.
And if many cauteries that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard your hand with the cautery before, be only around the appearance of the bone.
And if the pains rise into the tendon of the spine, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the feet only, and it is called suagra, then prick in the circuit of the heels as if they were revolving, prick in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick in the circuit of the heels over each node and over the palm of the hand.
And if the pains rise near certain joints in the elbows or muscles, then cauterize those of all parts of the armpits.
And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done good regimen and the flux is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healed, God help.
Chapter XLV.
Of cauterization of ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestines protrude in front of the hernia, and this begins to worsen, then it is necessary that you order the patient to leave his food for a day and that he use lenient causes so that the wound descends from his belly.
And after, follow the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to keep his leg inside until the hernia is thrown out or the intestines appear.
And after, return that with your fingers and feel with ten the rupture over the bone of the pubic bone with a sign the extremity of which is similar to the majority of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And after, ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it:
until it be red hot and throws sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And after, place the cautery over that sign with your hand with the cautery standing straight, and hold that until with it you can feel the bones of the pubic bone into the middle of the wound; and repeat with that another time if to you that has not been achieved in the first time into the bone.
And observe carefully the position of the intestine during the cauterization, so that you do not burn the intestine so that it does not come to death or other great harm to the patient.
And know that when you have the cautery do not touch the bones, do not damage your operation.
And know that the cautery of children should be subtle according to their size and measure.
And after take care of the cauterized area for three days with a border until the scar of the fire is healed.
And after take care of that with the other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the plague are sealed.
And know that you should pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time of his cure, which the lines the belly of him, and that the intestine does not come out because of the effort of healing.
And after when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer him decent medicine, and keep him that for another forty days.
And be careful of work and repletion of food and drink, and of violent voice, for when he uses this regimen of healing entirely he will be healed.
And you should say the cure of ruptures in the other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want them not to pull, then cauterize the rupture of that with a rounded cautery according to the quantity of it, and it is that which is extracted from the codena as the third part of it; and after take care of that with that which we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And already some first said that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with a tent:
and it is placed a line that goes through the latitude in the broadest part of the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter .xlvi.
Of cauterization of torsion.
When in some members by accident or by percussion pain and that pain persists for a long time and does not confer to the cure with medicines, then know that you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery of every member be according to the magnitude and smallness of it, and virtue and weakness of it, and location of torsion and pain of it.
Therefore if it is healed by the first cautery, well is it; and if not, then repeat over it the cautery; for by custom of those pains it is that they are pointed of member to that member which approaches to it, so that know that you should cauterize those until the patient is healed.
Chapter .xlvii.
Of cauterization of leprosy.
Leprosy some times with cautery for great benefit, and more so if the species of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And therefore as you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and has that cured with that which we have said in the division and do not say, nor is it, and fears over the patient that the corruption comprehends the whole body of him and the whole complexion of him, then cauterize that over the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle place of the head, and the second further below it, and the front to the end of the hairs; and two over two horns; and one behind, on the nape or service.
And last your hand with the cautery a little while until it impresses in the bone a small impression, and from it the scabs are dislodged, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated from it; and cauterize over the flesh according to what is needed.
And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then know that you should cauterize that with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and with a cautery over the extremity of the nose, and with two cauteries over the two cheekbones, and with two cauteries over two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries over the vertebrae of the back, and one large one over the vertebrae near the hip, and one over the ribs, and with two over the knees, and one over each knee, and with two over the elbows, and with two over the muscles, and with two on the toes of his feet; and cauterize that over all the joints of the fingers of the hands and feet, and over each heel of his feet, and over the hollows of his hands.
And guard yourself of the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery over the bone of the penile and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the liver.
And know that the more you adjust cauteries, so much is more beneficial and more conferent; and know that the patient does not have in the cautery pain, as if they have their own, for so that the body of him is already stupefied.
And know that the cauteries should be large or few according to the members and the joints according to what is preceded by the species of the instruments.
And then carefully apply the cautery with flour of herbs mixed with honey and the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of the cauterization of stupor.
When any member is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that numbed member with cauteries according to what merits the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the thickness of the  bone a little. And then carefully treat that with an enema until it is healed.
And sometimes stupor is cauterized which comes from the nerves and the feet, and the vertebrae of the lower back, and by cauterizing those nerves that move that member, the stupor is removed.
May no presume about this but only he who is wise in the anatomy of the members and the egress of the nerves throughout the whole moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the cauterization of ulcers that are mortified.
When ulcers are ancient and do not respond to any of the medicinal enemas, then you cauterize over that with a cautery, preon a little, according to the quantity of the thickness of the bone, until it is healed, the whiteness and the color of it are restored, and its color is changed.
And then carefully treat that with flour of herbs and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and the blood of a dove or the blood of a round, each one a part and all mixed together, and then apply a cloth and place it on the location until it is healed.
Chapter L.
Of the cauterization of a crab.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize that with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is revolved.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the posterior cautery in the middle location; but to me, this is not seen, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is more right that it be cauterized in its circumference with a circle as we have said, or with moving cauteries.
Chapter LI.
Of the cauterization of abscesses.
When any abscess is delayed in ripening, and thus it is due to the superfluity of making it, or to the state of the patient, who is old or decrepit, with little blood, or by time, and you want to hasten the ripening of the abscess; then cauterize around it with small, moving cauteries; and then leave it so that it will ripen.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form: and pause that in the middle location of the abscess until it penetrates the bone.
And if the cautery in that location that is further down, so that the body of the arm be relieved; and then carefully treat that until it is healed.
Chapter LII.
Of the cauterization of a corrodent.
Corrodent is a corruption that walks in the member, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corrodent in a location that can be cauterized with fire, then you ignite small, moving cauteries, and large ones according to what is convenient in that location where the corrodent is.
And then cauterize that from all sides until you eradicate all the corrosion and no cause of it remains.
And then leave it for three days, and place on the cauterized locations a poultice made with oil mixed together until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
And then treat that with enemas that bring forth flesh.
But if after three days you see that healthy flesh has grown in which there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery over that which is raw in the corrupted locations.
And corrodent is medicated some times with sharp medicine, which that is placed in the location of the cautery. But however, cauterization with fire is of more lighter help.
And I have already said the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have need of it.
Chapter LIII.
Of the cauterization of claws and of other similar things.
Many times there is a sickness in the lower parts of the foot that is called a claw, and it is a large, deep cause, which deforms the foot; and cauterization in those is done in two ways, either by fire cautery or by boiling water cautery.
But fire cautery is that you ignite the cautery concave in shape like the beak of a vulture, which is made of iron according to the quantity which contains the claw from all sides, and has fine margins.
And then place that ignited one on the claw, and then revolve your hand with the cautery in the circuit of the claw until the cautery reaches the depth of the claw. And let him rest for three days before he begins to lift his arm. Then apply a poultice of wild herbs crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on it for a night, so that it is eradicated from its roots.
Then cure the area with a gargle of generative flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not converted, and many times this happens on the surface of the body, mostly in the hands and feet, then you must administer in those places a cautery with water, and that you take a small piece of iron or lead or vulture's bone, and place that on the key; and then put a small quantity of water into the cavity, and hold your hand, and you turn that with compression of your hand of all, and press the edge of the cavity into the root of the key, and the water will flow through the root of the key; and wait for the patient a little the bite of the water for an hour, and then remove it, because the key with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do this to those and the other until you come upon all of them in the body.
And then cure those pus that the roots of the keys are eradicated with this of the gargles that the flesh generates.
Chapter .liiii.
Of cauterization of tremor.
When someone has a tremor due to fire in the nerve or from a feverish cause, or from another similar cause, then you must cauterize that with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with a cautery; and with cautery on the feet of him, and on his stomach, with olive cautery.
And the tremor of him is rested and hastened the health of the feverish illness.
Chapter .lv.
Of cauterization of white accidents in the body.
When in the body are found white spots, and are pustules split that are made of coarse corrupted matter; therefore at the beginning when it appears, that it be cauterized over all the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with myrtle twigs, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of erestologia long; or with a lens cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized additionally at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and they are not believed, and the superfluity is broken, doing those, and it heals of those.
But nevertheless it must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter lvi.
Of cauterization of flux of blood accident by incision of artery.
Many times there is a flux of artery that is incised, the plague which must be fortified, or by the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and then similar, and it is difficult to remove that.
Therefore when this happens to someone, then you must tightly close with your hand the orifice of the artery, and place upon it your finger, tightly pressing that many times until the flux of blood stops, and that it does not come out.
And then place in the fire the olive cauteries few and large, by number many, and exhale over them while they are hot.
And then take from those one small or one large according to the place and the plague in which the artery is broken, upon that vein quickly pressing that you have removed your finger, and place the cautery until it is abcised and restricted that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery tightly from the cauteries which in the fire are prepared, and then do not cease doing this one after another until the blood is restricted.
And guard yourself that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it comes upon the patient another evil.
And know that when from the artery flows blood, then it is not possible in those to restrict the blood, and especially when the artery is large, if not in one of four ways: or with cautery as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of him are burned and the blood is restricted, or that it be tied with a cord or with a bandage for a strong structure, or that there be placed upon him medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the blood; and be tightened with a pillow with a decent constriction.
But that one who administers a decent constriction of him with a bandage and with structure with cloths or by position of burning causes and similar, does not confer but briefly.
But if this happens to someone and the physician is not present nor medicine, then open with the placement of the finger indicated on the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of him until the blood is stopped from the sovereign part of the plague, and over the artery the finger is not removed; and over the artery be sprinkled with cold water of much great coldness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and more sew in that which has to cauterize or of medicine necessity.
Of incisions and perforations and evacuations and of phlebotomy and of poultices and their counterparts.
We have already said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which the use of fire cautery and comburent medicine is appropriate, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for it with the forms of the cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters of the hierarchy of the head down to the feet.
And in this chapter, I will proceed in the same way, so that the one who wants to know this may be helped, regarding what he has requested.
And before we begin this, know, my son, that in this chapter, that which is treated here is similar to that which is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And for this, know that great caution must be exercised, because in the operation which is in this chapter, many times the evacuation is done with blood, which is the essence of life, the sprinkling of the vein or incision on the abscess or opening of the fistula or purification of the ulcer or extraction of the arrow or incision of the stone and their counterparts. And of all those, fear and trembling accompany, and in the midst of them, the possibility of death.
And I admonish you that upon you may not fall that which is in this state, because sometimes cases arise that require your ways of men with many ways of illnesses. And of these, some will go with their illness and it will be lighter for them to die, and thus by the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and by the length of their illness, and with the illness is fear, which signifies death.
And of those, there is the one who gives to you his wealth and his word, you awaiting with that health, and his illness is pernicious.
And therefore, do not consent to that one who comes to you of whom this manner is; and your caution should be greater than covetousness, and your greed; and do not presume any cause on this unless with certain science which verifies this and to which by following, a praiseworthy success will come.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses, prognosis and indication of them, to which health is converted, because in that, you are helped in the acquisition of fame and memory, of praise, and of glory.
O, sons, may God inspire in you his understanding and guide you in your direction and protection, because that is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter, distinguishing it by chapters, as it preceded in the chapter of cauteries, from the care of the head down to the feet, so that what you have requested may be alleviated for you and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
Of the cure of the water which is contained in the heads of children.
Know that this illness often happens to children at the time of birth and when the midwife tightens the child's head, its life is endangered.
And sometimes it happens for a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this illness except in children; and to all of those whom I have seen, death has come, and thus it is that I have seen the work laid bare in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always so magnified that he could not rise over himself because of the greatness of his head, and more than the moisture increased until it died of fire.
And this moisture is either added between the bone and the skull, or it is added below the bone on the skull.
Because the operation in that, if the moisture is between the bone and the skull and the abscess is small, then you must make in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and the length of the fissure be two nights, so that the moisture runs, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore, if the moisture is more augmented and the abscess is larger, then there are two fissures according to this manner:
And if the moisture is below the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open from all parts and the water is squeezed when you compress that with your hand at the parts of the head and it is not hidden from you. Then you must make in the middle of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture; and after strengthen the fissures with cloths and cotton; and after, anoint that above with wine and oil after the fifth day, and after untie the bandage and care for the wound with tents and ointments, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member be comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, which you should consider according to the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, because sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore, attend to the incision where the abscess and the repletion of the water appear, and do this according to what is best for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and that blood flows and the patient dies from that flow of blood with the evacuation of moisture.
Chapter second.
When a catarrh or wound occurs in the feet or toes, and it is ancient and does not respond to the cure of medicines, then the posterior cure in this is the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those that the patient raises their head, and then press the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and then consider where the vein is; and the places of each one on the places which are near the ears, and so they are hidden unless in some men.
And then press on the artery with a tent, and then incise each one with the spatula of each one sharp part with incision reaching into the bone, and that is by the width of the head.
And if you want, introduce the spatula below the artery and break that into the incisions at the upper parts.
And the length of the incision is about two fingers adjusted, because when any vein is incised the blood is emitted with a pulsatile egress, which jumps outward by frequent jumps.
But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then you must measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then press with a tent, and then go into the bone.
And that which must be extracted of the blood is a quantity of one ounce. And for no less or more, and all of that is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and of the repletion of the artery of him.
And then consider the plague, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the cephalic, then incise that so that it does not become a cautery abscess.
And then strengthen the plague with feathers and with bandages of cloth of it, and then cure that with ointments while it is healing.
Chapter .iii.
Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When a certain accident occurs, ancient or catarrh acute, by humidity of agronomy and by quality in the lacerts of the temples, or so ancient and vehement, and similar to those, and is medicated with the ways of cure of medicine and that does not respond, then we have resorted to these ailments, the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the way of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises the hairs which are in the temples; and understand the artery appearing in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden unless in few men by the vehemence of the cold.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient be tightened with some cloth; and then press the area with rough cloth or evaporate the area with cold water until the artery appears manifestly to you. And then you take the spatula of which this is the form: And then you scrape the bone with that with facility until you reach the artery; and then put it in there and extract that to the sovereign parts until you extract that from the bone and discover that of the tunics which are below that, of all parts.
But if the artery is subtle, then envelop that with the extremity of the oncii, and then incise that one part according to the quantity by which the extremities of it are elongated and contracted, and it will not bring a flux of blood, because if it is not incised it will not raise the blood of all.
And then evacuate the blood of one ounce. within three.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie that in two places with a double strong cord or with long cords, and do not coat it with putrefaction before the consolidation of the plague and it becomes a flux of blood.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do that at that hour or at another hour.
And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery into the bone with a cautery cutellar until the extremities of it are incised, and stay in the place of that meteyssa work.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of heated complexion; because cauterization is of those causes that help the finishing humidities, and therefore it is better in judgment.
And cover the extraction of the arteries that you have placed the location of the old wound, and that are placed on it powders decently made, and then be cured with dry medicines making the flesh to rise and with poultices while it is healing.
And if while you work another vein becomes a flux of blood from the artery, then you must take care to restrain that blood, or with cauterization, or what you place the location of the wound, and tighten your hand until the blood is restrained. And if any cause of those is not to your present, then pause your finger on the location until the blood is coagulated, and embroca the location with water of vehement frigidity until the acuteness rests, and be tightened according to what you must.
And that which is lighter in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, because you have marked the two places with a probe, and after a pause, a little, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it may be elongated that which is between the extremities of him, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two handles is the same. But however, if it is less sharp than two handles is better, because if it is sharp with two handles it approaches each burn, and does not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, as in those there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in those and the flesh is cut slightly.
And this work is better in all work and lighter.
And the spaces which are between two handles the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Chapter Four.
Of the cure of the bodies of acute and sour ulcers of the heels.
When they are sour ulcers, and the bodies of those veins that are above the test of the head are affected, and do not confer in that any cause of the cure of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already reddens and feels in his forehead a walking as if it were walking of ants, and the heels of that are exhausted, humid so that already the hairs of them are known, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient agro mixtures in the cure of those of this operation, and numbered that cure with space.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on his forehead, and then cut three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure shall be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little of the movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other part.
And guard yourself from the incision of the arteries which are in two parts, and elongate your hand from the continuation of both the jaws. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
And if a piece of sponge dressed or dried cloths most with which you dry the blood.
And then introduce the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: which is from the part of the temples into the second incision. Excoriate with that all the flesh which is between the two incisions with the chisel which is above the bone, and then make that of the middle incision into the second incision. And then scrape with this spatula and introduce into the first incision another time an instrument which is called a cutellar, sharp on one part and on the other not sharp.
And pause the side of that sharp one deves the flesh annexed deves the flesh, and the side of it lean inside the bone, and push that one until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But that the incision be continued to where it appears of the flesh, and then make that in the middle fissure into the other fissure.
And because it runs from the blood quantity equal, squeeze the places of the pieces of congealed blood.
And then pause in each fissure calgua of old cloth, and pause on those powders steeped in wine and oil and wine vinegar, and vegas that it does not become pus caut.
And on the third day untie the bandage and administer a large infusion of boiled water or tea, and then cure that with an enguent of basilicon with rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of ulcers by catartz and in the heels descending from the parts inside of the head.
When there comes a catartz acute and continuing, and sometimes the heels of the patient exhausted little, and already the regard of them is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and of their case the hairs, and in the forehead of the head is a sharp pain leading and exhaustion consequent, then you know by these accidents that the matters and catartz do not come but from a few veins of the parts inside proceeding.
And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to shave his forehead, and then cut into it a fissure in the middle of the forehead, a little by the latitude (and begins with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and be incision into the bone; and elongate your hand from the eyelids of the temples which are bad deves the chewing), until it be the bone uncovered.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or with dry cloth and then refill between the two lips of the fissure with old cloth or with linen rags. And then tighten from above with powders steeped in wine and oil so that it does not become pus caut.
And when you untie it and see that the abscess has already diminished, then cover the wound where the flesh begins to grow, and take care of it with a drying regimen that makes the flesh grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and make a poultice of them and administer it to these wounds at the birth of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
Of the cure of that which catz in the ears.
Every cause that catz in the ears is one of four species, for it is either mineral or a cause similar to mineral, such as iron and lead, or it is of plant, such as quince or bean, or it is a fluid cause such as water and sour wine and their likenesses, or some beast.
And therefore when lead or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust or grow in the ear, and puts the ear in the sun, and if you see the lead, then distill in it some cause of violet oil or sesame, and then administer the extract of it, and make the patient snort with a condition, and plug the nostrils to prevent the occurrence of snorting. And then put in the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, for many times it is expelled with these causes.
And if it is not expelled, then administer the extract of it with the instrument called a subtle epicyclic gesti, of which this is the form:
And if it is expelled with the gesti, well is it; and if not, then administer the extract of it with a subtle onci of little duplication.
And therefore if it is not expelled by this, then make a cannula of brass and introduce the extremity of the cannula into the hole of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that it be not open except the cannula. And then extract with your wind with strong suction, for many times as the water that we have recounted.
But if it is not expelled in this manner, then take of a lit halka or of a vecz apparatus with which birds are taken a certain quantity, and put that in the extremity of the ray, and then envelop over that well-placed cot. And then introduce that into the hole of the ear with facility, and then dry the ear of humidity.
And therefore if it is not expelled by all the causes which we have recounted, then you must cut that before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the manner of cutting that is that you at the beginning lances the patient from the cephalic vein and extract blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make that cezer between your hands and convert the ear to the upper parts, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear above the grey of it in the well-pressed place. And let the fissure be of a lunar figure until it reaches the lead, and, the lead being found, take it out with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure at that hour with velocity, and take care of it while it is healing.
And if the cause catz in the ear is one of the greases that grow and swell, then administer the cure and the extract of it; but if it does not obey your advice, then you take a subtle teune spatula according to this form: And administer with that the abscess of that grease which is catz in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put that in many pieces, and then extract it with the oncis or with a subtle gesti, or with an incision as we have said, for the extract of it is alleviated.
But in the water which is introduced into the ear, cover the patient with a condition of snorting at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cot, and pour over that ear which is the water, and if by this it is expelled, well is it; and if not, then take many small lead and iron weights according to the length of the finger, and heat those in the fire a little, and the patient introduces one of those into the hole of his ear and jumps on one foot of that part and percussion with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear. Therefore do not cease this with stone until all the water is expelled.
Therefore do not cease this with stone until all the water is expelled. And already the water is expelled so that you take paper or of gonc, i.e., and put one extremity of it in the ear and extend the other extremity with fire until it is burned the most of it.
And then put another gonc and do this as many times until all the water is expelled, and straz that with a cannula as it is said above of the lead extractor.
But in the extraction of beast entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, as big and similar to it, cure that as we have said in the division; but if it is of a large thing which causes appearance at the edge of the vessel, then administer the extract of it with gesti and oncis, and the cause of it is lighter of all the other causes that catz in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you cure that with what we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations and do not compare your cure, then it is necessary that you watch the ear in the sun.
And therefore if there is here any cause of worms, then extract them with tweezers or with subtle instruments, but if there appears no cause, then take a tube that is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, the shape of which is as follows: And insert the fine extremity into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can bear; and then suck with that by strong suction, and do this several times, until all the worms are expelled.
But if you do not obey in this way, then you must plug and close the opening of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been prepared in the cure of worms, and you will find them in the treatise of distillations.
And it is your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, the shape of which is as follows: And make it of silver or of brass, narrow at the bottom, with a small hole, and flat at the top.
And therefore, as it is in the cavity of the tube, it is necessary here. And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it in the extremity of it decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or whatever you wish of these medicines into the tube — and that is in the ear — and then insert the reed with cotton on top and press with your hand with a temperate compression of it until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is put into the ear be already scalded with fire a little. And guard yourself that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too cold, for the medicines of the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
Of the cure of ear opacities.
Sometimes babies are born from their mothers' wombs unperforated, and this happens to some men, opacity in the fleshy part of the ear due to plague or flesh that grows there; and this opacity sometimes happens in the area of the ear canal which does not allow sight, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the ear canal, which does not allow sight, is in the greatest dispositions of difficult healing.
And in that one in which you can see, then it is necessary that you place the ear of the patient in the sun and watch it. And therefore if you see opacity appearing, open it with a subtle spatula, the shape of which is as follows:
If the extremity of it, in which the width is small, one part is pointed and the other is not; and the spatula is of two lengths, so that it does not make a hole in the ear.
And therefore if the opacity is due to flesh born in the ear or in the fleshy part of it, then take that with subtle instruments and cut it with great facility until all the flesh is removed.
And if the opacity is in the ear canal, then take a fine reed, heat it with fire a little, and then put it into the fleshy part of the ear.
And therefore if you have felt opacity with what the patient feels with ease, due to the gravity of the ear, strive to ease the pressure of it with ease; and guard yourself that you do not injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a cloth according to the quantity of the width of the tube which you have wrapped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some and put it in water and pulverize it over it, as it has been said, and use it; and if you see that the ear is already suppurating, then it is necessary that you extract the pus and replace it with another one which you have wrapped in cerot that is made with rose oil, until the pus has yielded; and then cure it until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear, and use the other cure which restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise of distillations.
Chapter VIII.
Of the cure of atheroma which develops on the eyelids.
Atheroma which develops on the eyelids of some people sometimes is moist, sometimes it is dry.
Therefore, when you have those with tweezers or with instruments, and you cut them with a spatula from their roots, and then place on the places a poultice.
But if there is pain with a flow of blood, then you cauterize those with a subtle lancet cautery.
And the best cauterization is after the incisions and several times return when there is any cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter .ix.
Cure of a swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Many ailments occur in the eyelids of the eyes, some cause a swelling that is assembled in its strength and hardness, and by its size it is called.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid below and above.
Therefore, the operation in them is that you consider it when the swelling is proceeding in that which is outside the eyelid and is bad to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, cut on that with a fissure along its width, and then drain that from all parts with ease while it drains, and then suspend that with an ointment and cut that off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with suture; and cure that while it is healing.
And if it is small, to you will not come harm from that because the ointment of it restores that and heals it.
And if the swelling is declining to the inner parts of the eyelid, you must cut the surface of the inner parts, then you open the eyelid and suspend the swelling with an ointment, other than that which you incised, and press that from all parts, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, that you do not notice in any cause.
And after the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and cure the place with water that heals while it is healing.
Chapter .x.
Of the cure of a cut on the upper eyelid of the eye.
A cut is a gray which is generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and mostly occurs in children, aggravates the eyes of those and causes their cataracts to be more severe; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears are mixed with those.
And because of this, those times make their faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; and on the eyelids of those below the eyebrows are humid, those which have already covered inflammation, and imminence of accernac appears in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel accernac within those.
And some manner of operation is in that which the patient holds his head in your, and then place a cloth on him and from it make a calgua, and make of it a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach from all parts, and then place that on that and press with your fingers from all parts so that it may be aggregated arcernac in the middle of the circle, and then make in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incision with a fissure along its width, and the fissure not be greater than the fissure that is made in flaubotomia.
But in the pressure cove that you make the code entirely while you reach arcernach, because in the most recent processes arcernach by fissure according to the form of white grayseza.
Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have enveloped between your fingers to the outer parts and revolve between your right and left hand while it is dispersed.
And guard yourself that you do not adjust in the fissure so that with the spatula you do not reach the eye and scratch that.
But if you do not appear arthernach at the beginning of the fissure, but that you adjust in the fissure a little with ease while it processes arthernach; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths of it in water and vinegar and place them on the place and tighten those with powders.
And if some that crush salt and place that in the concavity of the fissure so that that which is remaining of that humidity.
And then cure that while it is healing.
But if it happens in the place abscess caut, then cure that with emplasters cedatils while it is healing.
Chapter .xi.
Of manners of touching the eye.
When in the eyelids of the eyes there are hairs that are natural and are old, those annoy the eye and make manners of illnesses as such as frequent tears and softening of the eyelids and film while that is a cause of destruction of the eye that is called tactinir of the eye, and cure is done in four manners: or by cautery with fire; or with acute medicine according to that which was said before in the chapter of cautery; or it is made tactinir by incision and suture; or by canes according to that I say.
And therefore cove that you place the head of the patient in your, then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, well is; and if not, introduce an needle into that in which it is faithful from the part below of the eyelid, and make penetrate the needle with faithful below, and that be — near the margin of the eyelid in which there are the hairs — near the hairs, and pull the faithful to the parts below with the eyelid, and convert that with the ray.
And then make in the inner part of the eyelid below the hairs adjusted with spatula incision of the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and then extract the faithful and place below the eyelid small powders of cotto or of cloth, and then send over the eyelid with tent, and be as such as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, the form should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this is already diversified in men, for some of those who are indigested that it be incised of the eyelid a great quantity according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
And then apply the spatula on the two lines that you have cut, and begin from the larger lacrimal duct to the smaller one. And if your fissure is near the natural hairs as is the thickness of the king.
And then place the ounce in one of the two angles of the bone, and then scrape that whole thing, and then adjust with the incision the two lips with a wool or thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere that which superfluously of the threads on the two eyebrows with some causes envisaged, if you want to do this, and otherwise, do not care.
And then remove the suture of the threads within three days or four, and then take care of it.
And if you want, leave the plague its suture, and take care of it with what dries and constricts, for the eyelid is elevated it needs the sealing of the plague and its adhesion; but suture is better. And therefore, thus I say the ancients of taxing.
However, there should be solicitude over the patient, and it is of good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And it is another way in taxing, and it is that you place on the eyelid a figure as a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three hooks separated and gathered according to this form:
But if it is not possible this, have the hooks, and this is not equal, then take a needle in which there is thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and introduce the other thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the other thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between your two said threads with equality, and then with those elevate your hand with equal elevation, elevate the whole bone on which it is marked as we have recounted.
And then adjust the two lips of the plague with suture, and take care of it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs from your incision or your fissure, drain that abscess with a cautery and to its likeness, and with ointments.
And some times it becomes necessary for the eyelid that its hairs be converted, then it is necessary that you use in that of what we have said of incision; but suture in some is more artificial.
To taxinir with canes is according to this form: And it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure which is defined according to what I have recounted; and then by art make two canes or two thin splints of which length be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them be less than the width of the spatula. And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
And then add each one with subtlety over what superfluously of the eyelid of the hull, and constrict the canes of each part with strong stricture, and leave that for some days, for the bone by the stricture will die and become denied and will be able to enter that by itself it will fall.
But if it is late, then break it with the pliers, and then take care of the plague until it is healed.
Therefore, as it is solid, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this form: And have the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
Of elevation of stinging hairs in the hull with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and rough and stinging the hulls, then the operation in them is that you take a fine needle and put in it a fine thread of cedar and lead, and then that you adjust the extremities of it and nuts in a way very subtle. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of a palm.
And then you compose another fine thread below it in short, and tie the extremities of that if you want.
And then place the patient their head in your seat, and be near the sun so that your work be declared, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the hair adjusted which has needed of engen, and make that penetrate into the eyelid gently until you extract that from the natural hair.
And then pull the hair down and introduce that into the alixati, and be the hairs one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand with that until the hair be out-fitted with alixolati in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if it is thrown alixalati and the hair is not thrown, you will throw alixati to the parts below with the thread which you have composed with that, until in it be thrown alixalati of the above.
And watch that with the vision of the hull, for then you will throw alixati and the thread, and grotan somewhat and close the hull, and leave the closures for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place and is born upon that good flesh.
And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a longer skin from the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that, or that you let it enter so that it is lengthened towards some space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cure of the cataract which comes in the eyelid above.
When it comes in the eye cataract, and is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted above, or on the right or left side, by bad consolidation of a plaque or of a cautery, and it is called leporina, and this cataract or is natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of plaque or of cauteries or of cauteries, or by similar to their malcuratz.
The way of the operation in it is that you make that consolidation and that you separate the lips of it, and you put in it in that which is between those a piece of cloth of linen, and you tie those together until they are healed.
And do not cover that you use of cure of it of the causes which dry, constrict; because if you do that it returns cataract worse than no time you have not had.
Use in that of causes that soften as fennel is, and embroil with the water in which they are cooked barley and its seeds, or a decoction of  dyaquilon, which be liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge in that the cloth, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all ingenuity that is not consolidated according to the form that you had at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is not but any rectification of cataract that does not return the form of the place according to that you had before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of cataract which is made in the lower eyelid.
This cataract which is made in the lower eyelid, which is truly named cataract; and it is of it some natural, other accidental.
More accidental is made by plaque or by incision or by cautery or by others similar.
And the way of the operation of it is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and you put that in the flesh, and that you make it pass from the left lacrimal into the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the parts above with the needle and sew that with the needle, and incise with a wide spatula. And therefore if it returns the figure of the eyelid as it should, good is; and if not, take the ray and put that in the broken figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the side of the lower eyelid.
And be the extremities of the two fissures of two angles of the incision, which you have made until they converge, and be of their made angle until when they meet be made figure of theirs.
And this figure is Greek letter: the lambda.
And then close the flesh that for the quantity that is the side of it acute below of it, that which closes the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew those with the wool thread; and then cure those with that which we have said of the softening medicines and of the poultices until it be healed.
And if cataract  is caused by fissure or suture or cautery, then it is that you make with a flat fissure over the hairs of the eyelid according to that it is preceded. And then separate with the poultice between two lips according to that we have said.
In the sum of the sermon of the cure of cataract when it is above or below, that run in it the operation, according to that it is prepared of the form of cataract, and that is in form of motas diversity.
And the artificers wise all times prepare ingenuity in any manner which is possible to it until it makes return the figure to the natural form, or near that, and that patient according to that it convenes of the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many men in such a way that the eyelid is more above with the white of the eye, and is prohibited from the facility of movement and of its natural works, then it is that you enter the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and elevate it upwards, or extend it with the unci.
And then you incise the adhesion with a subtle spatula, the which be not with the sharpness of the incisions, have blunt a little for that the patient be not troubled during the operation, and remove the spatula that it does not damage the eye with its sharpness.
And be your incision which excoriate that adhesion with facility until it be returned the eyelid according to its natural form and that be healed all the adhesion.
And then you put in the eye salted water with which you wash it; or distill in it of zunia dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of linen, and put on the eye wool infused in the album of egg, and then the third day use of consolidating causes until it be healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the incision of the nail and the eminence of flesh of the lacrimals.
Know that the nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous, and it is similar to a hard, fine, cypress; or it is non-nervous, resembling white, congealed moisture, which, when you touch it, it is forced to take on a cut, it is cut off and the cut is not put back into it.
And both kinds do not begin except from the larger lacrimal, inward that goes little by little that covers the sight and prohibits the light and the movement of the eye.
But the manner of working in the incision of it is that the patient places his head in the towel, and then opens his eyes, and raises the eyelid with his hand, and then collects the nail with a sharp, little, double-edged scalpel and extends it to the upper parts. And then he takes a needle and inserts into it a piece of horsehair or cowhide or wax, or something similar, or he doubles the tip of the needle little by little and puts it in the middle of the nail, and penetrates it with the needle, and ties the nail with thread; and extends it to the upper parts, and excoriates with the hair the side of the nail which is near the pupil. And thus you follow that with the hair until the end of it.
And then you incise the remaining part in the root of the lacrimal with a fine spatula or with small scissors, and leave the flesh of the lacrimal natural so that by the incision of it there does not become a continuous flow of tears.
And some times the nail with the sole, extended or tied, as we have said, and then it is excoriated with a spatula lion of which this is the shape of it:
And guard yourself that with the spatula you do not touch the cornea and that there comes a rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then the incision is put in the eye a little salt trissa or a drop of cief made of cymbal, and leave it in for another day; and then cure it with water that covers it until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle, nor is it put into it the scalpel, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed as I and recommend in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a fine spatula lion of steel sharpened according to this form: With subtlety. And if you see that it is rarified and is confused and  embraces in that root, then distill of your own hour in the eye of a drop of cymbal made of cymbal or with cymbal rog or with salt trissat, and close the eye for another day.
And then repeat over that the operation until it is removed all the water that is of it, otherwise that the contrary abscess be in the eye, for then you leave it, and cure at the beginning the abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation over it with reason until it is healed.
The eminence of the lacrimal flesh, if it is noticed in the eye for great harm, it is suspended with thread; and incise it from one part, and do not complete the incision so that you do not incise a flow of tears.
And then distill into the lacrimal cymbal rog and made of cymbal until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the incision of alguezardenic and of the water that is born of flesh adjusted in the eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some, flesh is born red, and it is over-placed until it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids at the sides and is assembled to a rose of balustrade.
But the operation in it is that the patient places his head in the towel; and then opens the eyes of it and collects all that flesh with convenient thread, and you with a forceps or with a basket; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until all is finished with the scissors, and guard yourself of the eye that you do not damage it with the course of your operation.
And let your incision be with which you incise those or with a spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which the ascebel is collected according to what will come the form of it in this chapter.
Therefore, as the incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the eye with salt trissa, or distill into it powder rog and similar to it of the corrosive medicines, and place over the eye a cloth with album of egg until it is assured of an abscess caut.
And if there remain any cause of alguezardenic and it is lordly abscess caut, and you fear abscess caut, then leave the eye and cure that abscess with water that yields that abscess, and then repeat over it with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which happens in the eye of this kind.
But however you cover that all cure of the eye steel by natural way or by accidental way, operate with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is suffering that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the collection of pus in the wound.
Pus appears in veins which are located on the wound and they are prohibited from the clothing its operation, and they lengthen the wound for days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which there is pus is strong and in it there is no other illness than pus, then you collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a bandage or two according to your prudence; and that bandage of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two bandages gradually in one piece according to this form:
And then those veins are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and cleanse the blood hour by hour, until those veins are being removed from the wound and are being rolled up.
And guard yourself that you do not lead the wound with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation in the afternoon before the sun, and be firm in your operation that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you will have finished, then you distill in the wound chief green or red so that with its sharpness it corrodes that which is removed from the pus.
But if that is not possible to you, collect all in that hour, and then you plaster all with that which yields the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is subdued and that it is assured of a cauterized abscess.
And then iterate over it according to the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
Of the reduction of arizati to the nose.
When you cure arizati with cautery or with sharp medicine according to that which is preceded the narration of it and it is not healed, then it is not generated in it unless you make over the abscess you see the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the power until it is discovered the bone.
And therefore, as it is discovered the bone and sometimes in it corruption or blackness, then you root it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is called asprey cap, and it is made of iron, and it is the cap rounded as if it were to be grasped, which is made pointed by the point of a file or aliskalfati by subtle point (as it is in the following form).
And pause that over the corrupted place of the bone, and then revolve that between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped.
And this is done several times, and then restore the place with drying and styptic causes.
Therefore, if the place is consolidated and there is born good flesh in it and the body of the wound is separated and remains for forty days, and it is not renewed and is not abscesses and no accidents happen in it, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then there is not generated in it but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you discover the second bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and as soon as the bone is discovered, then you take the tribe according to this form:
Let the extremity of it be triangular, and the shaft of it be prim extended into the extremity as it sometimes is so.
And then pause that over the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little from the wound, and then revolve your hand with the tribe until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient as soon as it finds air going through it when your hand.
Therefore, then restore the place with styptic and drying medicines as you have been taught.
Therefore, as the flesh grows and the place is hardened, then the matter which flowed to the foreparts returns to the nose, therefore that is pus lighter on the patient.
Chapter XX.
Of the reduction of the prominence of the wound.
When the wound eminates with its totality and no accidents happen in the clothing or diminution, then you cover the patient, and then you follow it, and then you pause windy in the neck its scarification and sucks for good suction; and then pause on the wound liniment which is made of acatra and aloe and enses and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster over the wound with motz polvils.
And the manner of the polvils is that you take cloths of fine wool, and each cloth be duplicated in four folds; and make of those fine.
And then pause those one over the other according to the quantity of which the wound needs. And then strengthen over those with a hard cloth with a strong structure; and iterate the ventoses with suction its scarification; and then remove the ventoses and leave the wound straight the day and the night.
But if meanwhile the ligament is softened, then let it be very tight.
And then remove the ligament during the day and night as we have said.
And if you see the hernia already be reduced, well is, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the constriction and the leeches until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of the incision of the eminence of the tunic uvea.
When there is a rupture in the tunic uvea, and it appears prominent and protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of rasim, and the shape of a man is formed by it, and if you want to cut into it, then the operation in it is as we have recounted, that you enter the needle into the root of the uvea from the side below to the side above, and then place the other needle with a double thread from the lacrimal side, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then cut the place of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and tighten that knot.
And then extract the needle and place it over the wool soaked in egg white and leave it until the thread falls into the uvea.
And then cure the wound with water that comforts it until the plague is healed.
And sometimes, in addition to the whole part with a circle of cloth around the wound, adjust the eminence, and then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes to the bottom of the wound, and run the albuminous humidity, and descend the wound and enter immediately.
And then tighten until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of alconati.
This illness that is called alconati is nothing else but the one that is adjusted in the wound resembling water descending and it is not that one.
But the manner of acting in it is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight saddle, and then take his head in your two hands and hold it so that you see the healing arrive at the lower parts, and then let it dry and not descend, and keep the light, and the patient sees the causes as he sees.
And if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
But if the descent to the healing with water that we have said is not prepared, then make the patient sit between your hands and then take a fine spatula and finish it on that over the panniculus, cutting a little of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown (in the place where it is hollow), until the healing is removed.
Therefore, when it is removed, then you distill into the wound water cauda in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey.
And then cure it with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of the water descending from the wound.
We have already said the kinds of water in the division and which one it is convenient to perforate with a sermon, then this one according to the healing.
Then you must make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie his wound, tightening it.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his wound if the wound in which is the water is the left; or on your right hand if the wound is the right.
And then with your right hand take an almond, if the wound is left; or with your left hand, if the wound is right.
And then place the end of the almond near the crown for the thickness of the ray in the album of the wound from the side of the lacrimal gland, and then press the almond with virtue and roll your hand on it.
And then penetrate into the album of the wound and feel that the almond has already arrived at the visible cause.
And it is the measure of the path of the almond to the bottom the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the wound; because you will see with that pupil the vision of the wound through the clarity of the cornea.
And then place the almond into the place where is the water, and then you throw it down once, then again, and therefore if the water descends immediately, then immediately wet the patient's wound with water over which he has his sight, and almond in his wound.
And then rest for a while; therefore if the water has descended, then you remove that other time as long as the almond is not thrown away.
And therefore when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the almond with ease, and roll it with your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a little clear salt of gemma and with that wash the wound inside; and then place outside the wound cotton or stopper or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white and lick the wound with water.
But not those who are of our time place on that comi trissat with egg white.
And if you do not obey your almond to the entrance of the wound because of its hardness — because it is some of the men whose wound is very hard — then you must take the spatula which is called alberid of which this is the form:
And therefore pierce with that that conjuncture, and do not end your hand in the track, and it is not unless you make a way to the almond place subtle.
And then introduce the almond according to what we have said.
And you must complete the work, prepare the patient to sleep comfortably in a dark room, where he sleeps on his back and is prohibited from all movements.
And keep him in nature so that his nature is cleansed, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
And bind him according to his disposition on the third day.
And after that in that dark room, remove the bandage and expose the foot to view, and have him look at some objects, and then return the bandage on the seventh day.
And do not let him do this at the time of the cure or soon after the infusion. Have it that you abstain from this because the water may leak lightly through the great and vehement regard.
But if an abscess occurs, then you must unbind the wound before the seventh day, and rectify it with water that flows into the abscess.
Then cover the sight of him and place a cloth on his face through which his breath may be regulated, leaving him in the dark room for some days.
And then gradually take him out of that room and converse with him about his affairs.
And know that in alchemy the disciple is not excused from vision on some occasions, and then you should be bold about the operation.
And we have now come to some of those who are in Artach, and some said that they make fire in the Ayrac magdaam pierced with which the water is sucked.
But however, I have not seen any in our land who had perfect water, nor is water mentioned in some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is novel.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaam so that it may be on those who ignore those:
And they are made of iron or properly of iron, and their extremities are with this triangular subtlety, the acute extremity as such is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of a wound in the nose.
When in the nose are born various fleshy growths, some of which are a cause that is assembled like a scorpion of moths' weight, or a polyp of weight; and this malady is called polyp because it resembles that weight represented. And of this is cancerous flesh, a fleshy, of dusky color; and of this is the flesh lion not of dusky color.
Therefore, in that which is in these fleshy lions not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must have the patient lie between your hands and placed in the sun, and breathe the nostrils of him, and prick your own finger on those fleshy growths. And then extract that to the outer parts, and then incisi the water that you have comprehended of those with a sharp, subtle spatula on one side, so that you know that all the flesh is already gone; if any cause of it remains, of which the abscission is possible, then you root that water with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that none of it remains. But if it is lordly with blood or an abscess occurs, then you pause to him that which you must; or is of the malignant abscesses, then you cauterize and cauterize that so that it is abscised blood and all the cavities are gone.
And then be gotten in the nose after the incision vi agre and water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate according to what you must, then you know that from within him is flesh wound in the pus that soars bones of the nose to which the abscission has not reached.
Therefore, then you must enter a thread of him to whom there is some thickness, and sew in him moth nuts, and place between each nut the quantity of the finger or less, and engage the patient and enter one extremity of the thread in the nose with the ray or with another cause which is to him possible.
And since that has been done, that he throws his scent so that it reaches the canals of the nose, and be spit on his throat, because troops of occasions the semblance to this action do the children in the schools, and is lighter cause to him who wants to do it.
And then place the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that exits over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a suture of flesh with the nuts that are in the thread, and do this so that you know that the flesh is already with the nuts of the thread.
And then extract the thread, and place in the nose after the abstraction of the blood a poultice, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that is remaining of the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead tube for some days until it is healed.
But if you are in need of a cure that requires it, use that.
And this is the form of the instrument a capipurge maker with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And make a vessel of silver or lead, which is like a small open lamp, so like a small basin, and the meat seemingly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of the instrument to purge should be made flat and uncovered; to which there is a handle at the back of it, with which you hold it when you heat it in oil or water that you want of the juices and suckable causes.
Chapter XXV.
Of the nostrils in the extremities of the nose.
Many times the nostril in the extremities of the nose is inflamed, and it is magnified and mentioned in some days within which it is not possible to see the regard of it.
And for that reason, you should investigate that at the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all of that. And then place on the area a cautery or medicine that burns, which is in the place of it.
But if its incision is delayed until it is magnified, then consider if it is hardened, rough, of dark color and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron because it is a foul abscess; because many times, to the one who incisions this abscess, a great evil comes upon the one who had it.
And if the abscess is of a light touch and not of dark color, and sometimes that incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and incisions that without fear, and cure the area with water that exhales and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of the suture of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by resemblances.
Know that when an accident occurs in the solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, little confidence is given in that operation unless in some men.
Therefore, when it is necessary to have some cause of those, consider if it is fresh plague with its blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with suture, and then cure that until it is healed.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then you should scrape each part of its apparent code until blood comes out. And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and over those pulverize blood of dragon and incense, and place over the powder a piece of diaphana plaster, or of some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave that tied for two days or three, and then untie that and replace that plaster and leave that until the threads are by themselves abscinditz, and then cure with an enguent until it is healed.
But the manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you have done and have known.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts of the teeth.
Many times it happens to many men in the parts of the teeth of their lips some hard abscesses resembling fat of worms, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you should convert the lips and fends each of those hardnesses from all parts, and then the abscess incision, fill the location with incense blood until the blood is restrained, and then be washed with vinegar and be cured the location with water that is styptic, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Greatly of times there is on the gum flesh adjusted, which the ancients called albulus, therefore, you should suspend that with an onci or that you have that with the forceps and incision that you must take its root, and let the healing run or the blood.
And then place over the location incense blood or other styptic or excitative powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incision that secondarily, and cauterize that, because the cautery will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the reason of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the parts of the teeth and of the mouth and between the gums are adjusted rough, jagged, and some times are of black and are made citrine or green until the gum sees by that corruption and are made the teeth jagged.
And therefore, you should make the patient sit between your hands and place the head of him in your knee, and scrape the teeth in which those roughnesses and causes resembling sand appear until none of them remain, and that do of the blackness and of the citrinity and of the others until they are modified.
Therefore, if this is what is at the beginning of the reason, it is good; and if not, then repeat the reason on those the other day and the second and the third until you come to the last statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have need of various forms and figures of drills according to how they are prepared for your operation. And because the razors which the tooth is cut from the root are different from the razors which are used between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you must prepare as you shall see forthwith:
Chapter .xxx.
Of the Extraction of Teeth.
Take care that you cure the tooth of its pain with all care and take your time in the entire extraction of it, for there is no cause that should supplant the whiteness of it when it is extracted, for it is substance sublime until the excuse in the extraction of it.
But take care when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, that you firmly ascertain which tooth is the painful one, for often the pain deceives the patient and makes it seem as if it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this by the operation of the barbers.
Therefore, as you must ascertain which tooth is the painful one, and that you know well, then take care that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gums on all sides, and then make that with your fingers, or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until you reach the root.
And then with a strong grip hold it firmly with good communication or strong stupor, and place the head of the patient between your teeth that you hold well so that it does not hurt, and then pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and put that behind it on all sides with facility and make an effort for the removal of it as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then take care that you compress with cloth that broken part and tighten it with the extremity of a fine ray so that it is not broken in the hour of your constriction upon it with your hold.
And take care that you operate exquisitely with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gums and guard well your strength that you do not break that and remain a part of it, and return upon the patient by the malice that be greater than the first pain of it.
And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their fistinacio and audacity over the extraction of theirs, for they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they make come upon the men illnesses great which are more difficult to be broken, and the roots of them remaugulated all, or some of those, or what you extract that with some bones of the mandible as many times as we have testified.
And after the extraction of it, wash the mouth with wine caut or wine with salt.
And if it is necessary for blood to flow thereby, as many times it is necessary, then take some quantity of zegi and sprinkle it over the wound, and if you do not confer that zegi, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and subtle hold with which the tooth is hurt at the beginning be of long extremity, of short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when with those you must operate.
And be as often of thick handle so that when you tighten with those they are not bent, be short extremities.
And be made of Indian iron, descentment made of straight extremities, and in the extremities of those be teeth of which some interlock in the others and tighten by strong constriction, and some times the extremities of those be the form of the beak of a bird which has the name ciconia, so it is called, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of the Extraction of Teeth and of the Extraction of the Bones of the Jaws Broken.
When you must extract a tooth which is broken and remains some cause, then take care that you place upon the spot a poultice with border for a day or for two until the spot is softened; and then introduce some ligature or hold with the extremities of which are assembled to the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
The extremities of those be made from the root as if it were a file or rasp.
And if you do not obey to your instrument with these forceps or hold, then take care that you cave upon the root and scrape all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has the name atali, so it is a small lever of which the form is this:
And be of short extremity thick a little, and not be bent so that it is not broken.
Therefore, if by that the root is broken, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is of triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and of a more subtle extremity.
And now you have helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the shape approaching the following: And with other instruments which precede in the shape of teeth; because the scraping is done with this instrument which is assembled like a large onion, and this is the shape:
Of the triangular, twisted or short extremity, which is some thickness, and not embedded so that it is not twisted.
And another knows that the instruments of the moving teeth are so and similarly the other instruments.
But the skillful and subtle artificer in the art, finds for himself according to what the operation and the diverse ailments mean to him; because there are ailments to which the ancients did not say nor put proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is twisted, or if it may, then it should be cured over there in its place with what is convenient of the instruments and the forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help with the gesture of which this is the shape:
And be in it some thickness little by little, and be inserted or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is set; and then restore the place with convenient medicines to that.
But if in the bone there is a small puncture, then root that of that puncture and of its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of the prominent teeth above the others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course, for those the shape is this, and most when it befalls women, and most to the venerable ones; therefore, as you consider: if a tooth is nothing near another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or cement it, then root that; but that it is not annexed to another tooth, then you cut that with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to a pig's snout, and be made of Indian iron of a sharp, moving extremity.
And be your incision with which you cut that in too many days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not damaged another of the teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed to filing, then file that with a file of Indian iron of which this is the shape:
And be all of Indian iron the margin and well-made; and be of small, moving points as much as a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth be filed little by little in many days with facility, so that no other tooth be damaged and broken. And then line that at the end, and root that with some razors.
And if the tooth of which one part is twisted and it hurts the tongue, then as you file that until the sharpness of that fracture is stopped and leveled, and be filled so that the tongue does not hurt it and the word does not break.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
When accidents happen to the teeth in front with concussion and removal by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot strengthen over that which he eats, and you have cured that with styptic medicines, and it has not been of any value, then because it does not break, it is made in those that are strengthened with gold filings and not with silver, because silver becomes green and soon it may be seen, but gold at no time is changed.
And be the filings in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that it can enter between the teeth; and the form of the straight one is that you take the filing and take double of it between two healthy teeth, and then that you grow with two tortuosities of the filing between two damaged ones, or if it is one or many, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other side. And then iterate the testing into the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom so that it is not damaged.
And be your tightening with which you strengthen the filings must be the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
And then cut the superfluous extremities of the filings with the forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place with gesture, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then leave it so tight as a Roman.
But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another filing in such a manner in all its time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the straight line of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as often these are tied:
And when it is done that a tooth or two is returned to its place after the fall of each one in its place, and they are regrown as we have recounted, and they are remade.
And that is done only by a good artificer and wise.
And sometimes it is fitted some cause of the bones of the cow, and it is made as the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and it is tightened as we have said, and remains and serves with that for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which comes from the tongue some times or is natural with which man is born, or accidental and happens by plague which is already solidified.
And the operation in it is that men open the mouth of the patient, his head existing in the tieu se; and elevates his tongue, and then incides that ligament nerve according to the latitude between that the tongue is released from its recess.
But if in that there is some hardness or knot, and this is due to the consolidation of plague, then you put an ointment and split that by the latitude between that you have incised the ligament and that the knot is dissolved.
And guard yourself that no fissure is made in the flesh of the preon and that you split here artery and blood comes.
And then wash the vestiges of the incision with water or with wine vinegar or with hot water; and then place beneath the tongue a linen; so is the which holds the patient's tongue in each night so that it is not consolidated another time.
But if there happens a flux of blood, place on the location vitriol trissat; but if the blood comes out, then cauterize the location with a cauterizing iron which convenes to it. And then this cure with the other causes within that it is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Sometimes it happens that on the tongue an abscess resembling a small lump appears, prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and often it is magnified while the mouth is opened.
And the operation in it is that men open the mouth of the patient, seeing before the sun and consider the abscess.
And if you see it of dark color or of black, hard, to which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that because it is gangrenous.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the ointment in it, and incise that with a subtle spatula, and incise it from all sides; and if blood comes to you in the hour of your operation, then you place above it trissat zegi, that is vitriol, so that it restrains the blood.
And then return to your work until you have treated it with compliment of it, until it is washed with wine vinegar and salt; and cure that with the other cure with water until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of the extraction of abscesses of the ears and of those that are in the throat and of the other abscesses.
When in the throat it is swollen, so are the glands which are assembled with a hard lump, which happen outwards and are called boils, which when you cure them with water as we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flux of blood; leave it alone until it matures, and then either you will extract it, or it will burst by itself.
And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of it is subtle, then that is the one that must be incised.
And the operation in it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess of it has already rested it with a complete rest or if it is diminished with some diminution; and then make the patient stand before the sun, and his head be in the tieu se, and open his mouth, and the servant takes between his hands, pressing the tongue of it with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it is made of silver or of brass, and it is subtle like a knife.
Therefore, as you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and cast upon that your gaze, then take ointment and place it in the opening, and pull that to the outside parts as much as you can. Other water that you pull some cause of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form:
Other water that you pull some cause of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form: And it is assembled like forceps, but the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the straight of the other, very sharp, the one which is of iron indi embedded.
But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then incise that with a spatula of which this is the form of it: And it is sharp on one part, not sharp on the other part.
And since you have incised a furrow, incise the other according to this same manner of incision, and then the incision the patient gargle with hot water.
But if there happens a flux of blood, gargle with water of decoction of the bark of millefolium or of myrtle leaf and similar to that of the stiptic causes so that the flux of blood is restrained, and then cure that until it is healed.
And sometimes there are born in the throat other abscesses other than those boils, and incise those according to that which I have said in the incision of two furrows equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess which was in the throat of her, the abscess tended to a brown color, of little feeling, the one which had already closed the throat of her, and the woman breathed with tight meat, and had already prohibited to her eating and drinking of water, and she had already arrived at death if may be for a day or for two.
And the abscess had already grown so much that there were two fistfuls of pus inside which came out through two tracts.
Therefore, I treated it fistularly and put myself in one of the openings, and I pulled out that one, and threw it away from it a large portion, and then I incised that one which I understood from the other tract, and then I opened the mouth of it, and I compressed its tongue, and then I put the opening in that abscess.
And then I abscessed a large part of it, and it did not run from it except a little of blood. Therefore, the throat of that woman was absolutely cleared, and she began to drink water, and then she ate food, therefore I did not stop inciding that abscess many times for a long time, and abscesses succeeded in place of that one, the one which incision entered as it was prolonged.
Therefore I put a needle and cauterized the throat of her, therefore as much as an addition; and then I walked around and I did not know what God did of that one from me.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of incision of a boil when it is abcessed.
When catarr arises on the boil, and it is abcessed and it is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the part below thick and round, and then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with the water that we have said in the division, and it does not compare your healing, and it seems sometimes that the abscess cauterized already is gone from it and it is subtle, then cover that you incised that which is aggregated round; and if it is to that longitude, and it is sanguine, of brown color or of black, and it is not to it feeling, then cover that you attempt the incision of it, because in that there is fear over the patient.
And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient lie down and press the tongue of him with an instrument of which you process its form and then put the opening in the navel, and pull that one down and incise that one with one of the two instruments the ones which are said in the incision of two melons.
And cover that you do not incise that one but the water that is adjusted over the natural term its addition, because if you incise of it more, you will lead his speaking.
And after the incision, use of water the one which have been recommended in the incision of two melons, and cure that one until it is healed.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision of it, cover that you use of a needle in the cauterization of it its fear, and the manner of the cautery in it is not but with sharp water, and it is that you put the head of the patient in your knee, and then press the tongue of him with the instrument the one which we have said, and then take of the water the one which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and compare with that living cause, and put that not thick nor subtle, and of that fill the concavity of the instrument the one which this is the form:
Be the extramitat of it concavity in which is put the medicine as well as the concavity of a spoon of ray, and put the instrument with the medicine on the boil, and the patient yawns on his side so that it runs saliva or mucus of the mouth of that one through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend from that one for any cause over the throat of him and that it cleanses that one.
And with your hand to the medicine, and express that one on the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see that one being darkened and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cloth and envelopes that one over the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and introduce the ray with the cloth in a tube of over until the cloth adheres in that tube, and do this many times until you can achieve that which you want of the cauterization of the uvula, and then remove that one because it dries and falls down after three days or four.
And if you needed that you repeat the medicine, repeat that one, and after the cauterization abstergeys in the circuit of the uvula with cloth dipped in border, and modify with that water that is in the circuit of it of the medicine, and be washed with hot water, and be cured for the moment with embrocation, and dedicate with gargles until it is healed.
And this kind of cure is more saving than incision and more long of fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with water that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with fumigation in this manner: receive calamine, hyssop, oregano, rue, sicamous arabic, chamomile, broth and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in a pot, and let them be submerged in hot water, and let the pot be well cleaned decently, and let there be in the middle of the pot a hole, on which is placed an instrument concavity of silver according to this manner; it is made of silver or of silver.
And the extremity is introduced into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula over the tongue, until the uvula is completely obscured.
And then repeat over those moist areas until it is dry, and be careful not to do this cure at the beginning of the development of abscesses, because it would too much tighten the abscess, and instead of doing this, you must declare the abscess of it with a cautery.
But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and on the extremity of it make a hollow of wax, so that the mouth of the patient be covered, because the wax prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Of the extraction of splinters and of what adheres in the throat and of other causes.
Moist patches adhere to the throat or a splinter of wood or any other cause.
Therefore, it is necessary that you extract what appears of those things, on which the gaze falls, because you press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it is declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is to you hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because often the cause annexed to the throat is forcibly ejected by vomiting; or that the patient swallows a piece of bread or a root of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or you press a piece of dry sea sponge, and tie that firmly with a thread, and then the patient swallows that, because as it arrives at the place where the spines are and are extracted, then they are forcibly ejected. And moreover, take an eel and tie it firmly with a thread, and it is placed and gently extracted; or take a porr and gently the tip and gently the other end.
But if they are not forcibly ejected by those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it is thicker than a ray a little, and in the extremity of it there is a concavity which you introduce into its throat with ease.
And hold its head elevated upwards, and be careful that the touching of its bone of the throat, so that it may end up in its body and with that which pushes the bone or the splinter, or that the physician with his hand.
But however, that the patient that is introduced is better, by the science of the place of the annexed cause and pushes it down, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it is forcibly ejected.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of the extraction of bloodsucking attached to the throat.
When the bloodsucker is medicated with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and does not confer, consider then in the throat of the patient to the sun, because you may have compressed the tongue of him with the instrument which to you we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the bloodsucker, extract that with a small pin or with a subtle gesture decently.
And if it is not possible to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and introduce that into the throat of the patient, and then place in the concavity of the cannula a burning iron, and do this so many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and is removed from the throat), and abstain the patient all day of water.
And then press a vessel full of cold water, and work the mouth of him in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow any of that and bad the water an hour after with his hand, because the bloodsucker as soon as it feels the water catches.
But if it is not forcibly ejected by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cimet or with asafoetida by the instrument which we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so long as it falls.
And there is another way of operation in the fumigation of that, which is that you take a bowl in which there are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cover in the middle of which there is a hole, and it is composed in that hole the extremity of the instrument; and then let the fumigation descend; and place the patient's mouth on the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation is not forcibly ejected until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodsucker, because the bloodsucker immediately falls.
And if it does not catch, then you repeat the fumigation many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and eat salty and dry causes, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that with this regimen it be forcibly ejected.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker of the throat is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, unless that in it there is some curvature: which is placed in the throat, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is gaunt, in which it is sharpened with a file, so that, when compressing any cause, it does not let go.
Chapter .xl.
In which is the sum of the sermon concerning abscesses and their incision.
Abscesses are special matters, of many kinds, according to the remembrance of them, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and incision of them by two ways, of which one is by the species of abscesses in themselves; and by that which we comprehend of the humidities.
And the second way is according to the places where they occur in the body, for the abscess that occurs in the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the buttocks; and the abscess in the fleshy place is different from the abscess that occurs in the joint; and to each of them is its own treatment by operation.
And more than abscesses are some which ought not to be perforated but rather when the maturation of the flesh in them or the completion of them.
There are other abscesses which ought to be treated when they are ripe, and not when they are mature according to their completion, just as abscesses that are near the joints, for when an abscess occurs near a joint, its being is prolonged until it can pour out what is in its circuit, and very soon those ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, because it is the cause of contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near a major limb, and if you delay the perforation of it before its maturation, it will damage the major limb; or it is near the buttocks, therefore perforate it before it is mature; and you ought not to perforate it cru, of incomplete digestion, but that which is near the buttocks, so that you cannot pierce the preon of it and it be elongated to the parts of the buttocks, and a fistula be made, or that it be done in the term of it that it not be healed. But more, you ought to know the hour of the perforation of the abscess, and thus it is when it is mature.
And you ought to know that it is mature when it is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, and towards the diminution of the heat and the pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And that you ought to know the perforation to be done in the place furthest from the abscess and of pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
And perforation always be by the length of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or the feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, afterwards, in all places equal in which there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use of perforation according to that limb.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is best that you let the perforation of it until its digestion is confirmed according to completion, as we have said; for if you perforate it before that, it is prolonged the course of the pour of it and of much filth, and very soon the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it.
But some abscesses are perforated according to the width of the flesh or the body of necessity, or according to what the limb requires.
And you ought to administer small perforation, and in large abscesses large perforation and many sections according to the variety of the greatness of the abscesses.
And others are of abscesses in which the codpiece ought to be concave and be incised, when it is done so that bread is made and it is done in a term that it already follows, just as those that occur in trops of buboes.
And of those are those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those is the one in which it is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, just as the abscesses of the angles.
And of them are those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similar to those.
But that one to whom there is no such as his abscesses are superficial, you ought to perforate that with superficial perforation, or flat only.
And you ought when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, that you perforate it and do not take that you extract all the pour in that hour; having extracted from it one part, and then close the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and then do that many times according to gradation until it is fully drained.
And more so if the patient is of weak virtue, or pregnant woman, or small child, or old in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the egress of the pus, and very soon the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Therefore, guard this chapter with great care, and in the way in which you perforate these abscesses, you ought to abstain from the plagues and consider therefore if the plague of the abscess is few, or a flat section, then you administer the qualms of it or of a counter-coction; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you ought to put a meca in each tract until they reach together.
And if in the abscess is abscinded a part of the codpiece or has concaved that in the circuit, then you ought to cover it with old coction or with a thread made of cloth of it, as when you have treated loaves or rags, its humidity; and strengthen that within the third day; and then process that and cure it with that which ought of the dressings until it is healed.
But if blood flows during the operation, then you administer cold water and wine to which you have wrung a cloth, and place it over the place of the blood flow many times.
But if the blood flow persists, then you must administer regimen and cure as I have recommended in many places in this book of ours and of division.
But if it is in wintertime, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you must enfund  powders in wine and caut oil, and place those on the place.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then you must place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all that be cold until the third day, as we have said, and then you must untie the abscess and cleanse it and administer to it that which is fitting for its cure until it is healed.
And thus is that which is necessary of the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said of every abscess in what manner is the way of its cure by chapters singularly.
Chapter .xli.
Of the incision of abscesses that come in the nape of the head.
In the nape of the head, small abscesses, and they are of a kind of nodes that contain tunics that are to their making; and the kinds of them are many.
And of them are pimples, and of those are those that contain humidity similar to lime. And of those are those that contain humidity similar to dust, and resembling to them; and of those are those that are stony, hard.
And in the incision of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must the extraction of those does not make contrary artery.
And the operation in incision of those is that you probe those with an instrument the form of which comes near thus, the one which is called entromes, as long as you know that it contains.
Because if that which contains is humidity, then you split that with a section according to the length by superficial section according to this form:
And it begins in the section of the line of .B. into the line of .G. Therefore, as the humidity is evacuated, then you excoriate that skin that contains that humidity, and do not leave of that any cause of all, because troops many times return, if there remain of that any cause.
And then you submerge the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that the wound and leave it for another day, because with that you corrode all that is rotten of that skin.
And then repeat over that wound with Egyptian ointment second and third times if you need it, until you are confident that there is no rotten any cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise that according to this form: with a section having the form of a cross, and get oncis between two lips of the section and scrape that from all parts, and exert your strength in the extraction of the tunic which contains that.
But if your artery makes contrariety, then do what I have recounted to you first.
And similarly do in the stony abscess of incision and cure according to what I have told you; and incision upon a stony abscess is lighter, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
And sometimes there are some of these abscesses that are in the head in some men with which of all there is no humidity; the cause is because I incised upon an abscess in the head of an old woman and retrieved the abscess as if it were a hard, rough, white, thing which could not be drained, and if anyone was struck with that, it would plague them.
But in the other abscesses accidents in the head other than this one is not this chapter, as well as the abscesses that come to the heads of children and you should the roots of the ears, but the incision of all these be superficial.
And pause the perforation of those of the lower part of them so that the body of the sania be relieved in the lower parts.
And then cure those with that which is fitting for that cure.
Chapter .xlii.
Of the incision of scrophulas that happen in the neck.
Many times these abscesses develop in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they happen in other parts of the body.
And those that happen in the neck, and there are many that are generated among them, and all scrophula of those is within its own tunic, and as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
And the kinds of these scrophulas are many, because of those some are stony, and of those some contain humidities, and of those are malignant ones that do not obey to cure.
Therefore, in that one which you see of good disposition in the Touch, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the neck, and is mild in all parts, and is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not hard, then you must incise that with a superficial section from the lower part to the upper part of the body of the line of .G. into the line of .B., and scrape that from all parts, and extend the lips of the neck with an onci, or with many oncis if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more caution that the vein or nerve is not cut.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not injure your hand, or the patient, and that you cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from your operation, then place in the wound vitriol trissat or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and tighten the wound, and leave that inside which rests the sharpness of the abscess and is softened the wound and begin to be pus-filled. When the blood is cut.
Therefore return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then inquire with your little finger if there is any cause of the other small scrofulas, therefore cut those and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the large scrofulas vein, then cover it so that you do not cut that scrofulas from its root. Cover it so that you place it with a strong bent iron and leave it there until it falls by itself.
And then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that.
And if you cut that scrofulas entirely, then cover it so that you adjust the two lips of the wound and close it as soon as pus that there is no superfluous remains.
But if you see that there is superfluity due to the size of the scrofulas, cover it so that you understand to cut the root of it, and extract it and administer suture and what is said.
And those of the scrofulas that contain humidity, pierce it with a superficial perforation where you see the place of maturation of it, and place a perforation of that which seeps the pus from the bottom of the body, as we have said.
And then administer perforation, calques with ointment and similar to those, so that it corrodes what is left of the corruption. And then when you see the wound already clean, then cure it with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter .xliii.
Of the section of the pile of the abscess that happens within the throat.
The ancients said this section in the throat, and no one in our land has done it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men having a squint, cover that the extraction of the throat be avoided, as for that it is not done well for because all the veins and the largest of the body are here.
But in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the canal, cover to use the section of the throat to avoid the damage which is done by perforation.
Therefore, when we want this, that they cut the throat below three circles of the circles of the throat, or four with a small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, that the section be in the cartilage, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood of it are there.
And if the physician is fearful, cover that he extends the chain of the throat with an onion, and then cuts the chain until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if he sees any cause.
And then cut the cartilage as we have recommended; and it is significant over the section of the canal by the flame which is of that which is emitted with that which is discolored and by the abscess of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Then as the hour is remade in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the chain of the wound, and stitch that only with the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make flesh grow until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, the exposition is no more than seeing that some of these abscesses have already opened the throat of the patient, and the patient has come into death, and the skin of it is dried, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
And for that reason we command to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice of it is for three days; and then we command so the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and put it in her throat and cut with it a part of the canal of the lung, and I was called to the cure of it, and I brought back the woman as if she were dying, and I uncovered the wound and brought back the blood which was coming out of the wound little by little.
Therefore I was confessed that she had not cut a vein nor guided it, and the wind was coming out of the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
And I did not accuse the servant if not for the hoarse voice, and after some days she returned to the improvement of her dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epilhot there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of incision over the abscess which occurs in the throat outside, and is called hernia of the throat.
This abscess called hernia of the throat is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it moves in women.
And it is according to two manners, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one it is not a matter of curing.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that is made by a blockage of an artery, and in that one there is fear. And no cove that it be presumed to him like iron, but in that one that is small. And then you probe that and investigate it with the finger, and if you find that it resembles a fatty node, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise it as you would with the nodes, and extract it with the instrument that contains it from the skin and bursa; and otherwise, then you scrutinize its whole being, and then care for the area with what is necessary for healing before it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of incision of the kinds of nodes.
Of nodes there are many kinds, and I have already said all the kinds of them in the division.
And I must recount thus the difference between a node and an excrescence as if making a doubt.
Therefore I say that in an excrescence there is heat and fever and vehement pain until the boiling of the superfluity is settled; and it is complicated putrefaction that at the hour the fever, the pain, and the heat cease.
But in a node there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it counts that which is in the sac, which is in the u sac properly.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a seed and it is made thus as a vase, whether it is larger or smaller, and they are according to two kinds, whether they are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, that you examine it and inquire into it at the beginning with the instrument that is called intromes, according to what will come its form in the chapter which is near this.
And the manner of inquiry of abscesses and of all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you revolve your fingers with that little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the cord.
And then finally your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then you extract the intromes and consider what is emitted in the trace of it.
And if the humidity is flowing out, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial incision according to what I have said in the other abscesses.
And if from the trace of the intromes there is no humidity, then you know that it is fatty.
And dry over it with an incision having the shape of a cross according to this form: as you are taught, and suspend that with forceps, and excise the cord from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sac, if you can, over it and extract that sania with the node.
But if it is ruptured in the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many times it should be so, and then you extract it in pieces until nothing of it remains.
For if anything of it remains, little or much, the node returns according to the most.
And if you see that any small part of it remains, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders sharp and strengthen the wound, and place over it a cautery, and cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you stitch the two lips of it and cure it with what encases.
But if a pulsatile vein is in it, or non-pulsatile, then you coat and moisten the place with a thrice-strained vinegar that is vitriol, and leave that strait for two or three days until you can stitch the wound and that the boiling of the blood is calmed; and then return to incise what is broken of the node.
Chapter XLVI.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary in incision and perforation.
Of those there are the forms of the intromes, and they are of three kinds, of which some are large, and of them some are medium, and of them some are small.
The form of the large intromes is this:
The form of the small intromes is this:
They are made of iron, of lead, of extremities properly rounded, so that they fit the entrance into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the instruments called probes, and one of them is called berid.
And there are three kinds, which are large, medium, and small.
The form of the large one, the form of it:
The form of the medium one, the form of it:
The form of the small one, the form of it:
It is convenient that they be for those abscesses and fistulas and buboes so that among those are of the bones and other causes.
And they are made round, large, long, like large needles with which the sutures are sewn, and they are made of citrus gold, or of copper or of iron, and the best are when they are made of citrus gold.
And they are made the instruments of black plume, which are agreed that for those to be opened the fistulas in the concavity of which are reflections, that they are reflected with their lightness with those reflections.
And they are of three kinds, because some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its stricture.
Form of the large plume instrument:
Form of the medium plume instrument:
Form of the small plume instrument:
The forms of the probes are of many kinds, because some of them are simple, to which there is only one curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
And of them are probes orps, and they are of three kinds.
And of those are probes having two curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
And of those are having three curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Form of a simple small probe, the form of it:
Form of a large probe having two curvatures: Form of a medium probe having two curvatures: Form of a small probe having two curvatures:
Form of a large probe having three curvatures:
Form of a medium probe having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three kinds, because some of them are large, medium, and small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of the medium scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but that it may be made gently in the scraping of the nodes the fear of incision of vein or nerve, and so that the disease may be healed and tranquility be restored a little by the application which destroys the scraping of the abscess.
And these are the forms of spatulas, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you see.
They are made of gold and are similar to a ray with which and alcohol is made.
And it is in the lateral extremity pointed with a spatula hidden and in that it runs to the parts inside and outside, when you want, as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden among the fingers when perforating the abscesses and not perceived by the patients, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of leeches with which the flow of blood is abscised, and they are of three kinds; large, medium, and small; the forms of them:
They are made of citrus gold, round with some length, and they are subtle.
And so that these kinds of leeches, large, medium, and small, may be used so that for those you abscise the flow of blood with speed in need, and then when to you first it is not medicine.
However, do not use those to abscise blood in every location of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy locations, such as in the folds of the arms and legs, and in the folds of the breasts, and belly, and groin, and similar to their fleshy, moist folds.
And sometimes they are made of those instruments other small ones resembling scorsas of fisacs according to this form; by which the blood is abscised when it is done by phlebotomy, or by incision of vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
Of the cure of the nipples of men which are assembled from women.
Sometimes the nipples of certain men are inflamed, as they begin to be hairy, and then the nipples are inflamed, and the nipples are assembled from women, and Roman abscesses, they are removed.
And to that one who avows this, it is commanded that he should incise those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B. into the line of G., and then exfoliate the entire thickness, and then fill the wound with a medication of a flesh-colored hue, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with sewing, and care for that until it is healed.
But if the nipple declines to the parts below and is softened by its magnitude as it should be in women, then it should be split in two parts, its surpluses being raised, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, of which each one should be contained in the other, as long as the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line of B. and the line of G. And then exfoliate the chain which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said of the suture and the powders, what is necessary for the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not comply with the incision of what is commanded to be incised because of the restlessness of the patient, and because of the flow of blood, then it is commanded that you fill the wound with a cot submerged in corrosive wash and leave it until that which corrodes is removed from the gray matter, and then care for that until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of the perforation of abscesses that come from below the nipple.
These abscesses that come from below the nipple are of the species of scrophulas, hard ones, which contain a peel that is removed.
And of those there are some that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G. to the line of B. And as soon as everything that is in the abscess of the sania is evacuated, then you fill it with old cot and leave it for the next day.
And then the cot should be removed and it should be cured with a suitable wash to it, until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the species of nodes is, and of the scrophulas, then you should split it as we have said in the section on scrophulas, equally.
But if the wound is extended in such a way that it is a pouting, then administer to it cautery according to what we have said before.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur by artery or vein.
When an artery is ruptured, and the chain which is above it is consolidated, then many times abscesses occur. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are by the artery or vein: that when an abscess is by artery it is long aggregated in the forefront of the body; and that when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel in it that which is stridor.
And that which is by vein is round and manifest of the body.
And incision on this abscess is an error, and most of all in that which is below the armpits, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in most places of the body; and it is a great one, therefore it is commanded that its cure with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or on the head, it should be avoided.
But on that which is of those by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, split it in the chain with a long section; and then break the section with hooks and then the artery, and deliura of the tunics until it is uncovered.
And then put on that needle and make it penetrate into the other part, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which cause you to yeen see in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then prick the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until there is all the blood in it, and it is dissolved the abscess.
And then administer a cure in which is engendered power until the ligaments fall; and then cure that with suitable washes to it until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess by the section of a vein, then it is commanded that you have with your hand that which is possible of the abscess with the chain, and then introduce the needle below the place which you have had below your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract that from the other part, and then ligua the abscess with a good ligament according to as I have told you in the ligament of uva4 of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then introduce the thread with that needle below all the abscess, and then make the incision of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle place of it until when it is issued that which is in it, then you should split the superfluity of the chain, and leave that which of it is tied.
And then place on it the powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with calx and unguents while it is healing.
Chapter 1 of the abscess which happens due to twisting of nerves.
Thus as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they are struck or caused by excessive work, and by similar means.
And it is made most in the places of the armpits or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are sore.
And it is a severe abscess, and it is assembled to the color of the other body, and in the majority of its dispositions there is a sense of it, and when it is squeezed with violence, the patient feels a sensation of stupor.
And it is not an abscess that is added in the front of the body, and for this reason the chain is left, and it is sore to every part and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore those that are in the joints should not be enclosed with iron, because very quickly it will cause contraction.
But those that are in the head or on the forehead,  should be enclosed with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then you should take it with the forceps and cut it from the root.
And if it is large, then you should suspend it with a hook, and scrape it, and then cover it; and adjust the patch with sutures, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter .li.
Of the section of an abscess which happens from a boil that happens to the belly.
And it happens to some men, growths in the bellies of those and in other parts of the body of those, the ones that are called fungals because of their similarity to those with fungi, of those whose root is subtle and the head of it is thick; and already the lips of those are turned, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are greatly magnified.
And I have already seen one, and in the belly of him there were two parts that were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white, of fine root.
And already the lips of those were turned and were opening, and humidity ran from it all the time.
Therefore I incised those and removed one in weight of eighteen ounces. and the other, which weighed six ounces.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider when the patient is humid, and the color of the boil is white, humid, of subtle root; then you should incise it with a spatula, and be in your presence with cauteries in the fire, because many times the blood should be expelled from the section of it; and if you see the blood, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient fearful and timid, guard yourself from incision with iron; but then take a piece of fresh lead made, and strengthen it with that boil, the manner of which is that which we have said; and leave it for two days.
And then adjust in the stricture of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease strengthening the lead greatly in the boil, until it is cut and falls by itself from its work.
But if the boil is of thick root, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and of pain, and more so in that which is in the belly.
But possibly it is that you should incise the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure it until the patch is healed.
And guard yourself that you do not presume to incise those which are of dark color, of little feeling, of light regard, for those are cancerous abscesses.
And I come with a reminder of cancer, then.
Chapter .lii.
Of the cure of eminence of the navel.
Eminence of the navel is made by many causes; or by fissures of the fascia which is over the belly, and yeys of it the skin or intestine according to what it should be in the other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery according to what is said before, or by wind contracted in it.
But if it is by fissure of the fascia and by the emission of the skin, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is lion of pain, and then appears of diverse situations. And if it is by the egress of the intestine, then the situation of it with that which we have recounted, of greater diversity, and when you press it with your fingers it is hidden, and then returns; and very much is it with it, and it is magnified much by the entrance of bath and vehement work.
But if it is by humidity, then it is lion and is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it crewed.
And if it is by blood, then with these signs appears the abscess in blackness declining.
But if it is by flesh nothing, then the abscess is severe, thick and hard, and it is placed according to a quantity.
But if it is by wind, then the touch of it is lion.
And the operation on him is that you consider at this time if the prominence of the navel is from artery blood, or from vein, or from wind; therefore, if it is prohibited from the cure of him, because in that there is fear and terror as you have been taught in the chapter in which I have said the abscesses by artery and by vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is from the intestine or from the hernia, then you must order the patient to hold his leg, and be standing extended; and then send him to touch in the circuit of all the navel, and then command him that he stays between his hands over his two, and then surround him with a spatula wide in the circuit of the navel over the place which you have marked with the touch; and then extend the majority of the abscess to the parts above with a large unci; and then tie it in the circuit with a strong thread or with a lead and the manner of tying decent.
And then break the edge of the abscess extended over the ligament and introduce your finger into that indication and seek the intestine; and if you have found it or guarded by the ligament, then you extract it and impel the intestine to the parts outside of the belly.
And if you have found the hernia, then take that with an unci; and incise the superfluities of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put in those two strong threads and introduce the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a manner of cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place until you can see the skin extended and fall by itself; or incise it when it is subtle and you can, and then cure it with water that you must use from the sponge until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh nothing in it or by humidity, then you must concave the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or the humidity, which you find in it, and then cure it with water that you must use and that consolidates the place.
Chapter .liii.
Of the cure of cancer.
We have already said, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner it is to be cured with medicines, and that it is avoided in it the cure with iron because it should not be ulcerated; and we have said cancer generated in the major and caution of the cure of it.
And they said the ancients that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible the eradication of it, as of the cancer which is in the nipples or in the groin and their likeness of the members allocated to extract all of that, and mostly when it is beginning small.
But when it is ancient and is large, you must not have proper to it, because I have not been able to heal from that ailment nor have I seen another, nor that has come to that.
And the operation on it is when it is allocated as we have said, is that you proceed and leave the patient and purge of black cholera sometimes, and then blood that, if it is found manifest repletion.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which he is placed with the operation, and then prohibit in the track uncis which you must have for that; and then concave from all part with the codena good extraction until no remains any cause of the roots of it. And leave the blood to run, and do not cut that lightly, and express the places, and absterge the thick blood all with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible for you of the instruments.
But if to you makes contrariety of thick blood incision of vein or of artery, then cauterize that until the flux of the blood is ceased, and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .liv.
Of the cure of hydropics.
We have already recounted, in the division, of the species of hydropics of the water, and the signs of each species, of the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of althitas alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanistres nor to the species of hypoarchas, because that is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of hydropic tympanistres with medicines and do not confer your medication, then consider, that if to the patient already is achieved debility, or is with that other ailment other hydropics, as if it is in it cough or body of belly and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not medicate him with iron, because fear is over that.
But if you see the patient of exuberant virtue, and in him there is no other ailment but hydropics alone, and not a child nor old, then the manner of the operation of it is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister then expresses the belly of him with his hand, expel the water to the part below the navel, and then take a spatula spines according to this form:
it is of two parts acute long, of acute extremity as a spatula; but however be in it some shortness little by little, so that in the operation with that you do not pass inside the intestine, and that you lead that.
And consider if the generation of dropsy is from the bowels, for when you have the section, it should be a distance from the navel by the amount of three fingers to the left, on the right of it on the belly.
But if the generation of dropsy is due to liver disease, then your section should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is from the spleen, then your section should be on the right.
And do not let your section be on the side on which the patient wants to make the incision, so that the superfluities do not flow to that place freely.
And then pierce with the instrument the entire area, and then insert into that section, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the skin and the flesh, and you shall scrape that; and if the quantity is that of a fingernail or thereabouts.
And then pierce the flesh until the spatula reaches the desired place, and it is the place of the water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or bronze or lead, to which at the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on the sides of it there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the extremity of it is made blunt in the manner of a feather, as sometimes:
And at the extremity of it which is most superior there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then it is at once drawn over the instrument, therefore evacuates the water in the middle hour quantity, for if you evacuate from that more than you ought in the hour, forthwith the patient will die from the resolution of his animal spirit, or you will bring upon him a five-pointed death which is near to death.
But evacuate from that according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what the dispositions of the patient signify to you from the virtue of his pulse and from the goodness of him.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes this, for it is immediately retained by the skin which retains the hole that is on the flesh of which, and I tell you that you should pierce that in this manner.
And then repeat the instrument on the other day if the patient tolerates water, and extract a small quantity of water, and do water for some days on fear, and guard yourself from error so that it does not remain of the water but little.
But if you fear for the patient, and let out a great quantity of water, then cure that with burial in sand, and put a sweat bath, and in the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen and the liver after the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in that which precedes.
Chapter .lx.
Of the cure of children who are born with the places of urine unperforated.
Sometimes some of the children are thus from the womb of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or it is a straight hole or it is not in its place).
Therefore, it is necessary to cut with perforation of it as soon as it is born with a very fine spatula according to this form:
And place in the hole a fine lead nail and tie that, and keep it for three days or for four.
And when it wants to urinate, it is regurgitated and urine; and then return that.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place, does not let this clear.
But that one of whom the hole is straight, be medicated with a lead nail, as we have said, for too many days until it is amplified.
But those in whom the hole is not in its place, are led by the cause, which is that of those, that one who is born and the hole is the end of the head of the vagina because it cannot urinate to the sides, until it elevates the vagina with its hand to the sides above; and it is not to him generation, for so the sperm cannot reach the mother according to straightness, and it is a very bad disease.
And the manner of the operation in him is that the patient be turned over on his two, and then extend the head of the vagina of him with your left hand with vehement extraction, and inscribe the head of the head of the vagina of the place of the perpucii with a sharp spatula, as it is inscribed of a feather, or that you do not scrape any part, so that the middle of him comes to resemble the head of the vagina and that the hole falls in the middle place as it ought.
And guard yourself in your operation of flux of blood, for many times accidents happen with water; and pause you to him with the water that you abscind the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lvi.
Of albater which happens in the prepucii in the head of the vagina and of corruption and blackness and adherence of the prepucii of the head of the vagina.
Many times this albater happens in the vagina and it is an eminence of bad flesh.
And one of those is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, cover that you suspend with a fine thread and cut that which is within that world; and then place upon that cut submerge in Egyptian poultice; and then that, cure it with a diaphana poultice while it is healing.
And if it is malignant, of a white color, then you must administer a cautery near the incision of it and the root of it.
But if it is on the prepuce of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then you must treat the ulcer that is inside at the beginning while it is consolidating; and then you treat the outside one, because when you treat the outside one at the same time as the prepuce, it is not guaranteed that it will not be troubled.
And if ulcers occur in the genitals and on the prepuce, blackening and corruption, then you must cleanse all that which is already corrupted and that which is about to corrupt or that which is already corrupted; and then apply a line over that with honey, which is mixed with flour of the rind of pomegranate and of crushed and sifted earthworms.
And then treat that with the other treatment while it is healing.
But if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
Because the cautery is useful in two positions at once, so it is for the flow of blood and for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and is destroyed all at once, then you must introduce into the flesh of the prepuce a lead pipe so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in the one whose prepuce is his, and on it circumcision is not performed; and when adhesion occurs by plague or by abscess) you must excoriate with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
And if it is difficult to separate them delicately, then you must excoriate with a spatula some cause of the head of the penis and the prepuce, and this is because the prepuce, when it is subtle, very easily is perforated by its subtlety.
And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a thread of the subtle, which is already softened in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then treat it with a styptic until it is consolidated.
Chapter .lvii.
Of the purification of children and the treatment of that which occurs to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other plagues: but since it is of our operation and our will, and it is of those who are circumcised, it is necessary that we assign in that better operation and way lighter loss to health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in some of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it by experience, the reason for which is that I have found the majority of the artisans and barbers use circumcision and purification with a scalpel and with torrets; and they use a ligature with a thread and an incision with the nail.
And I have already tried all these manners and have not found better purification with shears, with a ligature with thread than in purification with the nail, because many times the bandage escapes the lower part, because the prepuce has two tunics, and the tunic remains deeper, and very easily it is forced to another incision and certain pain. And in purification which is done by alphecati, and is digital, of which the barbers use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secured, because very easily it enters into the furrow of it.
But in the operation with the nail, very easily it obtains iron and corrupts your operation. And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and many times it is in such a manner that there is no need for purification, and I have seen that.
But of the purification that is done with shears and ligatures with thread, the goodness, experience has shown me, because the shears are of proportional incision, because the sharpness that is below is as the sharpness that is above; and therefore as you press your hand so proportionally to two sharpnesses, and you incise according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the thread with a figure containing the foreskin of the penis entirely, with which there is no error of all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie down mostly if it is of those that understand a little, that you do nothing but you tie the thread in his penis only, and that you leave that for another day.
And then do that with all that manner that is to your possibility of that which receives his intelligence. And then make him stay between your arms, prepared, and do not be seen by him; and hide the shears in your hand or below your leg, that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, and pull that out until the end of the rectum comes out, and then modify that which is attached to it of filth.
The shape of the forceps for modification, this is the shape:
One set of limbs should be non-cutting and the other should be cutting, so that the handle of the key does not come out, and the length of the two points is as long as the length of two handles equally.
But the error in modification is that if the rectum is expelled entirely, or part of it, the incision should be made.
Therefore, as soon as you extend that with your fingernail in front of the abscess of the place and that you cut it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract it with a tool and cut it.
But if three days have passed, and what is swollen remains below the rectum, then you let it out until the abscess is cauterized, and exfoliate that with facility, and cut it according to what you have prepared.
And guard yourself from the end of the rectum, because it would not be good for it.
And therefore cure that with the water that the plague consolidates from the powders that we have recommended in the treatise of the powders.
And if it is cut from the rectum beyond measure, and obeys the parts above, then that does not harm it.
And but cure that with the water that we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lviii.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction caused by a stone or by congealed blood, or by pus or by a tumor, and similar to those of the water that we have said of the ways of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with the water that we have said and the cause is very strongly made on the patient, then it is necessary that you administer extraction from it with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It should be of silver and be a fine lion's claw, as long as a bird's quill with the fineness of a long ray in the likeness of a palm and a half, to which there is a fine tube in the head of it.
And the way of ejecting the urine with that is that you take the double thread and tie it in the middle of it wool or thread for good binding; and insert the limbs of the thread into the part below the syringe, and cut with the forceps if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, but insert it into the tube with force, and then insert the syringe with butter and with hog's album.
And make the patient lie on his back, and lubricate his bladder and rectum with olive oil, and olive oil and water.
And then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the rectum; and then double the rectum above the navel; and then push the syringe into that; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and that the patient has reached the desired cause, and it is not done according to this order, but the meat in which it goes to tortuosity.
And then extend the thread with the wool little by little, because the urine seeps the wool.
Then extract it and do for the cure of urine, and use the syringe, do not cease to do water and use the syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient feels relief.
Chapter .lix.
Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with clampcedra and with similar instruments which are according to water.
When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or it is constricted by a tumor, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it is done with an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is the shape of it:
But in the middle of it is a blind end, so it is closed. And in that there are three straps: two on one side, just as many times.
At the beginning is the concave place, in which is that which is called the navel, and as much as it is filled, it is added, as long as any cause is drawn from the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, it is drawn, and when it is expelled long, according to how it is clamped with the one with which naphtha is thrown in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, as you want to prohibit humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of the clamp into the humidity, and pull with that which is pushed to the upper parts, so that the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the clamp.
And then insert the extremity of the clamp into the vagina as we have recounted in the tongue; and then push the humidity with that which you push, so that that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels that.
Shape of the subtle cristeri with which the bladder is cristerized, and that is the shape:
And it is made of silver or of lead, of which the head is pus or similar to a small feather, and below it a canal is threaded.
And then take the bladder of motion, and place in it the humidity that you want to cristerize in the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong double ligature with a thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the extremity of the cristeri into the vagina.
And then tighten your hand over the bladder with the humidity with structure descent until the patient feels that that humidity has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder present, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and perforate it with all its roundness; and then insert a strong thread into those holes, so that it is rolled; and then attach the circle so that it is attached to the sofatur, because you place in it the water that you want of the humidities, and oils and waters.
And then you tie that to the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter .lx.
Of extraction of stone.
We have already said in the division the species of stone and cure of it with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have said the stone in which catz operation with hand, and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And you so narrating that with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly comes to children; and of the signs of it is that the urine that is issued from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in it sand; and the patient feels his vagina, and often it pains, and then it is dressed; and with that yeys foro the anus in many of those.
And it is easier the healing of the children of that into which they have reached fourteen years; and it is difficult cure in the old. But in the young it is milder for that which is among those.
And of that of which the stone is larger and the cure is more easier; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, as we come to the cure of that, cove at the beginning of that which we modify the patient with the cristeri which extracts all the fenda which is in their bowels; because that fenda sometimes prohibits the envy of the stone from the investigation of it.
And then be present the patient with their feet and be counted and maugut in so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or what jumps from there or sometimes.
And then do that cezer between your hands prepared, and the hands of it are below the things of it, so that the bladder is entirely made declining to the lower parts.
And then pierce that and all of it through.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you immediately take care with section upon it.
And if you do not catch all of it from below your touch, then cove that you anoint with oil your said indicator of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the said miga if it is a young one complete, and insert that into their anus. And pierce of the stone while it stays below your said. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon that with your said, and expel that to the parts outside ves the place of which you the section.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand extend the genitals to the upper parts, and with his other hand re-moves the codena which is below the genitals, in part of the place in which the section is made.
And then insert a spatula be inscident of which this is the form of it: And cut in him that which is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle place, but to the left side of the left thigh; and let the incision be over that bone and your finger be in the anus, and let it be a transverse incision, so that the external incision be wide and the inner narrow according to the quantity that comes out of the bone to him possible, and no more, for very much compress your finger which is in the anus the bone must the incision, and is forced-out its function.
And know that of the bone there is some to which so angle and margins, so that the excision of it is made difficult by this.
And of that which is like a gland, and it is round, and it is made of it light excision.
Therefore if it is that one which so angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not so forced-out, then cover that which you engage upon that, or that which you string upon that with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is as a file as you string upon the bone, and do not escape from it; or that you insert after that a subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you cannot upon that, then you enlarge the tract a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut it in strength with vitriol trissat.
But if the bone is more than one, then at the beginning you impel the hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then cut upon it; and then impel a little upon that; and similarly do if there are more than two.
And if it is a very large bone, then ignorance is that you cut that with a large incision, for it happens to the patient one of two causes: either that it dies or that it endows to him a continuous distillation of urine, for that reason that the place is not of all consolidated.
But administer expulsion of it while it is forced-out, or engage in the fracture of it with the forceps until it extracts that in pieces.
Therefore, when you will have completed your operation, then fill the wound with poultices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that. And pause upon that cloth infused in oil and wine, or in oil rubbed and water, so that abscess caut be given.
And then turn the patient over on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when that you will have untied, embrocate the place with water and a little oil, and then cure that with an enguent diafinicon and with an enguent diabazilicon until it be healed.
But if in the wound there happens abscess caut, putrid and corrosive, and of that semblance as if the blood is in the bladder frozen, and for that the urine is prohibited (and this is known by the egress of blood with urine), then therefore insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it provokes the bladder to corruption of the bladder and of it putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with wine vinegar, water and salt, and in opposition to all species, with that which you convene to it of the cure until it be healed.
And cover in the hours of all the cure that you lie both the thighs and adjust the medicines which are placed upon the place.
And if the bone is small and is in the middle of the vagina, and it is fixed in it, and the excretion of urine is prohibited, then cure that with water which I recommend before you reach incision, for troops accustomed by this cure are accused of incision; and already I have explained this, and it is that you take a perforator of iron, the shape of which is:
of triangular extremity, sharp, fixed in a shaft.
And then take a thread, and tie with that the vagina below the bone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the vagina, perforating with facility until the perforator comes to that bone. And revolve the perforator with your hand in that bone little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it until you make that of the other part penetrate; for the urine is immediately absolved.
And then press your hand upon that which is broken of the bone from the outward part of the vagina, for that is fractured, and it is forced-out with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not to your apparelled for any cause which prohibits you from that, then tie a thread below the bone, and another thread above the bone. And then cut upon the bone in that vagina between two ligatures. And then extract that. And then untie the ligature and modify the congealed blood, which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary ligature of thread below the bone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, for when the thread is untied, the codena returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for that it is necessary to you when you tie the thread above, that you elevate the codena to the parts above, or that it returns you must compliment, and covers the wound as we have said.
Chapter .lxi.
On the extraction of a stone from women.
Stones in women are rarely produced.
But if a stone is found in any of them, then its cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by many methods.
One of them is that the woman, if she is very young, is a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman well-versed who describes herself to the physician when she is chaste, or she is of women who have husbands.
The third is that you do not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially the operation with her hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the incision over the stone in women is distant from the place of the stone, because you indiges of pre-incision, and in that there is fear.
But if necessity provokes you to this, then you must take a woman physician well-versed, and few are found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek a physician skilled and subtle, or present a woman matron well-versed in the deeds of women, or a woman who in this art has been partially taught.
Therefore, make that present, and command her to do everything that you tell her, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; the reason for which is that she should regard if the woman is a virgin, then she must put her finger in her anus and want the stone.
Therefore, if that is found, force her, and then command her to insert herself into that.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and inquire about the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and comprehends that with good understanding.
Therefore, if that is found, then command her to gradually withdraw that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the sum of her virtue until it reaches the root of the vagina.
And then insert herself into that position of the majority of the vagina at the root of the vagina, wherever that part is stopped and center the stone in that part, and the finger of her should not be removed from the stone, even after it.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the ray onto that incision, and if she feels the stone, then adjust the incision according to the quantity which she knows that the stone is thrown from that.
And know that the species of stones are many: for some are small and large, and sharp and rough, and long and round, and having ramps.
Therefore, you know how many species there are of them by what you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust in the location vitriol trissat and keep it there for an hour until the blood is abstained, and then return to your operation until the stone is thrown out.
And do that you prepare with you of the instruments which are said in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by those in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of the blood is from the artery that is incised, then you place powder on the location and tighten that with poultices and stricture descend, and do not repeat that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for very soon the patient will die. And then cure the wound.
And when the sharpness of the blood has subsided after a few days, and the place can be opened, then you return to your operation until the stone is thrown out.
Chapter lxii.
On the incision of a hernia.
Hernia ayguoza is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which is below the codena of the genitals containing the huou, and is called ciphac.
And some times it is in the proper panniculus which has prepared it nature in the part of the huou, before it is known that there is another huou; and it is the codena of the genitals between the white membrane which we have said, and it is not that but tart.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which happens to the genitals, because into those it is poured this matter, and sometimes it happens by percussion made upon the genitals.
And this moisture is having many colors, for the color of it is either declining to citrine or sanguine, or red, or it is black and mucous, or it is aqueous white, and this is the most common.
And the signs by which it is known that this accumulation of water is there are: for if it is in the white membrane which we have said, then the abscess is round declining a little in length as if it were the figure of a huou, and appears the genitals, for the moisture contains that from all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is round in the part of the huou and by this it is estimated that it is another huou.
And if the moisture is between the codena of the genitals and the white membrane, then it feels below the centiment.
And as you want the knowledge of the color of the moisture, then you try the color of the moisture in the abscess with an introme that is inserted into the cavity of which the shape is preceded; and according to what is seen in the vestige of the introme, judge of that which is inside of it.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of him with iron, then we command the patient to be fleubotomized if this is possible, and sometimes we purge his bowels.
And then have him lie on his back on some cause a little higher, and place some warm cloths over him.
And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow on the right side of him, the one extending his arm to one of two sides to the groin of the genitals and to the parting of the navel of the belly.
And then take a broad spatula and split the groin of the genitals from the middle place for the length into the proximity of the pubic bone.
And let the section be made according to the rectum, equally distant from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white ciph, comprehending.
And scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not cut that; and your excoriation with which you excoriate by a wide partition that it may be suspended with the most and subtly examine with the excoriation according to the quantity as much as possible.
And then perforate the white ciph full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two labia of the section with a hook, and extend the ciph to the upper parts; and do not touch the groin comprehending, and incise the ciph in that manner that is to your possible. And incise that with its totality or in pieces, and mostly its subtle side, for if you do not scrutinize exquisitely the incision of it, it is not done with certainty that the water does not return.
But if the humor proceeds from that outside of its groin in the hour of your operation, then when you will have completed the section of the ciph, return deint that, and then adjust the two labia of the groin of the genitals with suture, and then cure that as with other plagues, until it is healed.
And if the humor is corrupted by another malady, then you must lie the vessels which are sore on the suspensory, and extract the humor, and then cure that with the water that we have said.
But if the water is aggregated in two parts at once, then you know that two are the hernias; therefore incise that partition according to that you have done in the other equally; and if it is to your view that it be an operation, then you do it.
And then you abstergiys the blood, and introduce into the sections wool submerged in oil or in rose oil; and place before another wool which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand that over the genitals and the navel of the belly; and place above doubled cloths and powders, and lie those above with a ligament which is according to this form:
And then be taken the cloths and be humplitz of carded wool according to this semblance; and be made the extremities with which it is pressed of cloth or of wet wool, and be added with structure in the braguier of the breeches, and one of the extremities presses from the buttock into the two, and the second presses at the parting of the pubic bone, and two extremities over two thighs of below and two other extremities over two hipbones, and all structure be adjusted in the braguier of the breeches.
And some times this hernia is medicated artificially with cautery in place of section with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cutellar cautery and that you incise with that the groin of the genitals, and it is ignited according to that we have recounted until it be discovered the white ciph containing the water, and then you take cautery according to this form: and it is assembled like a Greek letter.
And then perforate with that ciph, and it is ignited until all the humidity be thrown out.
And then extend the ciph with hooks, and scrape with hooks, and scrape with a subtle cautery ignited; and incise that according to that is to your possible until you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself of the humor that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is more saving and more distant from the flux of blood, and better than operation with section.
But if to you there is contrariety abscess caut in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or flux of blood, then you must cure that contrariety that it does to you for that, with cure the which convenes to him according to that is said.
But if the patient is fearful, and does not wait for the second operation for its horror, then administer perforation according to that we have recounted here; and it is when it is certified you must, for that which we have said of the significations, that that hernia is aqueous.
Then you must make the patient lie on some elevated cushion, and then perforate the abscess in the lowest part of it with a broad spatula, and place the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the aperture be wide until all the water runs out.
And then place on the spot cloth and lie that and leave that, so that it runs the remaining of the water. And then cure that until the plague is healed.
But if contrariety is in the emission of the water in that hour you perforate that: and this is not done except for that because the white pannicol in the orifice of the plague makes contrariety and prohibits the eyssiment of the water, then you must put in the plague pain or instrument with which is extracted the water of the hydropitz, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the opprecio of the plague a little.
And know that the water returns, and it is watered for about six months or around those; and as it is watered, then it is perforated according to that same manner, so that the patient will pass his days thus.
Chapter .lxiii.
Of the section on fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section on this hernia, there is fear of losing it to harm in the major dispositions; for to me it has been seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better.
And you are remembering the operation on that and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that the abscesses arise in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and this is done for many causes: or by excess acute aggravation, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not aggravated in pain, and the abscess is severe.
And very much the abscess is petrified, of which the color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it is done by the knotting of the arteries, and by the inflation of those so that already the memory of it is perceived, or by the inflation of veins.
But that which is by the inflation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and no cove that you touch it.
But that which is done by the inflation of veins is not dispersed by it any cause of the compression with the fingers.
And it is already possible that on this species a section is made and on the other flesh; and that you insert the blade of the genitals, and then extend the fluid to the parts below, and extract that from the white cup, and deliver the suspensory of the vessels, and tie them, and inscise the suspensory as much as you deliver that from all parts of the fluid.
Therefore, if the fluid is already with those flesh consolidated, then you must extract the fluid and inscise it.
And if there is adhesion for any cause of the cup, or between that which is between the vessels, then you must deliver all that adhesion and inscise it by a round incision.
But if it is the birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you must inscise all that which is of it, and extract the fluid as we have said.
Therefore, as the operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
Of the cure of hernia that is of the privy.
It is an abscess enveloped by some envelope seeming to sprout with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult movement exercise and walking over the patient.
And in the cure of this disease it is by fear for that of which it is preceded memory.
However, it is necessary that they say operation on it according to that which I have done the first.
And I say that you must make the patient lie on a raised cushion; and then you will insert the suspensory of the testicles to the parts below; and then take the blade of the genitals with your fingers with the vessels that are probed to the groin; and have those other minister that you, and extend those with vehement extension.
And then inscise with a wide sharp spatula by a transverse section in the right of the vessels while they are the vessels uncovered.
And then excoriate of all parts as much as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And then place in those a needle in which is double thread, and tie that in the first of the places in which it has fallen, and tie that other time in the back of them. And then inscise those in the middle place by a right section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is added from the fetid and corrupted humors.
And then cure the wound with the cure of the other wounds in which you want to be healed, so that the vessels which are cut may not be one of the two genitals, for it is not bad for that.
But if it has fallen to all the vessels, then the testicles must be extracted or that the testicles for that are tied with the vessels, so that it may be deprived of all nourishment for the incision of the vessels, and that they may be established, or that they are tied so that it may not be helpful with those.
Chapter .lxv.
Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
The advent of this hernia is by a section that must be in the cup extended over the belly of the part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, for that sending the bowels of that rupture to some of the bowels.
And this rupture is either of the cup or of the excrescence of it, and these two species occur for many causes: either percussion, or seizures, or clamor, or elevation of some heavy cause, or semblance.
And the sign of this, when it is by extension of the cup, is that it occurs little by little in a long time, and it does not occur suddenly, and the abscess is equal within a few days for that the cup comprehends the bowel.
And the sign of him is when it is by section of the head, for at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and it is an abscess that appears after the cord, which is a sign of the intestine, and the body of it to the sides before the head.
And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine the cloth, and this intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is made with wind, and sometimes it runs in the intestine, and here it is retained, and this is a great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes evil pain and more intensely when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the species of this disease with iron there is fear, because whoever is to be avoided the capture in that.
And the manner of the operation of that is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand to the sides of his cavity if he obeys his return, and then it is reversed over his belly between your hands, and raise the legs of him.
And then tighten the cord which seizes the cord of the testicles to the sides below, and incise the cord of the testicles all along; and then fix in two lips of the section hooks according to how you indicated to open the section with those.
And if the section according to the quantity that to you is possible that from that the fluid be forgotten.
And then scrape that skin which is below the cord of the testicles, until the white hard skull of each part is discovered.
Then you enter your finger in that which seizes the testicle, in that which is between the white skull, which is below the cord of the fluid, and between the skull second, and resolve with that adhesion that is in the part behind the fluid.
And then with your hand the cord of the testicles to the sides before, and with that extend the white skull on your left hand, and elevate the fluid with the skull to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the fluid upward and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with careful solution.
And seek with your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white hard skull. But if you find of it any cause, then you peel that to the belly below.
And then incise in the part below of the cord of the testicles by section of which runs blood and heals as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And then administer wool immersed in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the binding which we have recommended (and sometimes the white skull is cauterized, which we have said near the incision fear of blood flow, because many times those occur) and leave the binding until by itself it falls.
But if the capture of it is late, then of hot water be embroiled, and place over that until it falls according to what we have said.
And then cure the wound with the other cure of the wounds until it is healed.
Chapter .lxvi.
Of  wind hernia.
In this hernia no one has been seen to have been bold on the cure of it with iron.
And the first ones said that it is made as we have recommended in the hernia that is with vi; which is that you tie the vessels near the section on that with facility of it; and then dry in the middle place around the abscess with that which opened it, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lxvii.
Of the disruption that is made in the ankles.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and emerges the place.
And do not let the genitals any cause of the intestines in the genitals; and if they let, that is little; and return them in all hours.
But if it is prolonged the time with that, it is adjusted fissure in the skull until it descends the intestine in the skull; and occurs that by the extension of the skull which is in the ankles as we have said, which cause is because the skull is extended, and then it is softened and the place is abscesses and emerges.
And the cure of him is by cautery as it is preceded by the narration of him.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and that the patient lies on his two between your hands, and then dry the area of the rupture of the emerging abscesses with a section according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white bandage that is below the groin until it is uncovered.
And then take the ray and place it on the prominent area of the bandage, and press it to the navel of the belly.
And then stitch the two prominent areas on the extremity of the ray of the bandage, and adjust with the suture one of them with the other.
And then extract the extremity of the ray, and do not cut into the bandage at all, nor extend the wound, nor any other cause as you may be able to know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the cure of the plagues, and as you cut the threads, purify that and restore the plague until it is consolidated; for the bandage is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, for it is more proper to health.
Chapter .lxviii.
Of the softening of the groin of the testicles.
Many times the groin of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is noticed in that regard.
Therefore, it is necessary for him who is asked in the cure of it to make the patient lie on his two, and cut all the groin which is softened over the natural groin; and then adjust the two lips with the suture.
And if you want, stitch at the beginning the superfluity of the softened groin with three stitches or four and with firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then cure by the cure of the other plagues until it is healed and the threads fall.
Chapter .lxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excused, but for the cause it is lightly remembered to me that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary the remembrance of it unless for two ways, of which one is so that it is in the science of the physician when he is interrogated about it, that he knows the cure of it to whom it happens; and the other way is that we many times have need of castration of other animals for our benefits for them, as for goats, and sheep, and pigs, and similar to the animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by fissure to section.
But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the beast to be cezer in warm water until its genitals are softened and are limp and that they hang. And then take those with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear from the touch.
But in castration done by fissure and section, when you have the beast and press the groin of its testicles with your left hand.
And then lie the suspensory, and cut over each wound with a section between two wounds processed.
And then cut those that you will have each excoriated. And do not leave on those of the bandage any cause, but the subtle bandage which is over the veins.
And this manner of castration is better the one done by attrition, for attrition strongly leaves no cause of the testicles for which the beast desires coyt.
And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lxx.
Of the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: the one is that it appears in that which seizes the space in the groin of testicles, in that which is between two testicles figure as a cunh of woman in which it is.
And sometimes from that core urine flows which is in the groin of the testicles.
But in women it is a species: and it is that the cunh of the woman over the pental is as if two testicles of a man, a little of all diminished at the front part as if the perpucii of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of the men and of one species of the women. And it is that when you cut those flesh adjusted until it escapes the imprecio of it, and then that you cure those with the cure of the other plagues.
And in the second species of men of which you see urine which is in the groin of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation in it.
Chapter .xxi.
Of lenting and of prominent flesh due to causes of women.
Lenting, for it is adjusted over natural causes while it is stressed and is made light regard; and sometimes it is magnified in some women so much that it spreads as in men and serves into the coitus.
Therefore, you must have the superfluity of the linen with your hand or with an incision.
And in the last incision, mainly in the front of the root, so that no flow of blood occurs.
And then take care of it with the cure of the plagues until it is healed.
May flesh born is flesh that is born in the horror of the mother before it is full, and very little is it issued to the parts before, according to the semblance of the tail (and for that reason, the first ones called this “caused disease”); therefore, when we cut like we cut linen, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxii.
Of the cure of alratica.
Alratica is when the cone of the woman is not perforated, or is the small tract. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to illness that preceded, and that is made either by flesh not well adjusted or by a subtle or thick cyph.
And it is made either in the front of the mother, or in the ribs of her, or in the upper part of her, or in the lower part of her, and prohibits coitus and pregnancy and childbirth, and very much prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by examining the metrona, if the oppilacio is apparent, properly; but if it is not apparent, then you search for it with your fingers or with the ray.
But if the oppilacio is by a subtle cyph, and it is proper to the two labia, then you cut and disrupt that.
And it is that you put powder on the two labia, and then place your fingers indicated from both the hands at once.
And the woman be on her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two labia with force until that subtle cyph is broken and the oppilacio is open.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and put that on the location, and wash with water every day so that the cut location is not consolidated.
But if the cyph is thick and thick, then when you cut that with a spatula or a myrtle leaf.
But if the oppilacio is by flesh, then suspend that with linen, and cut that.
And be with you the medicines that make cease the flow of blood by biting, such as ahacatia, and dragon's blood, and incense, adjusted with album of egg.
And then administer a wide lead pipe so that the plague is not consolidated slightly.
And keep that for some days and administer calgua of the lime.
And then be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the mother's nativity of other flesh, and then when you cut according to this manner. But if this is by a carbuncle, to the carbuncle the which is in the mother be not made contrariety with iron in any manner.
Chapter .lxxiii.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red bottor that happens in the cone of the women.
Hemorrhoids so appear from the orifices of many veins through which from those corro blood continuously; and as they are old hemorrhoids and they are made theyls.
And already I have said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and say so those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the front of the mother and do not appear to the feeling, then in those there be not made cure with iron.
But those which are in the orifice of the mother upon which cats feeling, those are the ones that are cured.
And so that you put the woman in a mayor fright and then extend the tail with the forceps, or with rough cloth, and cut those with the razors.
And then pulverize over those of the fluxes of the blood of one of the incised powders biting, such as acacia and similar to those.
And then apply her feet for an hour, and then put that in cold water.
And if the fluxes of the blood persist, then make that seer in decoction of sumat and of the peels of millegrains and of guaias and of similar things.
And then take flour of barley and combine that with honey and wine and make a plaster with water on the back of her.
And if the blood is cut off, it is good; and if not, make adhere to two ventouses, and to the nipples their escarification.
And then take wool and submerge that in the juice of coriander or in the juice of arnagloza or in the juice of guarravier with wine poured and make adhere to the location; and then cure the location with ointments until it is healed.
And care for that within that is healing.
Chapter .lxxiv.
Of the perforation of the eyssedura accident in the mare.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the mare, as well as boils and abscesses, and ulcers and buboes and eruptions and fistulas, hemorrhoids and rags and boils and other abscesses. And I have already said these maladies and the kinds of those and their signs, and their cures in the division.
And because I say in this treatise of an abscess that comes in the mare when it is of the abscesses that collectives heal, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is done with iron.
Therefore, consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that redness and if it catches on that feeling, then do not cut it with the perforation of it, and care for it with that which helps on the maturation until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
And then have you make the woman lie on a couch that has two couches; and recline on her two and adjust her feet to the part behind the belly, and her thighs be expanded, and place her arms behind her shoulders, and tie her with a band to that which is convenient.
And then the midwife follows the right side and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the mare is opened, the form of which will come in those causes that will be made then.
And because when you want to administer this instrument that you put with the ray the preon of the mare of the woman, and that which of the instrument is entered into the mare no be more than the preon of the mare and led the patient. More if the instrument is larger than the preon of the mare, then have you put powders on the texture of the preon of the mare so that it be prohibited the instrument of all instrument in the preon of the mare.
And because you put the vertigo that runs in the instrument of the side above and that the minister has the instrument and revolves the vertigo until the orifice of the mare is opened.
And as the excision appears, and it is touched with the hand and is lean and moist, then have you succeed that of the head of it with a spatula lat.
And as the sania is evacuated, then have you put in the wound a cake submerged in rubbed oil or green oil in which there is some stifness; and put the calca7 in the section in the preon of the mare.
And put before the mare and on the pentilh clean wool submerged in water in which there are boiled malvas.
And then it is cured after two days with gargles which are convenient to that until it is healed.
And some times the mare and the wound are washed so that it is cristened with water and honey, and then with water in which the root of liri or of aristologia longa is boiled, and then returns to the gargle.
And if the wound is deep in the mare, then have you be prohibited from the cure of it with iron, have care of it with that which we have said in the division.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach the midwives in what manner the living embryos should be medicated when they are second to a unnatural figure.
Necessary cause is that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of the natural childbirth by the signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman expressing to the parts behind and desires to smell the air, and above that it is relieved by that which is above her of the part, and hastens the emission of the embryo, then you know that this part is second to a natural figure, and it is the emission of it over its head, and the second one with that or suspended or pendant from the umbilicus.
Therefore, as you see those signs, then have the belly of it be compressed so that the embryo descends slightly, and when it descends over its head, they give it the second one, and it is washed of those superfluities with good modification.
But that which is another this part is unnatural and not laudable, for when the embryo is emitted over its feet and the body of it is emitted before the head of it and the feet of it, and the hand of it one, or at the foot of it, i.e., or it is emitted the head of it and the hand of it, or at the belly of it, and fort leu is converted over its col, and seeming of the figures of it not laudable.
Therefore, it is necessary cause to the midwife that she be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard herself from error and deception.
And I have shown all figure of those, and what engen is in those for so that it be signified by that and be stood upon that.
When the feyt is emitted over its head by natural egress, and that is vehement over the woman and is made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of it already debilitated, then make that sezer, or what the women have it, and evaporates the conh of it with fenugrec coyt and with humid oils.
And then insert the metron between his two small shoulders and cut with it the second, or cut that with his nail until the moisture in it runs out. And press the woman's belly while she pushes the fetus out.
But if she does not push, then force the woman to be anointed with a mixture of ptillium and fenugreek with a knife.
And then command her, the one who is giving birth, to be compresses and make that stir with condiments; and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour, for the fetus will be born soon.
And if the two heads of the fetus are born at the beginning, then you must reduce them with little ease. But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a board and raise her legs, and then shake the board on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the shaking.
And if the heads are not delivered and the fetus dies, then cut them open and extract the remains of the fetus or tie the body to your hand with cloth and extract it with equality, for it will be born.
When the fetus is on its feet, then you must push those up, and then turn the fetus over, and then straighten it, and then take one foot of it and extend it little by little.
But when it is coming out between the thighs, then you command her to express herself, and make that stir with condiments, for it will be born if God wills it.
And if it is not born with what we have recounted, then you return the fetus little by little until you place it back in its natural figure, for it will then be born with easy delivery.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recounted, then take a mixture of althea and dissolved gum, and pound it all in the mortar with a good pounding, and then apply it with water to the woman's vulva, at the lowest part of her belly. And then make that compress in hot water, until she achieves the contractions.
And when the parts of her have become softened, then make a fumigation of myrtle for her and place it under her. And when the fumigation lasts for an hour, then you make her lie on a board, and then make that stir and extend her mouth, and take it away, and press the lower part of her belly with gentle compression, for the fetus will be born soon.
Placement of the fetus laterally while holding one of its hands. Try to reduce the hand of her, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her move.
And if she cannot move, then make her lie on the sheet, and shake her thighs with vehement shaking, and then administer the ointments that I have told you about.
And if the delivery has come, then make her lie on a board, and then study about the reduction of the hand, and straighten the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the stir for the woman and command her to compress herself until she is born.
Placement of the fetus on the chest with its arms and legs spread out and its fascia on the side of its mother. Make sure the midwife has the baby's hand and gently turns it little by little, and that it is done with ease.
And when it is and as much as it is straightened, then place on the vulva what we have recommended of oil and ointments.
And then command her to push little by little, and when you have done that, then make her lie on a board and command her to be inclined on the right side, and then command her to compress herself; and make that stir with condiments. The exit of the prepared fetus on the side.
When the mother's horror is expelled in this manner, consider, and then you cut the second with your nail until it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of her, then you cut that of the navel, so that it is not held back and dies.
And then gently push the feet apart while you hold that second cloth, and tell the woman to squeeze herself a few times, and the sir should be gently inserted, if God wills it.
The exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes even three or four, but this is strange and difficult; but it is caused by nature, and not by life.
And count those, whether they be multiplied, one after the other, and they are separated by the head, distinguish those between the ligament in the umbilical cord of each of them, and sometimes they are born thus as if it were one fetus by gentle natural insertion, and sometimes they are born by a less praiseworthy insertion, as we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult in childbirth and arrive at what we have said of unnatural figures, then take care of them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skillful and does what is done with ease and subtlety, and with slowness, and is ingenious according to every figure according to what is prepared for her by the engineer, bringing to health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes ten, and it has already been verified that one woman aborted six, and another gave birth to ten, the cause of which was made by the measurement of the glorious wise men.
And all this is covered that it should be in the science of the midwife, as it is very close to that appearance of this, and therefore it is paused at that which is covered.
Chapter .lxxvi.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you cure the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of the medication and it is not outside, and you are forced to use surgery with your hand, then consider if the woman is of sound virtue and is not among those accidents by which she is feared to be harmed.
Then consider that the woman be laid on her back upon her two, and her head be inclined downwards and her thighs be elevated.
And the minister has that of two parts or be tied on the bed so that the body of him does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the mother of him with humid oils and with mucilage of althea and of fennel and of its seed.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then introduces her hand with facility into the mother, and then seeks with the hand in the place where the hooks are in the fetus.
And convenient places in this: therefore you consider if the fetus is prepared that descends upon its head, and then you place the hooks in its heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or below the beard, or in the fork of it, or in the places proper of the back, or below the hypochondria.
But if the descent is upon the feet of it, then in the pentalin, or in the middle of the back.
And consider that you have the hook in your right hand, and place the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and introduce your hand with facility and place the hook in one of those places which we have said, until you reach the left cause.
And then pause and place in the opposite position of it another hook, or the third if it is necessary, so that the traction be equal, and not be extension according to its rectum only.
And be careful to every part, so that the insertion of it be alleviated as it is done during the extraction of it.
And consider in it that which is between them that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then consider that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and introduces those skillfully and revolves with those that are retained.
Therefore if the part of the fetus is born, then the hooks are changed into the place which is more out; and do so until the whole fetus is born.
But if the hand is outside the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by the constriction of it, then consider that a cloth be enveloped over it; and then extract it until the whole is born, and incise it either at the junction of the hand or in the groin.
And thus consider that you do in the other hand and in the two feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is an accident to it constriction in the insertion, or there is in the head of it water adjusted, then consider that you introduce between the finger spines and split the head and extract the water, or which discards this with an instrument which is named “alundat”, the form of which will come with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is next.
And similarly, if the bone is of great size by nature, and then the one that is inflamed, or that is swollen as we have said, then extract the bone with forceps.
And if the head is extracted and is constricted at the collarbone, then it is split so that the moisture which is in the feet is poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor obeys this way, then you cut the head as soon as it is possible to you.
And if the bowels of the belly are festering or are in it hydropic, then you must perforate that so that the moisture that is in it runs out.
But if the feet are on its feet, then the traction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is lighter.
But if it is constricted, you must pull the belly and the foot, then you must extract that which you have enveloped on your hand, and that you split the belly and the foot so that the water that is in those runs out.
But if the other members are held and the head is turned, then the midwife puts her left hand in; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then she puts her hand in the perineum of the mother, and searches with that the head, and pulls that into the mouth of the mother, and then puts in it a hook, or two hooks, and pulls it with those.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted by an abscess, the cautery which happens to the one, then it must not be trebled on it;  it is better that you administer effusions of humid fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the feet are on its side, then if possible, it is to be pricked; and it is to be administered water as we have said in the living fetus.
And if that is not possible, then it is to be incised in pieces, and it is to be extracted.
And you must not leave any cause of the second one.
And as you have completed all your operation, then administer water as we have said of the cure in the abscesses which happened to the mother.
And if there happens a flux of blood, then you send them down in styptic waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in the belly of which was a dead fetus, and then over that fire another pregnancy, and then a dead fetus is the other. It happened to one a long time ago an abscess in his navel; and it inflated so that a fire opened, and he began to throw out pus.
And I was called to the cure of him, and I medicated him for a long time, and the plague did not consolidate.
Then I placed on him some causes of plaster of strong traction, and extracted from him a bone, and then after a few days, I extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, as in the belly there were no bones.
And then I thought that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore, I continued to treat the abscess, and extracted from him more bones, the woman existing in her usual dispositions, and already living in that manner for a long time, curing him of a little bit of pus.
And I do not affirm that this is strange, but that in this there is science and help to what the physician artifices with his hand for the cure administers.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of the vulva with which the mother is opened:
This is the form of the vulva in which the lips are brought together, to which bringing together there are two vulvas in two extremities of two parts. But however, this vulva must be more subtle of strictori, and be made of either wood or stick of boy.
And it is the width of each stick that is two fingers and the margin of each one that is one finger, and the length of each one is one palm and a half; and in the middle place of the two sticks there are two adjustments of that same stick, which are already made, of which the length is the majority of one palm and a little more, and the width of each one is two fingers, or a little less.
And these two additaments are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with those when you revolve the two prescribed vulvas.
Another form similar to that more subtle and lighter:
It is made of sticks of wood or boy according to the resemblance of forceps. But however, at the extremity of it there are two additaments as often, and the length of those additaments is about one palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
And as you want with those to open the mother, then you make the woman lie on the sheet with her feet hanging, open that which is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, similarly according to the quantity that you want of the opening of the mouth of the mother, until the midwife makes it so that you want.
The form of vertigo which the ancients say:
The form of impelling which is driven by the feet:
The form of dizziness which is contained in the great head:
And it is assembled like forceps, which has teeth at the extremity, sometimes, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes, which has teeth like those of a saw with which it is incised and contained. The form of dizziness little:
The form of a nail having a spine:
The form of a nail having two spines:
The form of a spatula having two extremities with which the head is cut off:
The form of two broad spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied the species of that and are prepared by the artificers, as much as it is lighter to their operation and more useful to men for their quantity.
And in the works of those instruments, whatever they may be, you should always be prepared, because the need for them is not excusable.
Of the extraction of the second (tooth).
When the second tooth is retained, the infant should be commanded to hold his breath, and then do that  stirring with the condition, and strengthen your hand over his mouth and over his nostrils, and if by this means it is pushed out, it is good.
And if not, then you take an olla and pierce a hole in the cover and place in that herbs inside the mouth of the mother, such as calamint and rue and anise and chamomile and Arabic siccated and cinnamon and  santuary. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the olla, and place that on the fire.
And then place a tube of cane in the mouth of the mother, and keep that inside until the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then do that stirring as we have said, and the second tooth will be ejected with velocity.
But if this cure remains and it is not ejected, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of altea, and then introduce that into the mouth and caress with that the second tooth, and when she has found it, then take it and extend it little by little. But if it is annexed in the gum of the mother, then introduce her hand as we have recounted, and when she has found the second tooth, extract it little by little according to rectum so that the mother does not feel the violent traction. So that it may be changed on the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is narrow, we have already recounted the cure with stirring and with medication of the olla with herbs.
But if it is not ejected with all the causes which we have recounted, then guard that you do not fatigue yourself on that in iteration of extraction, but rather that what is ejected from it to the mouth of the mother lies on the cloth of the woman, and then sterilize that with ointment and tetrapharmacon; for that will make it rot a little after a few days and it will be dissolved and it will be ejected.
But when it may be possible, it is raised from it evil odor to the head, and to the stomach, and that is what you read to the patient; and therefore it should be administered sub-fumigations and conveniences according to that.
But some of the Ancients already are praised sub-fumigation of narcissus and dried figs.
The form of an instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated of the retention of menstruation and of the second tooth:
It is made of copper or of iron.
And it is placed the fine extremity in the mouth and the wide extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation is placed over the embers of the fire.
And keep that inside until that sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate another.
Of the cure of the unperforated anus of the child.
Many children are born and the anuses of them are not perforated, which are already subtle and opaque. Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to perforate with her finger that opaque; and if not, perforate that with a sharp spatula, and guard that it does not touch the  sphincter.
And then place on that wool infused in wine and oil; and then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear that it will be opaque again, then place in the hole a tube for many days, and remove it when the child will want to defecate.
And already accidences opacity of the anus by consolidation of plague or of abscess; therefore it is necessary that that consolidation be incised, and then it be cured with that which we have said of the cure and of the lead.
Of the cure of fistulas that end up in the anus.
The fistulas that develop in the area below the navel and have a thickness and consistency that develop near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
And it is a fistula or a lump.
And with that swelling being ancient and running from the humid white moisture or a subtle pus, and sometimes from these fistulas some penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by what is emitted from them by the exit and by the windiness; and sometimes the patient uses the exit, and very often it is emitted from these worms.
And sometimes from these fistulas, they penetrate into the bladder and into the meat of the vagina; and from these penetrating ones they enter the junction of the thigh and into the notch of the hip.
And in which it is known that a fistula penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate, is that you put your finger inside the anus, and you introduce a subtle probe of wax or iron into the fistula when there is no roughness.
But if there is roughness, then introduce into that a subtle probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all, nor do you proceed from the tract any cause of excretion or worms or windiness, thus as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and then you turn to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the vagina, then the significance of it is the emission of urine from it and the prohibition of it so that the place with medicine may be consolidated.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the thigh or into the hip and causing pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe enters here if there is no roughness into the hip, and causing pain in the circuit of the part; and that from it there is pus always; and that it does not work in that medication, nor is it consolidated with an enema.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no cure of all, and the cure of those is the work and vanity of the medical leaves upon which they are based.
But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, a cure with iron is expected according to what I will tell you, and what I have already said and proved.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his two and raises his legs onto them, the thighs inclined towards his belly, and then introduce a probe of lead, or wax if there is roughness in the fistula, until you know the place where the probe enters.
And if that feels the patient around the anus, then cover that while you introduce your finger inside the anus.
And if you feel in your finger the probe already by itself entering uncovered, or another thing that you feel between your finger and that skin or flesh, then you know certainly that that is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, for it is not in that cure, as we have said.
But however, some say that it is cured in some men tart.
And of the medication by which is expected benefit in it is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it is preceded, and introduce that ignited one into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those flesh adjusted to the fistula, which are like the quill of a bird's feather, are already cauterized.
And then cure that with poultices enveloped in border until they can all those flesh that are cauterized, and then cure that with medicines the flesh engendering and consolidating, and if it is healed, well is; and if not, then it is not healed in any time by any other cure.
And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is veiled flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula in the place where it touches the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying with the probe, and in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the probe reaches, and by the probe is liberated and catched.
And then purify those fistulous flesh which are assembled to the quill of a bird's feather and do not remain from those any cause.
But if flux of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when you are inserting those flesh, then the best that may be and of the lighter pus instrument is cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts good two habits: it is the cauterization of those flesh adjusted, and the abscessing of the blood, the drying of the humidities.
And then cure that with poultices enveloped in border or in a caus trissat until the place gets braced, and then cure the plague with enemas of hard flesh engendering and consolidating.
And so medicines in which there is styptication and drying; when then it is restored it is already healed and you do not fear iteration.
But if the fistula already reaches into the preon of the anus and is elongated from it to the surface of the body, then introduce your finger into the anus and inquire with that.
And therefore if you feel the probe and between you and it is veiled skin or flesh, and is proper to penetration, then it is not operation in it but according to your trust and of hope.
This cause is administered to him in one of three ways: either cauterize that as we have said; or to drain that while you obtain the concavity of it so that it is possible for you to introduce the instruments and the proper cure; and do not proceed with the incision so that you do not injure the ligament containing the gut, and that it may occur over the patient as if it were the will of the deity; and then cure him with that which we have said that is very strong; or elongate that veil and drain the pus that dries that within the buttock, as we have said, or with a probe or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then drain those carbuncles that are in the incision within the one where you can make the peroration; and then strive to make the restoration of the whole wound with incision, and if the orifice of pus above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the buttock, and pus flows lightly through the patient. And in some cases the fistula is finished in this way: it is when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it is in the latz of the buttock around the surface of the body with the codena and on the margin of the buttock, then take a probe of perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the hearts according to this form:
And introduce it into that faithful envelope of v fiels or around them; and then introduce the probe with a faithful in the fistula until you obtain the concavity of it.
But if it is penetrating in the margin of the buttock proper, then you extract the probe from that track so that you introduce your finger into the buttock; and extract the extremity of the probe and adjust the two extremities simultaneously, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you have incised the probe into the flesh, tighten well that within which those carns are incised that are between the two extremities of the probe and that they join.
And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make that penetrate, in whatever way it is prepared for you, but not in the preon, because it is not for you to do this so that you do not injure the ligament; and then make it with that which is healed.
The form of the spatum spinos with which the fistula is fended: the curvature of which is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that you do not injure what is not necessary, as sometimes.
Of suture of hemorrhoids in which blood flows in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are according to two ways, because they are between the buttock seeming like that of coals, or that those are like the fat of rasim. And of those are small and large, and that the blood flows from those always and is one, and are many, and are outside the buttock, and in the extremities of it.
But however those that are outside the buttock are according to the few humidity, of which flows clear water or a little blood with a continuous body, and are according to the color of the body.
And the cure of those that are inside the buttock is that you command the patient to lie down and that he expresses himself until the buttock is empty and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take and suspend with hooks or whatever you have those with your nail, and then you introduce those of their roots.
But if the hooks are not held in those because of the humidity of them and their softening, then take those with rough cloth or with a stick or with a fleece of wool, and extract those with your fingers, and then introduce those and pulverize over them some powders caudas near the incision, so that they may be adhered to those in place of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterization. And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the buttock does not obey the egress, then christenize the patient with a crister in which the bite is small, and wash it with that water that is in the buttock and that obeys the egress slightly when the patient expresses himself.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the buttock, then the cause of them is lighter, and it is that you take those with your nail, or that you take those with a hook, and introduce those, and then cure those with the water that we have said until they are healed.
And that which you have incised, cover that you administer suture of them according to this way: take a faithful envelope and introduce it into a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and envelop the two extremities of the faithful in the part below the needle, and so longitudinally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong structure, and then untie the faithful and extract the needle.
And do this to all, and leave one of those and do not sew it, so that the superfluity of the blood flows from that.
And then place over the buttock cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerot; and place that over the buttock and command the patient to rest. And then leave that until it heals; and when it is healed, cure those with unguents or with another cure until it is healed.
And since old ones are not useful in that medicine, then when you treat those with the point of a spatula or your fingernail until they are moist and the pus is removed from them, which prevents them from consolidating; and then treat them when they are consolidated.
Then you treat those with a vigorous scraping of pus, the first one when blood is drawn and they are excoriated; and then treat them when they are healed.
Know that a boil, it is clear, and it is not if not a red nodule according to the color of the body resembling a keycap, and it is made in all the body and mostly in the parts below the feet and in the armpits, and therefore by those pains you must treat the boil.
And therefore, when it is incised that which is in the circuit of the boil, and it is held with the forceps or a pincer, and it is eradicated from its root; and then treat that.
And if you wish, cauterize the following as it is preceded in its chapter.
But warts are small, rough, fistulous round eminence on the surface of the body, and often come in the most of the children.
And the cure of them is that you extend and incise that, or you tighten that with a thread or a needle until it comes out. And if you wish, cauterize that, according to what we have said, with fire or with a sharp medicine.
But a nettle is a small, rough, or fistulous eminence on the surface of the body that goes into the skin, and when the ant touches that it is felt in it like a bite of an ant, and it is made all over the body.
And the cure of that is that you take a tube of feather of hawk or of vulture, and it is strong, and you place that over the nettle until you contain it the circle of the tube of the parts of it; and then you revolve your hand with the tube until you incise that which is in the circuit of the nettle, and you place that in the skin of the flesh, and that you eradicate the nettle from its root.
And if you wish, do that with a tube of iron or of steel according to this form:
Let the upper part of the tube be drawn to a subtlety, blunt (so it is not perforated), enveloped so that on the finger where you apply it, it be blunted and the revolution of that.
And if you wish, cauterize the nettle according to what is said before in the cauterization of the boil in the chapter of cauterization.
On the form of the instruments that are administered to give a cure.
Sometimes a cauterizer is made of silver or of latten or of iron melted or hammered; and sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those to whom they are administered, because that which is administered in the cure of the small children be small; and of those whose handles are bent or sore, the cauterizers of those be small.
The form of a large and few cauterizer:
The head of the tube of it upwards where the pouch is tied be wide according to this manner; and be to it distinction the one where the pouch is tied as often.
And the extremity of it lower, which is inserted into the handle, be blunt (so it is not opened) much like a lion, drawn to a subtlety; and in one of the sides of it be two holes, and in the other side one hole, and be the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and a little thicker.
And be the pouch in which are placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheepskin, and the root of it be a palm.
And be perforated by many holes as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes the thickness of the finger.
And then insert into those holes a strong thread of thread cru which be of ten threads, or about those; and adjust with that the pouch; and when it is placed in it the pouch, be straight in the head of the cauterizer between two distinct ones with a strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the pouch with the medicine, which be heated according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and guard yourself that it be not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient be laid on his back, and elevate his legs up and place under him a cushion on which already are the men or a bolster; and then anoint the extremity of the cauterizer with oil or with egg white or with mucilage of fennel or of similiar; and then insert that into the handle with facility, and the minister presses the pouch and expresses that with two hands and at the same time with vehemence until it be evacuated in the pouch all that which is in the cauterizer; and then extract the cauterizer and the patient raises his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that ayessement, keep it as much as you can; and if you sleep with that for a whole night, it is more useful in the cure.
But if you encounter a patient with a solution of the belly and its expulsion, then repeat the cautery until it heals.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or suppurating abscesses, then be the cautery subtle and lion, of the cauteries with which the children are cauterized.
Of the cure of the plagues.
And I have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues what was convenient to the free, and I say so the cure of those with my hand and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore I say that the plagues are diversified according to what in which the plagues are made and according to the place on which the plagues fall.
And the causes for which many times the plagues are made are such as a bite of a serpent, or incision of a sword or of a knife, or percussion with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
But the plagues that are in the places of the body are such as a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I am recounting the cure of some plagues so that you pause that reasoning and rule over the other plagues.
And I will begin with the plagues of the head simple, for the remembrance of the composed will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is by a bite of a serpent or similar, and the wound has already been cleaned and it is a large plague and you fear about that patient having an abscess, then you cauterize and perform cephalic phlebotomy immediately, and do not delay this; and extract from that of the blood according to the quantity of its virtue, if no other cause prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood that is extracted from the plague is little.
And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the plague; and guard the patient from repletion and from wine and from coarse food.
But if by any cause phlebotomy is prohibited, then let the food be lessened and do not approach to meat nor to wine.
And place on the plague, if an abscess occurs cauterize it, coat infused in rose oil or in wine in which is steeped.
But if it is certain of an abscess cauterize it, then place on the plague, if it is recent with its blood and the air has not yet changed that powder which I will recount a little later.
And if the air has already changed that, then place on the ulcer until it is healed.
But if the plague is large or is by incision of a sword and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted by sutures, then adjust those with sutures according to how I will recount of the sutures of them.
But if the plague is already discovered from the bone and tendon, and there is no retention of it but a small suspensory, then incise it and then cure the plague with medicines and restore the flesh to the place of the wound, and command the patient to be sparing of foods in which there is thickness: caps and formed cooked meat and similar to them, until it is composed.
And if there is putrefaction in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that pus and throw it out, and then cure it.
But if in these plagues an artery or vein is present from which blood can flow, and it is not severed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that not incised, then you incise it with a spatula, or ligate it; and if necessity compels you that what we have said does not agree, then you cauterize until the blood is severed.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; so that you pulverize on those this powder, which consolidated before the air changes them.
And the manner of the powder is this: take olive oil, one part, of dragon's blood, two parts, of cauterized earth, three parts; have all three ground and sifted, and of it, fill the plague, and be constricted by a good constriction until it well adheres to it, and be coagulated with the blood.
And then strengthen that with poultices and loosen it, and do not untie it while it is thus that it is not suppurating, for the medicine is not eradicated from it until it is healed.
And some times do this solely cauterize, when you do not have present olive oil and dragon's blood.
And already do this same operation in the great plagues when it is necessary that it be placed on them and be tightened, and are recent plagues with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then it is not understood in the position of this powder, but then cure those with what we have said, so that you place on them some digested poultices, or that you place on them powder of barley flour with water and honey until they get pus; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if the plague fractures a bone, and it is small, then you extract it with tweezers.
And you will say the cure for skull fractures in that which is poisonous.
Of the plagues of the neck.
But if the plague occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in medication, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or the artery, then if it is the nerve, it is not in its place, but that its cure be avoided with that which makes vehement coagulation, such as zinc and zeger that is vitriol and similar to their nozo to the nerves and contrazo that. And do not place upon the plague any cause of all cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
And if that which is cured by medicines is light, such as it is washed with sweet water, some herbs infused in rose or non-rose oil, and then washed with sweet water and the other pebbles minced in this manner, and humid.
But if the plague is large, then administer suture, or cut the lips of it, and then cure that with powders until it is healed.
But if the plague is deep or occurs in the lowest part of the body, then perforate it in the most depressed location.
But if in the plague the artery is already incised and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to provoke that.
But if the vertebrae of the throat or all have already been incised, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the collarbone with suture over the canal of the throat and do not touch it; raise it equal and reduce it to its natural figure, and then strengthen it with decent structure, and leave it for some days; and then cure it with poultices in which there is coagulation and excitation until it is healed.
But if the plague has already made an impression on the bone, then strike it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can; and what to you is not apparent, leave it until the plague is healed, and it is separated and the discharge from it is relieved.
And if the plague is recent, then pulverize on it the powder which has been recommended to you. But if a fistula is made in the plague, then cure it with that of which the memory will come in its chapter.
If it is a percussion of a lance or of a sword, and sometimes of its depth, then consider more if from the plague there is windiness when the patient is ill; then know that the plague is mortal.
And if in it there is no depth and the plague is recent with its blood, then you pause in it the first hour powder, and do not strengthen it because it not be the blood retained in the depth of it and that it returns to the heart and that it kills the patient, but pause in it attractive poultice, and untie it twice a day.
And if the poultice is not to you present, then you pause in the orifice of the plague a cloth old so that it sucks what is of the humidities; and make that the patient sleeps on the plague so that it runs what is in it adjusted.
But if from the plague have passed three days or more and it does not happen to the patient spasm nor tremor of heart nor constriction of the veins, and sometimes the other good dispositions of it, then know that the plague is saved; and therefore cure it with calcinations and with the other cure until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is excused, and already all time is open, then know that already it is made fistula; cure therefore it by its chapter.
And if the plague is by incision of a spear or of a sword, and is simple in the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure it with that which is preceded by suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone, and already from it incised pieces, then you turn the plague and try to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the plague is healed, that the extraction of them is relieved.
And of the other plagues accidents in the other members the judgment in cure is the judgment of that which we have said.
Of the plagues of the belly.
The indisposition which happens in the belly is either great, or little, or medium.
And small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and it is seen that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not try the intrusion of them to their place soon, because it opens and is thickened for that the entrance of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best incision is the middle one, because in that one the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, as it is in the two species mentioned before.
And know that the suture of the belly is done in four ways, but two sutures are common that are used in sutures of the other wounds of the body.
And two other sutures proper are used in other wounds, but they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the hernia through that, and it is difficult to reduce that, then it is done in one of two ways: either by the smallness of the incision as we have said, or when the hernia has come due to the cold of the air.
And therefore when this is so, then you should cleanse that, as you would submerge a sponge or cloth wet in tepid water, or that you have squeezed in water with squill, and cypress, and spikenard, and apply that to the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes do this with wine, which has astringency, and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
And therefore, when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the hernia with water in which are boiled elder and mallows, because by this it is alleviated the pain of it with little cause.
But if the pain of it is excused by this cure, then you widen the incision a little with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first cure is better, when it is proper that it is not a section, and that it does not occupy itself with drying, unless there is need and deficiency.
Of the instrument, this is the form of it:
One part of it is sharp, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is subtle, and not as subtle as a spatula, rather it is blunt a little.
And therefore, when the wound is amplified and the hernia is outside, then it should be reduced according to its natural form, in its proper place, if it is possible, because it is better.
But when the incision is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it should be done so that the patient lies on their back, and you place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you place their head and feet higher than the middle parts.
And similarly, if the incision is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you place your attention and your consideration always in this way so that the part in which the wound is is higher than the other.
And thus you should administer this in the great wounds and in the middle wounds.
And in the small wounds, place what is prepared by you, and have it ministered between your fingers, which has the incision entirely with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then uncover it so that one who sews it sees the cause of any other.
And this is the common way of suturing: one that you take the needle, or count of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and then lay it from the end of the incision of the ring finger, and tighten the needle one, and another that you do not put thread in the two extremities of the needle, with two extremities of the thread that is below the thread of the parts of the fingers, until you make that penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the thread and two extremities of the needle, and they are made four orders.
And then tighten with thread double in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by decent addition; and then lay the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in it, and then tie that with thread as you tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if there is need with the needles until you have completed the entire constriction of the wound.
And let the needles be medium in thickness and subtlety, because the subtle needles lightly cut the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to enter in the needle, and therefore for this reason they should be medium in subtlety and thickness.
And do not let the needle be stuck in two extremities of the needle properly too much, so that the flesh is not lightly cut and that the wound is closed before its consolidation.
And do not be prolonged in suturing so that the wound is not prohibited from consolidation.
And then cut the extremities of the needles so that they do not prick the patient in their sleep; and place on the suture puffed powders of every part, which have the extremities of the needles; and leave those until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this kind of suturing with needles in this way is more convenient in the small wounds, because it suffices in the suturing of them one needle or two or around those.
But the second sutura is common: and it is that you administer with suturing the four extremities, of the needle and two extremities of the thread, in one go, with a needle in which the thread is enveloped equal in subtlety and thickness.
And after the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle from that same part from which you began, so that the thread retracted be drawn from the higher part to the wound, so that the suture be like a suture of cloth with which the cloths are tightened.
And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suture saves the men.
And with this suture you sutured the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been wounded with a sword, and the disruption of the wound was greater than a palm, and it was emitted from the bowels around two palms of the bowel of the middle place and the disruption was in the middle of the limb; and therefore you reduced that after the bowel had been pierced for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or thereabouts, and you cured that and it is healed; and after that it was visible for a few months, and it is converted into its dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by miracle it healed, because you did not cure that with ointment, because it was in a place where ointment was not found nor any medicine, but you placed on the wound a piece of old cloth twice a day and washed it assiduously with honey water until it healed.
But you say two kinds of sutures proper according to the narration of Word.
And it is that you begin with a suture of the chain, and you insert the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
And therefore as the needle penetrates the chain and in that same laceration according to straightness and length of the whole body, and leaves the extremity of the chip in which you have inserted the needle; and make penetrate in the other extremity the needle from the inside part to the outside part in the other extremity of the half.
And then, as you have made that penetration, then you make that penetration another time in that same extremity of the half from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the extremity of the chip that is in this place, and make penetrate the needle in the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part.
And make penetrate with that the penetration with which you make that penetration in the chip in the extremity of the mirror which is in the part of it while all that penetrates.
And after as you begin from this same side and stitch that with the extremity that is of the chip in the other place, and extract the needle from the chain which penetrated, and after reduce that in that chain and body the extremity of the chip that is in the other side with this extremity of the mirror; and extract that from the chain which is of the part of it.
And do this one time and another, and do this one time after another until you stitch all that is outside according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you stitch with a suture of pellets with which you stitch the hairs, in such a way that you stitch the chip one time from the part of the extremity of the chain, and that you leave that other time within while you make it completed.
But the second kind of proper suture which you call Gualia, and this is of its service and for its recommendation, is that you stitch that according to similarity with which some medicants stitch that, in such a way that they join all parts to their corresponding part to it convenient by nature; and they apply the extremity of one of it and the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of it, and this is done according to what you to it recommend.
So that you put the needle in the extremity of the mirror to your proper side from the outside part, and make that penetration to the inside part in that same, and leave two extremities of the chip; and after revolve the needle and make that penetration from outside to inside in two extremities of the chip.
And after revolve those each one, and make penetrate each one from the inside part into the outside part in two extremities of the mirror others that are in the opposite place.
And this manner of suture is better than the common suture lighter, and it is the suture of which I preceded memory.
This is the service of Gualia
And yet some said to me, suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so that you introduce in these one thread each, and begin with the introduction of the needle of that which you owe you, and make that penetrate into the other place according to the suture of those with which they stitch the hides equally.
And you know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than of the other places of the belly.
But the judgment of the medication of the wound is the judgment of the other wounds.
The reason for which is that when you can obtain the wound recent with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the bowel and stitch it and prepare it decently, then it rests upon that earthy powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then it rests upon that some ointments which are at your presence while they make hard and draw the threads, and be consolidated chip and mirror; and after cure that as it is the cure of the other wounds while it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines, then place a poultice on it immediately, because it begins to sweat, throw out pus, and change this twice a day, as you and I have taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medication in many arrangements when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague will communicate to the main limbs, then you should submerge linen cloth in good quality olive oil, or in roasted oil, and place it on the circuit of the places that are between the angles and leave the bandages.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in their bowels, because many times this happens, then cauterize that with a black stippling ointment, and mostly if the perforation is reached in the bowel and is made an exit wound penetrating into its cavity.
And know that the one that is of the thick bowel is of lighter pus healing than the one that is in the subtle bowels.
And it is of difficult healing because the bowel which is called “gegunu” does not receive healing from plague that comes into it at all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of the magnitude of those that are in them, and because of the subtlety of the body of that one, and because of the proximity of that one to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the plague is the cloth, and you get that recently, reduce that according to your recipe with which you reduce the bowels equally.
But if it has passed into space and is already made green or black, then you should strengthen that with a file on the place that is damaged from it, so that blood flows, because in the cloth are veins and arteries.
And then cut that which is other that ligament, and place the ends of the file hanging from the part left of the plague wound, so that above you may be relieved the attraction of it, you must the removal of the cloth and emission of the pus of the plague.
Memorization of the plagues when they happen in the bowel.
When a rupture happens in the bowel and is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some men, for this reason because I saw one who had been plagued in his belly by a lance thrust and it was the plague of the right side of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and from him there was a discharge and flatulence.
Therefore, I followed the cure of him since he was not committed to the healing of him, but I continued to subtilize him until the wound was healed and the place was consolidated.
And I put that I saw the place already consolidated, I put on the patient that he should not happen an accident of evil in his belly; and do not happen to anyone by this evil accident and remains in their thousand dispositions eating and drinking, and then between a bath and is exercised in his limbs.
And already said some experienced that when a plague happens in the bowel, and is small, then it should be tied according to this manner: and it is that you take large-headed crickets; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and place a cricket of those that has the mouth open on the two lips of the plague; therefore when it takes on those and strengthens its mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another cricket near the first one, and do not cease this to do with crickets one near another according to the quantity of the whole plague.
And then reduce those and the plague; and remain those annexed heads in the bowel until the bowel is healed; and do not happen to the patient any harm.
And already it is possible that the bowel may be tied with a fine needle which is made of animal bowel annexed to it, because it is meshed in a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of those bowel needles, and be it well skinned, and then tie the extremity of it with a needle thread, enveloped, and then introduce that needle into the bowel and with it the bowel, and reduce that into the rupture.
And this manner of suturing with crickets is nothing but a second way of trust and of hope.
But if the plague is large and wide, mostly if it is in one of the subtle bowels, because then it is not generated but subtilization, and it is not the healing of it at all.
Of cure of zoster and fistula.
Know that every plague and abscess when it is inflamed and becomes ancient, and is made an ulcer, and is not consolidated and throws out pus all the time and is not cut off, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is called a fistula and we call that one zoster.
And fistula according to truth is a hardened, white, knot, with which there is no pain and to which the cavity is as the cavity of a bird's bone; and for this reason that one is called by some rizatz, that is, bone.
And it is in some men humid, the one that throws out pus; and very quickly the humidity is cut off in some hours. And some times this humidity is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
I have shown all those causes, and their signs, and their cure with medicines in the division.
And I will tell you how to cure a fistula that is made by operation with a knife.
And know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; some of these are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the head, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the vertebrae of the spine, or any of the joints composed by composition as if from the hand and foot; and of these, some are located near the main member and resemble it.
And therefore of these fistulas that are this way, those are of the diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and occupation with it is work and ignorance.
And if it is of the fistulas any the depth of which does not reach these places that have been said, and you wait and confide in the cure of it, and you want to arrive at knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or of wood, and if the fistula goes straight, and you probe it with it.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of fine lead, because lead with the lightness of its body is eased and curved of its tortuosity.
And if the fistula is having many horrible things, it is not to you possible that you signify on it with a probe.
Therefore, cleanse the orifice by its orifices, because the moisture by which you cleanse it must go to the other orifices and run from them.
And then inquire exquisitely, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if here has the bone or the nerve, and if the concavity of the fistula is distant or proximate, or if it is a fistula which has many orifices and is above all with the sum of your strength, with your interrogation, with which you interrogate the patient, and the invention of the pain you owe your compression with the hand over the place, and resemblances of the significations and of the causes accidental to the abscess.
And since you will have stood on all those causes with true station, then come to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if the fistula is apparent proximate or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or of one of the places which I have told you.
Then you dry the fistula according to what has been said before of its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the vein and of resemblances, and cure it until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of distant depth, and is straight, then you must cut into it in the preon as much as to you seems possible, and then modify it of all its corrupted flesh; and then administer poultices enveloped in acute medicines, and introduce them into the concavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
And do this with that some times until the acute medicine corrodes all that which is rotten in the concavity of the fistula of the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it according to what we have recounted.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is due to you to certify that, then you inquire about it and dry it according to what we have recounted, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is to you discovered and there is in it any corruption and blackness, then you gnaw that until the corruption is hosted all; and then cure that with what it incarnates until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and gets worse as it was doing, then you know that you have not arrived at the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you uncover it secondarily and exquisitely do the gnawing and purification of it with the stronger force of your hand, and then restore it.
And therefore if it is healed, well is; and if not, then you know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which you have not succeeded, and therefore in that you can only do is to leave it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is to you possible to throw it out, then you throw it with subtle forceps which are convenient for that.
And if there are many bones, then exquisitely do the extraction of all those, and of those leave none behind with your strength.
But if to you makes any contrariety some cause of the humidities, and in their incision there is no fear nor error, then incision those ligaments or flesh if they are there, and deliver the bones.
But if to you is not the preparation of taking out the bones of your hour, then pause over the plague that which you can apply to the plague, and leave it until that is around those bones of flesh and of ligaments, and guard the plague that it not be consolidated, and be constricted the section which you have incised in your operation.
Hence, if you fear, pause over it a poultice submerged in oil, or a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green ointments, because when they will soften those ligaments, and the bones are of them separated the ablation, and of those attractions is eased.
But if it is a large bone, such as the hip bone or thigh bone or similar to those, and the part that is corrupted is only the surface of it, then remove that part only from behind until that blackness and corruption is gone, and then restore the wound.
But if the part that is corrupted is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and cut all the way into the area where the corruption has reached, and then cure it from within until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you do this to a man in his thigh so that you place that  aid and assistant upon your operation.
Take a young man around thirty years of age, who has an accident in his thigh, and from the parts of the inside, the pain is over the matter of the body until the matter reaches the thigh, and it is matter of abscess with a large abscess, and it is not caused by an external cause.
And therefore take the time with that by the error of the doctors until the abscess is opened, and the materials from it are moved, and its cure is stopped until the thigh is fistulated, and make in it many horrific wounds, which all throw out pus and the humors of the body.
And therefore the cure of many doctors around two years, and not in those wisdom but in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the thigh of him and the materials that were running from those horrific wounds for a great body; and already the body of that man was totally rotten and the color of it was yellow.
And therefore I inserted the probe into one of those wounds and reached the bone.
And then I and carefully inspected all the wounds and found them to reach all parts of the thigh.
And then I took my knife and incised over one of the wounds where I described a part of the bone, and I found that corrupted, and it was already terrible and corrupted and decayed; and a part of the thigh was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I severed that which to me was discovered and prepared of the discovered bone.
And I judged that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I excised and severed, and I had already removed it.
And then I placed the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I repeated and discovered over the bone secondarily over the first discovery, and I found continuing corruption with the bone.
And I severed that which appeared to me of that corruption, and then I made a fair cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered over it another time and did not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and perforate the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I incised around an inch of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
And it was not necessary to repeat the operation on him and the section of it unless for the disposition of the fragility of it and for the lack of tolerance of it and fear of death of it, because to him it happened at all times for superfluity of evacuation syncope evil.
And therefore the healing is by entire healing, and nothing is in the place of bone, hard flesh; and it is made good the disposition of it in its body and returns the virtue of it; and it is converted in its dispositions and did not make to him contrariety in walking nor harm in any cause.
But if the bone is eminent in the place of the body already, then cover that you succeed that in this manner: and that you take a ligament and strengthen that in the extremity of that eminent bone, and command to someone that extends that upwards; and place that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then tie that over the flesh that is left the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you pull the flesh to the sides, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to saw so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
And place a board or table below the bone decently, because when you do this it is not prohibited the saw that does not succeed the corrupted flesh.
And cover that it be the sawing over the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, and force to the sawing of it another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, abates it is one part continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh of all parts totally; and then place a board below, and then saw that of the first part where the corruption is until it is continued the sawing of the other part.
And be the sawing according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if from the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in it reason but engine.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is very difficult; however, since you inquire about the corruption in what way it appears to you, and that you open it, and cleanse it according to each disposition which is possible to you, and in case it is rectified to you, when it does not cause you contrariety of vein or nerve.
And know which are the incisors and saws to cut these bones are very according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and greatness and smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; for that since you prepare for every kind of operation instrument convenient to that operation.
And know that that operation signifies to you about the kind of instrument of which indigeysses; when with you is great study and long and knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of diseases, for the time you already had for yourself that which is convenient to it of the instruments to every disease.
And you know at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will place as simple with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experiment on the others. Shape of saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Shape of a  chisel: Let the head of this chisel be according to the shape of a star-shaped key, and the points of it be according to the shape of the points of an awl.
And it is not convenient otherwise than with that which the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or the mouth is wide.
Shape of a smaller razor:
Shape of a broad razor:
Shape of another saw decently made:  It should be made with an arch as high as possible and the sharpness of it of iron, and the handle of it of wood, a dagger-like handle made decently. Shape of it:
Shape of a razor with a concave side:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another razor with a curved extremity:
Shape of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Shape of another smaller chisel:
Shape of another chisel; this one resembling a chisel, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Shape of a chisel which is convenient for the ratio of that which is perforated of the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and of an acute extremity.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly as all the causes that we have said of razors and chisels and saws.
Of incising extremities and the serration of the bones.
The extremities may be cut either by intrinsic cause or by extrinsic cause, or as you will have medicated that corruption for the cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption goes from the member which you do not strike with any cause, then since you cut that member into that which the hon aches the corruption, so that the patient escapes by that of death or malice that is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that one to whom it happens, is that the member is made black before it is cured that fire has already burned it, or it may be brought near the blackness before the ulcer that it aches into that member that it seizes it and that it nourishes all the body; and therefore, you cut it.
And similarly if the cause of the corruption is a percussion of some venomous causes, as of a scorpion of the sea or of a viper or of a weasel and of similar things.
And if the corruption or the percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it aches into the hand.
And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you cut it from the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption so that it nourishes in the forearm of the arm.
And if instead of that, then you cut the arm into the armpit at the joint.
And if instead of that, the corruption passes and sometimes it surrounds the armpit, then in that is the death of the patient; and administering another cause another for cure is the quantity of virtue.
And similarly do of the foot when corruption reaches the toe of the foot, then you cut it into one of the joints.
And if it takes hold in the heel of the foot, then you cut the whole foot. But if it reaches into the thigh, then you cut the leg into the junction of the thigh.
And if the corruption has already reached the thigh, then in it there is no other remedy but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the way of cutting or sawing the member is that you tighten the ligature in the part furthest from where you want to cut, and tighten another ligature on the spot; and extend the minister a ligature to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligature above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligatures, a flat space until all the flesh is uncovered; and then cut or saw.
And so that it be placed cloth from all sides so that it does not touch the area, and that it comes to the patient lesion adjusted and cauterized abscess.
But if blood flows when working, then you cauterize the area carefully, or place on it some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication while it is being completed.
And then bind the affected limb with a bandage as convenient, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you what happens to a man in his foot, this same accident which I have told you, which is when blackness occurs in his foot with a burn that was assembled like a fire.
And that corruption occurs first in his toe before it spreads throughout the foot.
And therefore that man prepares to put himself pus that the cure may go to the limb with the vehemence of it that atrophies from pain and burn of it, and the insidious foot goes into the joint, and fire heals.
Long time occurs that same corruption in the toe of the hand I indicated.
And therefore it comes to me, and so I am pierced to repercuss that superfluity with what I place upon the hand of the medicines, and then the purification of the body of him; and the superfluity does not repercuss and begins to go to the other toe before it begins in the hand.
And he asked me to incise his hand, and I did not want to do that hoping over the repercussion of that superfluity, and more that I feared the incision of his hand dead, because the virtue of the patient was over the casement.
And because he departed from me, he returned to his land and I came to know that that man prepared and incised his whole hand, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narrative except so that it may be helpful about what catches of this illness, and that its significance by which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
Of the cure of the bowels and the quality of clysters with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and pus is extracted from it, and the place remains empty like it was a vessel, and the skin that is above it as subtle as cloth, and no further corruption has reached it, and it does not imprint on the bone or on the nerves or on the ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
But however, if the space is prolonged until the corruption imprints on some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure of it is that the skin is incised completely as it is revolved, and mostly when it is subtle and is made like cloth, and composes that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin adheres and that that corruption has not achieved further consequence, and in the skin has passed through a face, then you cure that with clysters.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the brac that you see is of fetid odor, then you clysterize that with an Egyptian medicine which is of oil and wine and vinegar, receiving equal parts, and they are adjusted in a vessel, and they are cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and clysterize with that the sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then extract that with a sponge; and do this for so many days until the sinus is purified and the stench is removed.
And some times it is clysterized with ash water, when this medicine is not present to you; and it is that you take the ash of beech, and put on it water; and then collect that and clysterize with it until you confess that the sinus is then stayed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then clysterize that with water and honey and that it is mixed with vinegar, and clysterize that with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey is that it purifies and washes, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when in the wine there is superfluity of astringency and dryness.
And as you do this sometimes and you confess that the sinus is already removed, then clysterize that with water that makes flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take of  dyaphinicon and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine; or that you clysterize that with some medicines and other washes that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise of the washes.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow in which the clyster nozzle is not received, then you enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and put in it a poultice wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basil ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the lips of it with suture and leave of it the quantity in which between the clyster its addition.
And if the orifice of him from which the arm flows is elevated to the parts above, then dry that in the lowest place that is in him so that the arm runs below, because when the arm is shortened in the prepondence of the sinew the flesh is generated in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinew inside the environment of the bone lowest according to what you want, then perforate that which you prepare the limb with preparation by which the arm runs lightly according to what is to your apparelled and that no cause of the arm be retained in it.
But that which is on the orifice of the sinew, which you remove every hour so that what is adjusted in it of the arm may escape. And so that you know if what runs from it of the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is undigested.
And thus you consider the place of that sinew, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is thrown over the orifice of the sinew already adheres, or acquires adherence, then the next day you untie it or the third day, and when you untie the poultice, then change the cloth for another and renew the poultice.
But if from the sinew a little space away there are subtle viruses, then do not despair of their adherence, because the healing of it approaches, because in some men there is a slow generation of flesh in the wounds, and of those there is the contrary done to them.
And if from the sinew a little space away there is much arm undigested, then you know that the sinew does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinew is delayed and is the prolonged cause, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as a diaphaniac poultice, when there is in it adjusted superfluity of addition of zegi.
And the last one which is cured, is that you take of diaphaniac poultice and be dissolved in rose oil, and be on it vojat vi antic in its substance, and then apply that to it, and use of that.
And already it seems in that action, when there is no arm, diaphaniac poultice, honey when it is cooked until it is thick, and use of it; or that you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind all and pulverize over the honey when it is on the fire, and then line it with water on cloth and strengthen that on the sinew; and line it with the honey which you have cooked until it is thick, and pulverize over cloth and strengthen that.
And sometimes are administered with it the long and roots of celestial lily (and it is celestial lily) and flour of errs and centaurea, and use of those simples or adjust them, grind them and sift and pulverize over the honey which I have recommended; and use of it.
And if the sinew is prolonged, and is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the preon of it, and already make inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or to the ligaments; then you cure it with fistular cure, as above is said.
Of the cure of panaritia and ingrown toenails and the addition of finger incision and section.
Panaritia is an abscess which nails from the nail of the finger or of the foot, and often nails in the other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, or is an abscess of abscess caut, or is corrupted, and throws out arm until it corrodes the roots of the nail, and often corrupts that whole, and often it spreads its corruption to the bone until it is to it a fetid odor, and is made the extremity of the finger lamed, and the color of it is made dusky.
And therefore when you will have that with the water that we have said in the division and do not apply your cure, then cove that you cut with iron all the superfluity that is remained of the nail and then cauterize the wound with water, because cauterization much is useful in that.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail voids already comprehend the flesh to the parts of the finger, and begin to pierce it and to let out that, then cove that you pause a fine ray below the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and impel that up and cut that flesh with facility, and place on that which remains of the flesh of the medicines corrosive comburent until it be all removed; and then cure that with poultices until it be healed.
But if the corruption has already entered the bone, then cove that you cut the bone that and extract it, for no time is healed that there is in it the corrupted bone.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption going into the wound, then you should cut it in one of the nuts according to how it is pressed, and then take care of it until it is healed.
If the nail is damaged by a blow or friction, and there is intense pain in that area, then when you first begin to treat the patient, you should carefully cut the nail with a sharp spatula, making a transverse cut from top to bottom, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh that remains under the nail, because you will cause the patient intense pain and lead to the formation of excess fleshy tissue in the area; and then treat the area with water that soothes the pain.
But this adjusted flesh, which is born in the hands of some men, is very fleshy, and it is very much in their bones, or very much in their nails.
And some of them are born at the base of the joint, or the birth of them in some of the nuts of the hands. But the one that is born in some of the nuts of the finger does not get worse, and this one that is born in the joints is very much worse.
And of those that are born fleshy, the incision is lighter, and it is that you should cut that with the root of the spatula.
But of the one that is born at the base of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore, beware of the abscess of it.
But in the one that is born in the finger, you should cut the flesh of it at the beginning with a round incision into the bone, and then saw with one of those saws convenient to water, and then take care of it until it is healed.
But consolidation, which happens to the fingers between their movements or by birth of the man who is born that way, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similar things, therefore, you should cut that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
And place between their cloths of the enfuzes in oil rubbed so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between those, or place between those a lamina of subtle lead until it is consolidated as it should.
And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you should cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenes to the figure of the member.
Of incisions of vices, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and they are veins convoluted and thick, full of melancholic superfluities that come in motion in the members of the body, and the major occurrence of them in the legs, and most in the legs of the itinerants and the laborers and the carriers.
Therefore, you should administer purgation of the body of black bile some times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
But the cure of them with iron is according to two manners: one is that it is incised and that black blood is thrown out, and the other manner is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
The incision of it is according to this manner: embroil at the beginning the leg with warm water until the thick blood is resolved, which is feculent of the leg, and then strengthen the leg of the patient to the most sovereign part of the groin, and to the part below the knee with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place, or in two, or in three with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood with your hand from the part below the leg and upwards, and downwards, until the amount of blood that you want and that seems sufficient is extracted, and which will take the virtue of the ailment.
And then apply that, and command him that he abstain from the foods that engender black bile.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that night to the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you who raise the leg of the patient, if in it there are movements, and then put it in a bath and embroil the leg of it with warm water until it reddens and the veins are exuberant; or that it be exercised by strong exercise, if the bath is not present to you, until the member is scalded.
And then cut the vein in the right of it by incision in the long or in the back of it of the knee, or in the lowest part of it of the ankle.
And then open the vein with pincers and exfoliate the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and it is of the appearance of it that sometimes that root declines to blackness.
And therefore, when you evacuate and from the vein you sometimes that white that is cord.
And then you put below that the ray until it is elevated and thrown from the vein, and suspend that with an onion orp lion.
And then cut another incision near that one for three fingers, and then exfoliate the vein from the part below the vein until it appears.
And then elevate that and cut that in the back incision of the ankle, and then extract that and elevate it until it is extracted by the second incision, and then extract that from the incision that is above it.
And do this until you extract that from the incision that is most sovereign or most high of all the incisions, until all is extracted; and then cut that.
And if it does not obey to you to extract and elevate, then introduce a needle with a strong and double thread and tie that and extract it, or introduce behind it the ray and turn your hand to every part until it is thrown. And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it is made difficult for you to elevate that root and it comes upon the patient for that harm.
And when that whole root is thrown out, then place over the place of the plague wool soaked in wine and oil, both roasted and unroasted, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity in its wrapping at the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then cover that which you do on all parts of its tortuosity and at the places of its wrapping, and then suspend that with hooks until you elevate that whole.
And guard yourself that your section does not incise the vein and that you do not plague that, for difficult it will be for you to elevate that; and serve your prudence in that.
Form of the incision with the which is dried vein:
It is not to it sharpened as with the hooks nor is it of sharp extremity so that it does not plague the vein; and it is of gross flexibility like a lion, for if it were subtle, it would incise the vein by its subtlety; having in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
Of the extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands as in the Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India hot and arid of little fertility and in which there are no herbs nor aybre.
And very much it is generated in other places of the body other than the legs.
And the gestation of it is of putrefaction that comes from behind the bone as if venom from within the body serpents and worms and scarids and worms engendering between the bone and the flesh.
And sign of the reception of the coming of it is of this vein that accides in the leg inflammation vehement; and then the place is vesicated; and then the vein issues from the place of that vesication which seems rooted from a plant.
And therefore, when it appears from him the extremity, then you must wrap over that a piece of lead of which is the weight of a dragon. Within two dragons, and no that and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
And as many times as ye see from it any cause to the parts outside, cover that with lead and bind that. And if the root is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and envelop the remnant; and do not incise that of root until it is issued outside, for if you incise that it is contracted and enters into the flesh and makes to occur abscess and putrefaction in the place and bad ulceration.
For that which must be treated gradually and be extracted little by little, until it is thrown out from behind it and no remnant of it remains in the body.
And of this vein is issued in some men that it is in its length of five palms and ten and already it has come to me that it issued one of twenty palms.
And if it is incised at the hour of its medication, then introduce the ray into the tract of it and perforate that with long tract with the body, until it is evacuated all that which is in the matter, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many roots, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and come to it many orifices, and is issued from each orifice a root.
And therefore cure that as we have said in the division and with that which is said above.
Of the section above worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine pain.
This malady is called in some lands by the name of bovine pain because many times it happens to oxen and it is a worm, few in number, the one which is born between the bone and the flesh, and goes in all the body up and down, and is shown in the feeling of its increase from limb to limb until it disrupts the bone and comes out.
And the generation of it is by putrefaction of some humors as if accidents worms and serpents and earthworms and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for the malice of it, for when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and has come to the brain, then very much it breaks in it and enters and destroys the brain, and this happens many times.
And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done if not by the ambulation and appearance of it to the feeling, and then cover that which is above it and that which is behind it with a bandage and constriction strong, and then dry above it and extract that.
And if it is rooted in the flesh and does not come out, then you pause cauterization with fire upon the place until it dies, and the major cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
If you see that being brought to the head near the temple, then tighten the bandage around the forehead with strong constriction, and then press on it, and extract it; and tell the patient to use modifications of their body with medicines that evacuate bad, putrid humors, and guard themselves from foods that generate putrefaction.
On the section for the ailment of nafir.
This ailment is called nafir in our land, and it is pain that comes in certain limbs, and then it is changed from limb to limb.
And I have already seen this as I will tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and as it was for an hour, I saw that inflammation go as if a worm was pushing it, but more gently than being heavy, as if it were living silver when it runs from place to place.
And then it went into the pain of that place and ended in the muscle, and then it stayed there for an hour.
And then it corrected in the other body until it reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to myself that I should turn it all over her body as I saw; and it was too marvelous of the permutation of it and the speed from limb to limb. And I had already seen this before in my own feet in that manner, however, I have seen many that suffer pain being changed from limb to limb. But I did not see this in the feet as in the woman.
And I did not think it to be anything but that because the woman was old, or so of dry body and of exposed veins, and in this appearance, that windiness was perceived.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retro-healing in those who are delicate and with humid bodies of well-nourished veins.
And as you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not to you apparent in the temple as we have said, then you tighten on that and leave it lightly and press on that until that windiness is constricted, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it in your own temples, then you cure it with the shaking of the body and with what you expel windiness, and charms those with fetid pills and with pills of serapi and similar things.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they strike, for their diversity is that of those that have large tips, and small, and concave, and blunt, they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have shafts.
And of the signs of the service is when it strikes in it, and it pierces the bone, and it is brought out of the cypharynx which is above the brain, for it happens through it soda vehement, and scotomia, and vertigo, and roaring in the feet, and inflammation and roaring of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and very strong is the speech cut off and the voice is destroyed, and it is brought out of the place of the wound a white humidity resembling powder, and eyes of it resembling the fluidity of the flesh.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then you abstain from the cure and the extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart, are that it is near the left nipple, and it is felt with that which is put in a hard cause, and it is not a cause void; and very strong the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the hand, and the running of the wound black blood, and it feels that coldness of the extremities, and a great cold sweat, and syncope; and therefore know that death descends upon it all at once.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are so easily of spumy blood from the wound, and the vessels that are near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient is changed, and he expires with great spirit, and demands the attraction of cold air.
And if it strikes the arrow in the ligament which is in the feet, and the pain is then near the small of the back, and it is made the leg great with vehement pain and with sighing, and it is not good all the members of the muscles.
And if it strikes the arrow in the stomach, then very strong eyes of the wound food any undigested.
And if it strikes the arrow in the belly, and it is put in it, eyes some wound of the wound, or the cloth, or the intestine which is dislocated, and there is no hope in the cure of it extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow has entered the bladder, and urine has been expelled, and something has been processed from it to the outside parts, and a great deal of pain is on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
May the other members as well as the face, neck, throat, and arms, and legs and their counterparts, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the ribs, and the legs and their counterparts, be saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisoned arrow.
And I recount this to you that I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may signify this for your treatment.
The cause is, that in a man a  arrow was shot into the lacrimal of his nose at the root, and you extracted that from the other side, leaving the gray of the ear of him, and he is healed, and it did not cause harm to his nose.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was shot in his eye, leaving the eyelid as it was, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be obtained from it except for a small extremity with which it adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head on it in which there were no ears.
And the Jew healed, and it did not cause any harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was shot in the throat, and it was an Arab arrow, and it is the one that has ears; and therefore I incised over it between two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; and therefore I subtly approached it, and then extracted it, and the Christian healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who was shot in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and therefore, because forty days had passed and nothing had changed in his condition, I incised over the arrow and maneuvered it, and he healed, and it did not cause him any harm.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow was shot in his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and because it was almost seven years, he pulled the arrow out at the root of the hip.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow was shot in her belly, and the wound was consolidated within her, and it was not changed in her condition for a long time, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow was shot in his face and the wound was consolidated, and he broke the arrow, not feeling much pain, and he looked quite well.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes who was shot in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And I was called to his treatment shortly after the arrow was shot, within three days.
And then I examined the wound of the arrow very carefully; and then I inquired about it with a subtle touch, and I did not feel it; but I felt a prick below the right ear, and then I suspected that that prick was because of the extremity of the arrow.
And I plastered the place with a plaster which has attractive and digestive virtue, confessing to myself that the place was festering so that it appeared to me the place of the arrow, so that it would dry over it.
And it did not cause any harm in the place, significant that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster on him for many days and it did not cause any harm; and the wound was consolidated meanwhile, and he broke the wound from the extraction of it for a space of many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and recounted this to me.
And then I placed on the wound a medicine acute and corrosive for many days until it was open, and with the touch I felt it, and examined the extremity of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the shaft.
And then I adjusted it in the appearance of the wound with that acute medicine until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the arrow, and it took me time with that for a space of time within four months.
And then because the wound was amplified, and it was possible for me to intervene with forceps in it, and I removed it, and it did not cause any harm, then I did not cease to subtly and ingeniously work on it with manners of engineering, until one day I began on it with manners of engineering to hang it with forceps skillfully made, according to how they will come in the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored that wound.
And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it, and the wound was consolidated, and the patient healed completely, and he did not suffer in it in any way.
And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows so that you may pause this rule and signification over that which I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not comprehended with narration nor do they comprehend them in the book.
And the wise artificers compare with few about much; and with that which is present about that which is absent; and finds novel operation and novel instrument of the descent of the extraneous causes of the art when it happens.
And therefore I say that arrows are not pulled out of the limbs in which they are stuck except in two ways: either by traction of the place where they enter; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that one which is pulled out by the place where it entered, is the arrow proceeding in fleshy place, and it is pulled and pulled out.
And if it does not obey the easement of the hour in which it is caught, then you must leave it for several days until the flesh around it can be softened, and the traction of it and its exit are alleviated.
And similarly if it is stuck in bone and does not obey your easement, then leave that one for several days and repeat that with traction and movement every day, and it will be pulled out.
And if it does not obey your easement after several days, then you must drill into the circuit of the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine drill until the place of the arrow is widened, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already lodged in the place of the body, and is hidden from feeling, then you must inquire about that with a probe, and if you feel it, then pull it out with some instruments which are convenient for its traction.
And if you cannot pull it out because of the constriction of the plague and the length of the shaft, and here there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then you must cut into the plague until it is widened and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the ears in which it is held, then you must cut the flesh in which it is stuck from all sides with all the skill that you can do; and engineer on that, if you cannot pull out the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and torsion of those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you must use with a twist of your hand with forceps in all parts until it makes that obey; and subtly with a subtle skill that the arrow is not broken and that it is made for you difficult to pull it out and from that extraction.
And if you cannot do that in your hour, then you must leave it for several days until the parts that are in the circuit of it soften, and then repeat it when it is alleviated. But if to you a contrary flow of blood is made, then you must administer what we have said of cure in its chapter.
And guard your virtue of incision of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer skill in every manner to you possible of the evasion of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and tardiness and firmness as I have told you.
And therefore that you make contrary the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should the placement of the arrow in it, for it is more helpful. But if that is not to you possible, then you must administer what is to you possible by the figures.
But the arrows that are pulled out by the opposite of the other part, or that already from it proceed some part to the parts outside, or make pliability the extraction of the arrow by feeling of the part above the codename proper and sometimes that eminent; therefore you cut on that; and be the section according to the quantity in which they grasp the forceps; and then pull it out, for it is made lighter to easement.
But if it is held in the bone, then you twist the blade according to contrariety until the arrow presses into the bone, and widen it itself, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then repeat it until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in it, then you impel it with it.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulse, then you introduce and that, if it is blunt, a concave instrument so that between the concavity of it in the tail of the arrow and then impel it with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then you impel it with a strong instrument entering into it, for the arrow is alleviated by that.
And if the arrow is intoxicated, then you must concave all the flesh in which it is the vein, if it is to you possible that, and then care for it with what is convenient.
And if the arrow catches in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and is proximate so that you touch it with the probe, and it is to you possible to cut on it, then cut on it and guard yourself from incision of vein or of nerve, and extract it, and then close the wound if it is necessary, and cure it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are shot:
Let the extremities of them be like a bird's beak that are made like a saw when they grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of these, many species are made, large, few, and medium, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
As a ray so that the entry of it into the concave arrow is eased and it is impelled with that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy of which it is customary to phlebotomize .xxx., of which are in the head .xvi., There are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples appear; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of two bones that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guidegi that are in the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are .v.; Because of those, one is cephalic, and it is the wild latz; and the people call it "the vein of the head," deaf, and it is a medium vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and that name the people "vein of the whole body," and basilica is the vein which is placed in the domestic latz, and it is called "citillar," and the vulgar people call that "vein of the belly"; and funis of the arm, and it is placed on the focil, and it is the one in which it is phlebotomized, and it is the one that appears on the poutz by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the little said auricular and the smallest said, and there are two ramps in it.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of those is below the curvature of the denolh of the wild latz; and the second is sophena, and the place of it is below the leg of the domestic latz; and the sciatic vein, and the place of it is below the leg of the wild latz; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
The benefit of the veins that are near the ears is for ancient catarrh and emigration and sahafati and bad old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: that it be scraped the head of the patient, and that the head of the patient be rubbed in the occiput in the place of both veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then tighten the patient's neck with a bandage until the two appear and the places of them near the ears in two depressed places of the head; and feel that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here is a try.
Then you take the sharp lance, and it is that which is incident, and then you introduce that below the vein in the codena until the phlebotomy comes to the bone. And then you raise your hand with the vein and the codena to the upper parts and you cut the vein with an incident incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make it as much blood as you want.
And then tighten with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
And already it has been preceded at the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
But of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the benefit of phlebotomy is for ancient emigration and bad and chronic ophthalmia and body of acute effusions of superfluity to the bones.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck a lot until the two veins appear to the feeling by manifest appearance and the pulse of them below your finger is demonstrated; and then you feel with a try.
And then you elevate the codena above the vein to the upper parts with your finger indicated, and introduce the incident phlebotomy below, and elevate the vein upwards; and cut that as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood run according to the quantity of your need.
And then untie the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place on that coto and poultices and tighten that above with strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
And already is preceded the recollection of them, and of those the incision, and the traction in the beginning of the book.
And therefore the benefit of phlebotomy of the vein of the front is about the phlebotomy of the cephalic to the old diseases of the face and to emigration and rigor and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is according to what I recommend to you; so it is that the patient strains his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, the form of which is:
Pause the point eminent which is at the head of the lancet on that vein and strike upon it with a pen or with another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity which you want; and then untie the perforation of the patient and strain that until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with a phlebotomy, however, no way that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity as well as the other phlebotomies, rather it should be of blunt extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is proper and strong that it would break it in it the phlebotomy when it is subtle.
But the benefit of the two veins that are at the lacrimals of two heels for scabies of the heels by itch and sebum in the heels, and to the ailments of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient strains his neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you if you are standing over the head of him.
And be made the phlebotomy according to the transverse to longitude a little with phlebotomy a little, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, very likely the extremity of it is broken.
And then make run of the blood as much as is to you necessary, and pause over those cuts, and strain those for a night, and then untie those.
But the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is conferent to acute fever and to soda vehement, and to the ailments of the face and migraine and itch that happens in the face, and mostly when it is ancient.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient strains his neck and then take his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy subtle long and place that in the middle place of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cover that you end your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and make run of the blood according to your necessity; and then tie that for a night, because that is restored lightly.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of the two guidegui is to constriction of ale and to the beginning of leprosy and to many ailments and impetigo and bad ulcers corrosive as well as herpotromeno.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient strains himself in each one in his neck with a bandage; and be the artificers over the head of the patient, and the patient be sitting on a stool.
And then phlebotomize the vein to the long with phlebotomy ample little by little; and then extract of blood according to tempered quantity or according to what you times of necessity that is to what; and then make semblance of the other vein.
And then untie the bandage and strain the two veins with a middle stricture so that the patient is not provoked, and leave until in the morning when the plague is healed.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the veins algerich, confers to small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the circuit of it.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that you make a seizure of the patient in front of you, and strain the neck of him with a bandage, and then turn the lips of him and regard the two veins of which one is of the right of the lip and the second of the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each one of both, and this is more because in the circuit of those there are small black veins; and therefore incisions each one by incision incident.
But if doubt is of you, and you do not know which one of those is, then you enter the incision of the major of those, and of the pus manifest of those.
And make the semblance of the two veins that are in the lips above.
But of two veins that are below the tongue the benefit is to the phlebotomy of the cephalica to preoccupations that are in the goiter, to the ailment of the uvula, and to ailments of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that you follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and elevate the tongue of him, and regard below the tongue, from one side of it vein and from the other side vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
And therefore phlebotomize each one; and guard yourself that you do not end your hand in phlebotomizing those, because below those there are arteries.
And your veins that are phlebotomized in the groin are those in which it customarily runs in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is made according to two manners, or put with the phlebotomy mirtilat or olive to subtlety declining; or secsar with phlebotomy cutellar, and call it alnessil, and this is the form of it:
Let the incision be as if with times, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full proceeding apparent gross, and to those that contain thick blood clotted.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and of more subtle extremity, and it is necessary to phlebotomize of subtle veins that contain subtle blood citrus.
But the usefulness of the phlebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: that which extracts the blood from the ailments that are left the throat and the neck, and from that which is in the feet and the belly.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when phlebotomizing that, that he guard well that and be over-fear in that, because after it there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will wound that artery and will occur a flow of blood, so that if he does not phlebotomize that with phlebotomy pungent, he should abandon it with incision as if with a knife.
And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you leave that one and that you change to the other, or that you seek some branch of it; or that you phlebotomize in the place of its end of the arm, because that one is manifest; and cut that one with phlebotomy knife as we have said.
But if you want the phlebotomy of the median vein, then it is necessary before the stricture of the arm that you touch the place within which you know the place of the wrists, and then place your hand over it with tension; and then lift the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision with a phlebotomy knife as we have said; and guard yourself that the percussion for some space of the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligament, inflammation in the place that you have marked with tension, then that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as if of a child, and the blood is subtle and red, then you know that it is of the blood of the artery; and then you should cover and place your hand over that for a long space; and then stop your hand, and if the blood is cut off, because it has been cut off several times, then you tighten the arm and leave that.
And guard the patient from the dampness of him, and be over-fear of him and do not harm him for some days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not cut off, and you see that you must not present medicine to that, then you should wound the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is contracted, and the blood is cut off; or that you take a piece of fig, and apply that, and take the one half and tighten that over the place of the vein at the stricture descending towards the ligament and within the other day.
And then if the blood is cut off, it is well; and if not, then cure that one with water of which it is preceded to the memory of the place of the powders cutting off the flow of blood.
And the incision of the blood of it is difficult in many dispositions because of the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
But of the dark vein the phlebotomy is usefulness that extracts the blood from the upper part of the head and to the lower part of the body; for that because it is composed of branches of the basilica and of branches of cephalic, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist that one be over-fear in the phlebotomy of it, because after that there is a nerve; and therefore if he adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and touches the nerve, it will occur stupor to him, and it is difficult the healing of it, and for a long time it is not healed at all, And this nerve many times appears to the feeling; and if it is hidden to some men and it is subtle and is not shown, then it is necessary that you pause the phlebotomy with the one with which you phlebotomize with a cut of a knife, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein in the length.
The usefulness of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood of the head and comforts the ailments of the joints.
And it is necessary in this properly, if you want that the phlebotomy be done pungent with phlebotomy olive or with phlebotomy myrtle; because it is the safest of all the veins, because it is not after it artery nor nerve.
But however, for many men is an abscess, when it is not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but do not touch in that abscess.
The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in the preservation of health and in the hope of it and the precaution of the occurrence of diseases, and that phlebotomy is done in one of the veins that is in the arm, namely: cephalic, basilic, and median cubital; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when there appear signs of fullness.
And it should be done phlebotomy on the third day or at the first hour that three hours have passed from the day.
But phlebotomy that is administered, more when it provokes convenience and necessity to it, either at night or day, at any hour and at any time.
And it should be known that a child should not be phlebotomized before he has fourteen years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month into the seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized those who have already passed sixty years.
And since someone wants to be phlebotomized by any manner, it should be known that they should cleanse their bowels before phlebotomy with a lion's enema, if there is a large amount of fecal matter retained, so that the veins do not throw the superfluities into the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the main limbs.
And they should not be phlebotomized patients with nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea, nor those recovering from illness or drunkenness until that has passed from them, nor those with dropsy, but rather that phlebotomy should be feared near colic, near vomiting, near abdominal pain, and near multiplication of labor and exercise of fasting or vigils, and from every cause that dissolves virtue, either corporeal or animal.
And before this, consider in the subtility of humors, if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is possible to it.
And before this, consider in the subtility of humors, if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is possible to it.
And pause the phlebotomy of him in the foot of the day, that is, around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And perforate that the foot of that one be guarded on that day from all evils of animal accidents, as well as anguish, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, as well as labor and superfluous pain and coitus and similar things to them.
And to his bedchamber, let aromatic scents and odors and balms and similar things be present according to the quantity of possibility.
And let the phlebotomist follow over a cushion that is softer than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
And before this, withdraw his arm, and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and then tighten the ligament with a strap and wrap that two times.
And let the stricture be temperate, for when the stricture is not equal, or the stricture is with superfluity, then it forbids the flow of blood; or it is with softening, and then it forbids the body of blood to ascend.
And before the stricture, it should be known that the one who is to be phlebotomized rub their hands together between them while the veins are inflated and declared to the touch.
And before the phlebotomist, anoint his phlebotomy with a little oil, properly; and before this, place his left hand index on that vein, below the place where he wants the phlebotomy, so that the vein runs a little, and the percussion is seated for of the veins is the one that atrobas thus as the heart runs away, and of those is that it is full of venosity and when you place the phlebotomy on that one, it is contracted, and the phlebotomist is discovered; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens, that one is strict.
And therefore, for this, it should be known that the phlebotomist should be halted and be solicited in all these causes.
And before this, pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one go, then it is good; and if not, then repeat this other time below that place a little, or over it with a festoon, if the place is not apoplectic.
And if the place is apoplectic, or the patient is frightened, then leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligament, for it will strongly draw the abscess caut, nor enter into a bath.
And before this, repeat the phlebotomy if the need.
And if the opening is small and the blood runs subtly, and you fear that there will not be the quantity of blood that you want, then you repeat the phlebotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the opening a little, and do this with a festoon before the place is apoplectic, for the place is apoplectic in many men with little opening.
But if sometimes that is already apoplectic, then do not repeat on it, for it excuses you no cause; and pause on that some part of the opening of oil, for it alleviates the body of the blood. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And similarly administer a flench of oil in every phlebotomy with which you open the veins that are forbidden by the body of blood, and they do this tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is placed on the area, because the blood is subtiliated and is revolted when it is thick.
And if in the location of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, because many times it happens, and most to those who have not been bled but that time, or at the opening of the vein little, and then you cover, and place on the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen that for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And cover that you do this near the taking of blood from that vein with the compliment of it or of another vein.
And if there remains in the location for some days some blackness or greenness, do not notice it; and if you want, place on that some cause of aloen and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mint or calament or similar to it.
And many times abscesses and eminences happen because of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And therefore place your hand over it, and if then you feel softness because of your compression over it, then that eminence is bad and evil; and therefore guard yourself that you place over it any cause of what has been said, because it will flow strongly from the artery blood.
And make a poultice with water in which it is stippled, so that the place be endured, and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
And cover that you extract blood from every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that appears on the blood according to how it appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it issue until it is thin; and similarly if you see it thick, then you let it issue until it is subtiliated; and similarly if it is acute, until the acuteness of it is stayed.
And cover that to one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in one time, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomy be wide.
And in that one who is frail, let the contrary of that be done, and cover that you extract that one in troops of times, and that the tract be strait.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of the vein is that it be the transverse section, not puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from flux of blood and incision of nerves, and is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And to which it is customary to happen syncope because of the phlebotomy, and cover that you cure that before the phlebotomy with a little of bread soaked in wine of millegrains or simple oxymel scalded; and extract from the one blood in three times or four.
And if it is a cold complexion, then prepare before the phlebotomy a poultice soaked in mirra syrup or in honey syrup aromatized with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in syrup aromatized and with a strong odor.
And if syncope happens because of the phlebotomy, and the cause of it is the issuing of much blood, then cover that you prepare in drinking water of flesh and syrup very odorant; and use of aromaticity with algualea, and be the one's feet lined with it.
And use of the other causes that have been said in the division in the chapter of syncope by evacuation.
And he who wants to vent his arm and dissolve his blood according to time, cover that to him whose phlebotomy is by much evacuation, and the virtue of him is cold, that evacuate the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
But he who wants to vent his arm, and get his blood according to the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven hours or nine from the first phlebotomy.
But he who wants to throw the blood of his body to the contrary of the part to which it declines, cover that it be vented on the second day or the third.
But that body in which there is much blood already scalded and is acute and causes fever, cover that it be thrown from it blood in one time and be from it thrown a great quantity and be amplified the opening until syncope occurs, because you will have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and that you place your hand over the wrist of it because of the blood's body, so that it does not end up dead in place of syncope, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And cover that when you want to vent the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is made difficult the issuing of the blood, that you do not press over it with vehemence and curve it slightly, because that is too bad.
Rather let it be let go until it is phlebotomized secondarily; or remove that with the acuteness of the phlebotomy that is coagulated of the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place over it of tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress that with lighter compression until the blood is issued.
And if the vein is suppurating, then leave that and do not touch it until the suppurating is seated.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate blood according to the method, and there is no excuse, then you bleed him in that location or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "artery of the arm" is flebbotomated in the place of the fossa or basilica, when they are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient inserts his hand in cold water until the focus reddens and the vein appears manifestly.
And then it is tightened on that limb with a stricture mitten; and phlebotomize according to the small transverse, not longitudinally nor according to the length.
And be the opening wide and be your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize that on the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you iterate the hand in cold water and leave the blood run in the water until you achieve your necessity.
But if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the iteration of the hand in cold water, and the most is placed the body of the blood in cold water in time of winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than of all the other veins, because it leaves him no pulsating vein, nor nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the saphena of the right hand is convenient for the diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that you tighten the hand with a bandage or with your own hand, because you have placed it in cold water, until the vein is inflated and is well demonstrated to the viewer; and then phlebotomize that transversely; and if it is incised that of all no one will see it in red.
And conserve that you do not finish your hand with the phlebotomy, because from him are the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
And then iterate the hand in cold water and let the blood run in that, because if you do not iterate that in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited from flow.
And as it is extracted the blood according to the quantity of necessity, then you pause on the vein oil and salt, so that it not be consolidated tightly; and similarly, cover that you do in all straight ram.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of that of the left hand, is that it is convenient for the diseases of the spleen.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of him as you have done in the other.
And the benefit of the saphena vein of the phlebotomy is to the illnesses that are in the part below the body, as well as illnesses of the womb, and to the retention of menstruation, and to the illnesses of the lungs and ulcerations of the thighs and of the legs old, and to their likenesses of illnesses.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient inserts his foot in cold water and makes friction upon it until the veins appear well; and lay upon the joint of the foot with a strap; and the place of the vein the talo appears by the finger, and of that are ramifications in the surface of the foot motz ramps.
And therefore phlebotomize the widest ram or below the leg by the talo of the agreement of him, because it is better and safer.
And if you phlebotomize that in the surface of the foot, then you guard yourself from the nerves that are below that on the surface of the foot, and pause your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize for the transverse, as if you wished to incise it.
And be the phlebotomy void.
But if the emission of blood is prohibited; then you iterate the foot of him in cold water and let the blood run in that until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then iterate with the phlebotomy in a little, because the place is safe; and do not fear of him malice, but that you guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do of the saphena of the other foot equally.
And of the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is by the talo below the cavity of the left part.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of him is to pain of the hip when it is by blood caut.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient enters in bath, and fastens and strengthens the thigh of him from the side of the wide into above the talo above four fingers in a long and subtle band, so that it appears not by that.
And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each engine that is to you possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise that by incision or secces that by section, because the place of it is safe.
And she is in many men well-known; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then phlebotomize some ram of it, and it is that which appears in the back of the foot opposite the auricular and the annular.
And guard yourself from the nerves, and make the blood run in the quantity that you want.
And then loosen the stricture and place over the location of the phlebotomy cut and tighten the area, slightly it is healed.
Of suction and the qualities of using those.
Suctions are of horns, or of wood, or of iron.
And suction is made in two ways: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is suction without scarification.
And this suction that is without scarification is in two ways, whether it is with fire or without fire.
And to the suctions that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations of the body, of which one in which suctions are placed is alnocrati, and it is the rear part of the head; and the middle location of the two parts of the neck together; and suction of the chin below the jawbone below the mouth; and suction of the two spatulas; and suction of alohoster, and it is above the end of the rib; and suction of the two fossils, and it is of two arms; and suction of the two cavities; and suction of the two thighs.
And suction does not extract the blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not catch the virtue through those, as it is caught by phlebotomy; nor does it occur that suction be made with fire or without fire in any illness caused by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity provokes suction for illness or for continuation, administer it at every hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and in any time that it is.
And therefore when times in any cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command suction to be made more than it is passed from the day two or three hours.
And the benefit of suction of the neck is that when that confers gravity to the head and to what is effused to the eyes; but it is necessary that this be approached evacuation of the whole body.
And this suction is in the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
And it is not light that use of it that one who is of frega complexion, or in which is catarr, for it gives to that great harm.
And therefore it is not necessary that use of it the old, and in the heads of whom there are frail illnesses.
But to that one who above that is continuing over it is made oblivion; and therefore it is necessary that you command the suctioner that pause his hand a little with the suction to the parts below, fear of the generation of oblivion.
But suction of alkehel is in the location of phlebotomy of the vena fusca and of the basilica: and therefore confers to asthma, and to the constriction of ale and to the scissura of the sturment of ale, and to cough, and to repletion.
And it is necessary that the suction alkehel be pulled a little, for if it is paused below, it engenders weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the suction of alhagdahan confers to the pains accidental in the head and to ophthalmia, and migraine, and pre-focus, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the location of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And it is necessary that you command the suctioner that do not press his hand with scarification so that it does not pierce the artery and happen fluxes of blood.
And suction below the chin confers to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gums, and semblance to their of the illnesses that are in the mouth, and stand in the location of phlebotomy of aliheric that is in the two lips.
But the suction that is made over the two spatulas confers to caphatan, the which is made by repletion of heat.
And the suction of the two parts of the ends of the fossils confers benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, so it is of the basilica, fusca and cephalica, because that one attracts the blood of all those veins more slender that are in the flesh, and those veins more slender of the other veins more gross until that the attraction comes to the three veins.
And command the suctioner that too much does not proceed in scarification, because the location is denuded of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a suction with which is suctioned over the assholes and confers to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the ulcers more below.
And tell the ventor to make a large incision, and that it be deep, because the place needs a strong section; and very light and subtle ventor's are used and it be scarified with a scarification.
But smaller incisions on the legs are made more subtly, because they draw blood from the whole body, and correspond to old pains in the lungs and the womb, and the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and correspond to boils and hemorrhoids; and they are in the place of phlebotomy of two veins, and they are incised, and of two arteries.
But too much weakens the whole body and causes fainting in many men.
And of the incisions, the healing is proper to the incisions of the two legs.
And the quality of the position of the incisions is that you pause the incision at the beginning and suck it with temperate suction, and do not prolong the position of the incisions, but pause them lightly, and move them carefully, and that the humors come to the place by equal movement. And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the place already reddened and inflated and that the color of the blood appears.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and then consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who has tender flesh of rare pores, you must scarify him once and no more, because the place should not be ulcerated.
And command the ventor to amplify the scarification and prolong it a little, and temper the suction with facility.
And if in the blood there is thickness, then you must scarify twice, because in the first scarification the way of subtlety to the blood and its liquidity is opened. But in the second, to the acquired scrutiny of the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then the third scarification should be made so that it may achieve the last.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little, one scarification suffices us.
And if we want an extraction of much blood, we scarify with many scarifications; and if we knew that the blood was thick, then we must scarify with a prolonged scarification.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision only.
And if that one whose incision is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, then the places of the incisions should be anointed more gently, wider, more resolved; if it is in summer, as it is with oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of double amaranth, or oil of quince; and if it is in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of sanc, and to those similar.
And if the superfluity is thick, hot, then the oil should be amaranth, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to those similar.
But if the ventor has wide pores of tender flesh, then he should be prohibited from oil, and he should have the places of the incisions near their own ventilation washed with water or with cold water of solatrum, or with quince water, or with water of board, and similar to those.
And the one whose blood is of much humidity, wash their incisions with sour wine, or with myrtle and sumac water, and similar to those.
And of the one whose superfluities are thick, wash their incisions with old wine, or with water of sansuc, which is majoram, or of decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and to those similar.
And the incision should be guarded before bathing; bathing should be administered near the bath for an hour or two, and he should sleep near the incision.
What is what is necessary to be regulated by the ventor before phlebotomy.
You must consider at the beginning: then if the ventor or the one who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and tends to sharp blood and inflammation, then he should be prepped with cooling causes, such as vinegar, endive with sour wine and lettuce, and secanabin, and julep, and to those similar.
And pause their meals as much as they can, and birds' meat, and dishes seasoned with sour things, and to those similar.
And of the one whose complexion is cold, he should be prepped to drink syrup of almiva, or syrup of alsecanabin of seeds, and sumac, and very fragrant wine between veal and lamb; and that he should be commanded to use little drinking and eating, and pause their meals of little and canary, and sparrows and small birds and doves.
And he should drink more than eat on the day of incision and phlebotomy.
And he should be given to drink in some hours to certain men tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, so it is muscat, or alcelita before the incision or before phlebotomy or near it, so that the main limbs be comforted and that the blood be subtiliated; and he should not take that scalfatz.
But the wounds that are the incisions should be placed on the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and on the tip of the hip, because these members do not endure incisions on themselves.
And it is not desired for those (wounds) but rather the drawing of blood from the limb, just as we place a cupping glass on the nipple in the disease of bleeding from the nose; and we use it so that the cold, viscous air from the limb is dissolved, just as we place it on the belly and navel; because it thins the limb and warms it and removes the pain as it resolves the cupping glass.
And it is already placed on the abscesses when they occur in their suppuration or boil, because by virtue of the strong drawing, the pus is drawn out and eradicates the boil from its place.
And similarly it is done when it is placed on the liver and spleen, drawing out the cupping glass in those enclosed spaces.
And these cupping glasses are administered empty with suction alone; and some times they are administered with fire.
And some times they are administered full of tepid water in the diseases of the spleen.
And this is because the cupping glass should be filled and be larger, so it is either water alone or water in which herbs have been boiled appropriate to the water.
Form of cupping glass administered with fire: its orifice width is two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon is the majority of a palm; and it is in the place of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the majority of it, the trauc is small according to the quantity that enters it a needle.
It is made of a thick piece of iron or copper, with large edges, lion, smooth and rounded so that it does not damage the limb of its position on it.
And in the middle of it is a transverse bar of iron or steel, on which a candle is placed with the fire.
And already this cupping glass is larger than the one we have described; and the small one less according to the diseases and the state of him who uses it.
And the cupping glasses of the infants and the weakened are others than the cupping glasses of the young and of large bodies.
And the quality of placing this cupping glass with fire on the limb is that it extends the fire with wood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and places it on the middle of the transverse bar in the middle place of the cupping glass, so that the fire is ignited around the part below so that it does not burn the body of the patient.
And then it is placed on the limb of the patient, and the finger is on the trauc that we have said, and when we have the cupping glasses and do not indicate that we show the finger and that it escapes the vapor on that trauc, then the cupping glass is immediately dissolved.
And properly ignite the fire according to its manner, and repeat that if they are indicated of it.
But in a cupping glass that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse bar nor trauc, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb alone.
And this is the form of it: And this cupping glass, the more it is large, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in all members but in those members in which it is not possible to place cupping glasses, because of the smallness of those, such as the mouth and gums and similar to them; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and the nose and their similar.
And the quality of using those that have been found leeches that are in the waters of muddy ponds.
And then they are left in the day and night in muddy water until they are famished, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and with cupping glasses; and then the limb of the patient is rubbed until it reddens; and then they are placed on it.
And as they are filled and case.
And if it is possible suction from the place with a cupping glass, it is more beneficial.
And if not, then the place is washed with vinegar and then with a lot of water; and it is rubbed and squeezed.
And if the bleeding of the patient is prolonged after the removal of the leeches, and that is the result, then you put a cloth of linen in cold water and place it over it until the bleeding is stopped.
And if the bleeding is multiplied, then powdered vitriol, or walnuts and similar to them of the causes of astringent, is sprinkled over it until the bleeding is stopped; or the middle of the boiled beans is placed on the spot and left until the beans adhere to the spot, and the bleeding is stopped.
And therefore, if necessary, the repetition of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then the spot is rubbed with fresh blood or a needle is left in the places until blood escapes; and then they are placed, because those when they feel some blood immediately adhere.
And when you want them to lie down, sprinkle a little bit of crushed aloes, or salt, or ash, on them, and cover them quickly.
Thus begins the reading of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in the bones.
Oh, son, know that these foolish doctors and the vulgar boast of this chapter, and those who at no time have regarded the books of the Ancients nor read even a letter from them.
And for this reason it is made that this manner of the learned in our land is deprived; and you must not forget this at all; and I have not adopted this that I have learned, but for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study over the understanding of them, until I extracted the science from them.
And therefore I turn to experiment and study in the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my best experience has been passed; because I have now abridged it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of elongation; and abridged it at the end of abridgement; and showed it at the end of declaration; and formed in it many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as it has been done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summaries and collections from the essence of bone fractures, from which their preliminary knowledge is necessary before we begin the recollection of broken and diverse members, of each one. Therefore, I say that in the prologue of this chapter, the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning the artificers are forced and stand on the truth of them; so it is for you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art other than you.
And therefore I say that when you come across a fracture or dislocation or sprain or wound, then you must at the beginning apply yourself to phlebotomy or to bleed that, or both at once, if no cause prohibits it, as for example, weakness of virtue, or the one to whom you are attending is a child, or old and decrepit, or the time is of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then he should be content in his food with cold herbs and poultry and crabs; and we forbid him fatty meats and filling him with foods and all foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of a safe abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the limb.
And then return the patient to his first regimen to which he is accustomed.
And therefore, as the broken bone begins to be restored, then the patient should be fed with nourishing foods of much and heavy nourishment in which there is viscosity, such as foods made of cooked wheat with water, and rice, and caps, and fish, and cow bellies, and eggs, and fresh poultry, and thick gruel and similar to those, and with this regimen is made the coagulation of the fracture more lightly and better.
And know that the broken bones when they are in men who are in the first youth and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their limbs.
However, nature adjusts and amends over the broken bone of every part any cause seeming to glut in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it until they are at once conglutinated and tied together, until they come to the end of firmness and hardness, as fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the patient's foods, foods in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And you will come with recollection of every species of fracture, explained in their distinct chapter from the other.
Many varieties of fracture within themselves. And they are diversified the species of fracture of the bone in themselves; for there is an arched fracture, another that happens in stars; and sometimes it is made a fracture according to the length of the bone: and in the fractures of their satagia and stars and additions proceeding and non-proceeding, as it is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with a plaque and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And to every species is engendered a proper torment in its restoration, according to which will come recollection of it distinct in its places.
Many signs of fracture of the bone. And by this is known a bone fracture: it is the twisting of it, and of that prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and so of it when you compress it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting in the place, nor is there a feeling when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
However, it is possible that it is a small twist or fissure, so that you must feel it with your hand and with compression of the whole; however, place on it of the medicines of which you remember a little before this moment, the one that is convenient to the place; and then be strict by subtle constriction.
And know that the place when it is arched and is not split into two or otherwise that does not happen in it, as if the whole part of its comparison is remauged, then you must begin from your hour to the rectification of it, however, that it happens after the cautery abscess.
And if it happens abscess caut, then leave that for a few days until the abscess ceases; and then bandage it according to whatever manner that you can of lightness and of ingenuity.
And know that the restoration of it and the healing of it is lighter than of the bone in which this happened sathagie.
And then strengthen it according to what will come the remembrance of it.
But if in the bone there are satagias, then it is necessary the extension of this broken limb of two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And be in the position with which you place the limb in the place, according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended of the broken limb, then you must perforate that you make return those additions with ingenuity and according to whatever manner that you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength that it does not happen upon the patient by your operation pain nor injury; and perforate yourself according to your power that you apply one bone with the other its companion according to their best forms.
And you must in that hour profitably touch with your hand that, and if you see here any other cause, rectify that and bandage that according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, as if foolish doctors do that, who often make happen abscess caut by their operation, or make happen contraction in the limb as we have seen this by the operation of their foolish practices.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil limb is that which I recommend; for that you know that the broken limbs are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small as the arm and the hand and the foot and similar to those, then you must the envelopment be of very fine cloth.
But those that are gross as the thigh or the leg, then you must in those be envelopment broad and hard, for the broad liament connects the great limb and strengthens that of all parts with even constriction, so that in it no macula enters.
And then, as you begin, your evacuation of equation, pause liament convenient to this, over the place of that fracture with three envelopment or four according to that the limb merits; and strengthen your hand a little in the liament.
And then, see to that at the part most sovereign of the place of the fracture, and strengthen less than not to force your constriction with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture. And then, lengthen yourself to envelopment of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the constriction little by little, until you take from the place a great part.
And then, take another bandage and envelop that other time over the broken place with envelopment, and then see to the envelopment at the part farther from the fracture; and be your operation in the constriction of the envelopment and in the softening of that according to that we have said in the first envelopment below.
And then, pause between the envelopment of stopa lion or cloth with which is evened the tortuosity of the fracture, if in it there is tortuosity; and if not, do not pause in it any cause.
And then, pause upon it another bandage, and then bandage over these envelopment stars decently made at once, if in the place there is no inflammation or abscess caut, and then pause upon it that which seats the abscess that and that os the inflammation; and leave that for a few days; and then you strengthen upon it the stars.
And let the stars be mostly made of cane, well formed; or of pine wood; or of palm branches; and let the width of each star be according to this form and this figure:
However, the star placed over the fracture should be thicker and a little larger than the others, and the length of the star according to what is measured on the limb in magnitude and smallness; and then bind over the stars with another bandage according to your first structure; and then tie it below decently according to what we have said of structure, and it is that it should be your structure according to the location of the fracture more, and as much as the fracture is elongated, the less the structure.
And that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and be of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen by the operation of some fools putting their threads of cords of hemp, and it is a great error, when the bandage is outside equality.
And excessively fine threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to make a bandage with them that you want, and it is not that between star and star there be less than a finger's width.
And if the patient is said to be sensitive in the extremities of the stars near the bandage in those places, then place some cotton wool or carded wool between that so that it does not harm him.
Sometimes a fracture is with a plague, and accidents happen in the bone, and I will come with a remedy in that in the chapter according to singularity.
And know that all broken limbs are not straight with stars on the first day; the reason is that the limb, when it is great, should not be placed on stars but rather after 5 or 7 or more days, according to your certainty of the advent of a boil.
And this is the way of the plasters with which the Ancients restored, those which were placed on fractures and dislocations and sprains.
Way of plastering as a bruised restoration of fracture, convenient to many complexities and mostly to women and children, because it is of that which does not bring heat nor cold: and it is that you take of powdered meal, and it is the marrow of the flour that remains from the movement of the mill on the sides of the mill.
And mix that as it is, unless that you sift it with album of egg, and place the confection of it not thick nor subtle; and then use of that.
Another way to plaster to restore fractures, dislocations, and sprains: Take asafoetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the root of wild millet, of all ana drac. x; of myrrh and aloe ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; all be ground and sifted and be mixed with water alichil or with album of egg if the complexion of the patient is scalded; and then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores the bones broken lightly, and confers to many men.
Another way of plaster which confers to fracture and sprain: Take migrach and met of white altea ana drac. x; of myrrh and aloe ana drac v; of acacia drac. vi; of bol armenic drac. .xx.
All be ground in a mortar with much contricio, and be sifted, and be comfit with water or album of egg and be administered.
Way of plastering to joints and separated bones of their places, and it is said pain accident in those and in fissures and fractures: be taken wool felt and be submerged in strong wine and cooked oil and be placed over the place.
More in this plaster is not virtue of restoration, of boil and expels pains properly.
Another way of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and leaves of wild poppy; grind all and make a plaster of theirs.
Way of plaster abbreviated administered of the restoration of fracture of bones and when you want resolution of the remaining of boil: recipe of ground althea, of chamomile and violets flowers, of er's flour, of all ana part .i.; Be all ground and be cofit with wine, if the limb is not scalded.
But if it is scalded, then mix that with humid coriander water or water and use of it.
Another way of plaster more strong in resolution than this first, when accidents happen hard boil of the restoration of the limb: recipe of ground althea and of seed of li, and of balaustia, and melilot, majorana, violets flowers, of chamomile, of all ana part i engual; all be ground and be cofit with water of sauze or with sweet water or with wine, all that according to the quality of the limb and the repose of the color of it.
But Ipocras does not say in his book that it be placed on the broken limb of the restoration of it but rather made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommend that it be medium between thickness and subtlety.
It has been observed in Gaul that when a broken limb is placed on a restoration of it and the causes in which it is dried with a small amount of heat, such as myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
A method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: Take wheat, of chickpeas, of human hair cut or bird feathers, and of alum, and salt, finely ground; be crushed and sifted and be cooked, and make a plaster.
But the quantity according to which the wound remains and is loosened, is that you consider if no pain nor numbness nor the bone is broken, is not worse than its place, then you do not untie for many days. And if pain, numbness, or inflammation occurs at the site, then you must either tighten or untie it at that hour, and remove the plaster from it.
And take a cloth of linen and a sponge of sea lion wet, and submerge that in tepid water, and with that wash the site until that numbness and pain are subsided; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then place upon it woolen cloth submerged in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and bind it over it for a night until you are sure of a cautery abscess, and that the inflammation of the limb rests, and the pain of it is removed.
And then repeat that stricture subtle and small plaster and do not tighten it with your first constriction, and more subtle with it until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and the roar and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents are already removed from all, and you have gotten rid of plaster and constriction, then you repeat that as you have done at the beginning, equally.
And if no accidents occur to the limb of those that we have said, then do not untie it until three days or four or five or seven. And some times all this is left for twenty days according to how it appears to you by the unbinding of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And then adjust in the constriction more than in your first constriction altogether, and adjust in the thickening of the food of the patient, according to how the remembrance of it is preceded.
But if you see the site of the fracture already dry and extend more than it should, then you know that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; and therefore immerse it in tepid water every time that you untie it; and let it be so for three days; and ease the constriction a little, and by this operation the nourishment will run to the limb, and it will heal slightly.
But what those foolish restorers of the fracture of the limb do another time when it is not restored at the beginning, according to how it should, and is restored according to tortuosity, is an error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if it were a straightener, that which enlarged the Ancients in their writings and they were accustomed with this work.
And I have not seen any of them do this, because it is more reasonable that they do not do this.
Chapter Second: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are made by a blow of a spade, and the blow throws all the bones into the skull, which is left the bone, as if it were done in the shaft, and for this reason this species is called ascial; or the spade cuts into some part of the bone, and cuts into the flesh of it and does not pass the incision into the back of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute levitation.
And the plague of these two fractures is either great or small, and of a fracture that is contortion or attrition; and the cause of it is a blow with a pole or a fall on a rock, and their likenesses.
And this fracture is either penetrating that already approaches the panniculus which is left the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is either great or small.
And of a fracture that is broken in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason this species is called capillary fracture.
And it is a fracture that is made either by a fall or by a blow of a rock and its likenesses, which makes some lamina of the bone enter into the parts within, and it is made in the concave place as it happens to the payroles of eram when it happens to their blow and is the part of their entrance into the parts within.
And most often this is done in the bodies of wet bones, as if they were the heads of infants.
And to all these species of fractures, there are pains as if they were stars separated. And I will come with remembrance of all this in its place.
And we shall know all these species of fracture by detection upon them and by inquiry of them with touch and examination of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary species is known by this that it is discovered upon the bone, and it is rubbed, and lined upon it with touch, for the fracture appears black.
But in the cure of a fracture, consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest signification upon pain, as it is vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and swelling of the joints and roar of them, and likenesses to them of the accidents in the major dispositions, then adopt that it is not healed.
And if you see no-flowing accidents, then you begin the cure of him.
The cause of this is that if the patient has come to you at the beginning as he is afflicted and this is in the days of winter, then you must study the condition of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you must examine the bone before the seventh day, because that which is left of the bone should be corrupted by the panniculus, and that the accidents that we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain, and it is in small pieces and attrition, then you must insert the minute and rubbed piece, according to what I will tell you.
And you shave the head of the afflicted patient, and uncover the bone according to custom and manner as much as possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be light upon the patient.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flows of blood or pus, then you oppose it with what you must, and it is that you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and rubbed oil, and make the patient rest until the pus is settled, and if you are sure of the blood flow; and then you begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
And the one way is that you insert the bone with a straight, narrow incisor, and this is the shape of it: And then administer another incisor, this one a little wider than that one; and this is the shape of it:
And then administer more the wider incisor than the second.
And you must have various types of incisors, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others, and they are at the end of sharpness of their extremities, and they are made of Indian iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incisor so that it does not break the head and damage it.
And if the bone is strong, hard, then you must pierce in its circuit before you administer the incisors with the drills, which are called non-deep drills.
And they are not called thus, but because those do not reach the term of the bone of the skull, to which it is close, because the drill has a round extremity or margin, over which the remaining head is sharp, resembling a margin or a small circle, which prohibits it from being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these drills a great number of which as many as are convenient to the thickness of each bone, so that it is to you present in all the tests of the skull, the extremity of which is sharp, the quantity in length and shortness be according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of drills: The quality of piercing in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the drill on the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then change the drill to another location, and place that which is between all the cracks the quantity of the thickness of the ray or environment of that.
And then insert with incisors that which is between each crack of the bone, and make that as subtle as you can in the end of lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for some instruments which you will have prepared for that, as such as tweezers and subtle forceps.
And you must guard with all caution that the incisor does not touch any cause of the scalp.
And therefore, as you will have circuited the bone, and if it is continued with it, you will separate it from the scalp, and you will have extracted it, you must shave and smooth that in the roughness of it of that which is in the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but however, it must be more thin and more subtle than the others incisors.
And if any small pieces of bones and splinters remain, then take that with ease with what you must of the instruments; and then care for the wound with lichens and ointments which we have said.
And the other way of operation is lighter, farther from pain, which Gualia and lauzec call by great praise; and this is the sermon of it: it is necessary to you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone of the place in which is the fracture most vehement and most manifest, until when you will have discovered that part and you will have placed below it the extremity of this slow and gentle incisor, of which this is the form:
And it is that the lenticular part is long and you do not insert any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides forward in length, as sometimes; so that the lenticular part be adjusted to the scalp with the face of it incident acute in the bone.
And then strike upon the incisor of one part with a small mallet until you insert the whole bone with ease as it is revolved, and you are sure of the panniculus that no accident happens to it in any way, and if the medicant14 was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was asleep.
If now any cause is annexed to the bone of the panniculus in some places of the bone, cut that of it with the extremity of the lenticular incisor, and deliver that of it with facility, because it is delivered from it its pain and its fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is cut off or taken from the bone is its fascia, and remains in it roughness and subtle ridges, then when you remove that roughness and eradicate those ridges with subtle razors, of which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it is possible for you to administer in each place the most convenient ones of them and the most right ones according to what you are applying in your operation that broken bone and its figure.
And when you administer in your reason with which razor you remove the bone at the beginning the most blunt of those razors, and then use the most subtle one of it, and do not cease doing so according to continuity until you arrive at administering the most thin and the most subtle of all of them.
But in each of the other fractures, requested capillary and subtle fractures, when you administer care according to what you perceive for its rectification.
And it is a cause that it is not well-known about all of those who have studied in that art. And this is what we have shown about those who have written about great fractures.
And if the panniculus is cut when you eradicate the bone, then when you take cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge that in rose oil, and place that over the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place that over the first cloth, and do this as lightly as you can, so that you do not crush the cephalic; and then administer over that bandage, and do not tighten it except for the quantity that the wound alone has.
And leave that with this care for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess caut; and then untie that and then administer medicines with which is superfluous dryness, as well as root of linen and flour of herbs, and powder of incense and of aristolochia, and of similar things to those.
And it is that you make of these medicines powder that be pulverized over the wound, as well as they are dry; and universally, administer in that all medicine of property of which it is that it abstersca and does not bite.
And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and not be in it dirt of rinsing or other; nor allow virulence to be added to it; because when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts it and you can corrupt it, and it happens to the patient as if it were a bad and malignant evil.
And it happens in the cephalic of the head, as if from it is modified the bone and most when the cure of it is less cared for, and it is blackness on the surface of it; and therefore consider when it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious all of it.
And if it does not happen blackness but from the medicine that is placed on top of it, and it is in virtue of that medicine that it makes that blackness, then when you take of honey one part and of rose oil parts iii., and in those lines a cloth, and then place that over the cephalic; and then cure that with the species of cure that convenes until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken but two parts together, or one of those sometimes, because in it you have two bones, because the part left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not happen to it except attrition and tortuosity and sinuosity.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then when you introduce the said little one into its nose, and that you align that fracture from within with your said finger, and with the said finger outside, until the nose returns according to its natural figure. And do this by you with facility, and guard yourself that no pain be caused to the patient by that operation of yours.
And if the fracture is in the most sovereign part of the nose, and the said one does not reach that, then when it be equal with the extremity of the ray in which it is small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the semblance of that.
And take care of you in the restoration of it in the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; and if not, then about the seventh or tenth, the rest of the abscess caut.
And then introduce into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth of it, if the fracture is in one part, or put two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and be in the splint thickness of such quantity that it fills the trough of the nose.
And I say some of the ancient restorers that the splints be enclosed in border, and be changed every day, but it is not seen to me; it should be that the piece be enclosed in album of comfit with powder of mol; and then leave the one until the bone is set and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes there are splints in the nose, in place of a splint, a kind of poultice wrapped in a lion's cloth; and if the patient already has a fracture of the nose, very violent and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do this, and if you want, do splints.
And if another time a boil occurs after the cautery, plaster the nose with cerot or with cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
But if no boil occurs after the cautery, then cover that area with a plaster of sesame flour and powdered quince seeds with egg white; and place a lion's cloth over it, and do not touch the nose with any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then cover those with a splint, and extract those with instruments that are suitable for those; and then close the incision, and cure it with what will heal and consolidate it, and with plasters suitable for it.
And if a plague occurs in the nose, then cover it with splints and administer lead pipes until it is completely healed.
Chapter .iiii.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not with a plague, regard then if the fracture is only outward, and not broken in two and curved at the parts within, then its knowledge is lighter.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, that you introduce your left index into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left mandible, then introduce the index finger of your right hand; and push with that the flexibility of the fracture within with ease to the outward parts, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; with that decentment equal that.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated in two, then cover that you administer extension of two parts according to rectitude until it is possible the equation of it.
And if there occurs concussion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those of which you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or lead; and place on the broken jaw cerot, and place on it doubled cloth, and place on the cloth a large splint made decentment, or a piece of sole equal to the length of the jaw; and tie that above according to how the ligation of it is prepared for you and that the application convenes, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use of rest and tranquility, and place the food of him soft leons.
And if you estimate that already the figure is altered in any manner, then you take off and untie that on the third day; and then rectify that which is already altered of it and plaster it with powdered moli, with egg white, or with sesame flour, because you will have obtained the cerot of it, and place on the plaster lion's wool.
And therefore, as it stands annexed and adjusted that plaster on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, that you do not untie it until it is healed and strengthened the fracture; because often times this fracture is straightened in three sempmanas.
And if another time a boil occurs after the cautery, then administer that which we have said many times in the sedation of it until it is healed, and be removed that boil.
And if the fracture is with a plague, then consider if it is a piece of the bone separated or splints, then you take subtilia those splints with what you convenes to it in the removal of those from the instruments.
And if the orifice of the plague is strait, then you amplify it with the fleubotomi according to the quantity of your necessity.
And after you will have obtained those splints, and of those no sir remaugut re, then you cover the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and if not, place on that one of the plasters that conveneysso to it and incarnate that, until it is healed.
Chapter .v.
Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Many times the clavicle is broken at the part before the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three manners.
Because it is broken, or separated, or is separated in two parts other that do not coincide splints; and it is easy to the restoration of it; or it is so that it occurs in it splints, and it is difficult to the restoration of it; or it is so that the fracture is with a plague.
And the operation in that, when the fracture is with a plague, is that you make to be present two ministers, so that one has the adjutori and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck with that part.
And after enguala the fracture with your fingers until it is made the form of it according to what cove, and not be in it little eminence nor concavity.
And if you indigeysses more of extension, then cover below the titillic of the patient's hopes of cloth or wool, and be the greatness of it according to the quantity of your necessity; and extend and elevate the clavicle and constrict the hope with your hand until you enguales the frectura according to what cove.
And if you cannot pull the extremity of the clavicle outwards, because it has reached the breastbone, then make the patient lie on their neck, and place a medium-sized cushion on their muscle.
And the minister presses the muscle towards the lower parts while the bone of the clavicle is elevated that is in the breastbone, and then you rectify the fracture and grasp it with your hands.
But if you feel splinters of the clavicle and they are bad, then make them over that and extract those splinters with ease.
And if it is held in the bone, then you make an incision of it with one of the scissors which you have prepared for this, because you had placed below the clavicle the instrument that serves the chisel; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the form of it:
And it is similar to a chisel of which this is the concavity; and its width according to what you have need of it, according to the greatness of the bone or the smallness of it.
But the length of it be according to what is possible to you in the operation; that it have two extremities thus as times, and one extremity be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and it is sure of a cautery abscess, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear a cautery abscess, then you  apply the wound with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the scissure of the wound.
And if an abscess occurs, then you put a cloth in strong wine and rose oil and wine, and place it over that.
And all, that it not be bad the board over the broken bone; and for so much as you see the patient every day, that when the ligament is softened or sometimes the board already be remauguda, then you rectify that and strengthen the bandage.
And then place the sleep of the patient on their neck, and place below the tip of it of their sleep at night a small cushion; so that with that it be elevated the support of it from the side of it, and therefore is elevated the fracture of the clavicle to elevation of the muscle; or it be the arm of it tied to the neck of it.
And do not untie the bandage unless you happen in the place proximately or abscess, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to that, and adjust in the stricture and restore that and leave it until it be restored and be coagulated the fracture of the clavicle.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some times in some men it is done in less time than that.
Chapter VI.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula tart is broken in the side of it and not broken of it but the edges.
And therefore when it is broken the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and it is not known except by touch, then according to what is the figure of the fracture forces you the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every manner of ingenuity which is to you possible.
And then place over the place powder of wheat with egg white and linen cloth; and then place powder of cloth doubled; and then place over it a board slice of fine board according to the quantity of the spatula whole or maybe a little.
But if below the board is concavity in some of the places of the spatula, then you embrace that concavity with linen cloth, and then raise the board according to equality.
And then strengthen above with humidity long with constriction decent and with firmness of the board until it not be remauguda from its place.
And consider the bandage every day; and every time that it be softened, tie another time and strengthen it and equal the board if it be remauguda from its place.
And place the patient on their side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And therefore when this number is complete, then you dissolve the bandage, and that you know for sure that it is of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the location of the lower bone and place the bandage below the hip, then you cut across it, and remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle of the saddle, if an abscess occurs here, cauterize it.
Chapter VII.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle part of it and that is hard to mend; but the extremities of it must be mended that so they may be cicatrized and comminuated.
And of the accidents of it when the middle part of it is broken, it is that it declines to the parts of it and occurs great pain to it, and difficulty in its motion, and cough, and great heat and vomiting of blood; and it is declared in it the cavity in the broken bone and is not concealed to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that it be laid the patient on his back, and place between the spaces of it a cushion; and then press on the muscles of it, and adjust the bones of it with the hands of two sides, and subtilly in the operation of it and in the equation according to every manner that is to this possible and that convenes to this, until that the figure of the bone returns according to that cove.
And then place on it plaster and lint and place above the table of a subtle cloth of gauze or of calico and of their likeness in levitate, because you envelop that in cloth; and then subtilly in lian that on the broken bone that it not be harmed; and go with the bandage according to roundness to the back sometimes, and strengthen that with a decent stricture; and then consider the bandage in every hour, and when it is softened strengthen that.
And if necessity provokes the disfigurement of that you must corrode or pruziment, the pain, or the abscess that occurs in the place, then you cut and untie that and eradicate the plaster and rectify that which occurs by that manner of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster, if times to that the face; and adjust to it stricture until that it be healed.
Chapter VIII.
Of the restoration of the back when it is broken.
Know that fracture of the back does not catch but in places gross that follow the back; and of the extremities of them of the part in front does not occur to those contricio but for that which so cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not concealed to the feeling, therefore the inquiry of it with the said.
And the restoration be thus that you equal the fracture with the said according to the manner possible, until that it be engulfed according to that cove, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a stela, if it be indigested of that.
And if the fracture of the back is declining to the parts of it, then occurs to the patient great pain and puncture, as well as puncture that occurs to him who has pleureci, and for that which the bone puts the velament; and occurs to it difficulty of handling, and cough, and vomit of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Antixs are ingenious in that with much ingenuity.
And of them is that which is said: he who places foods of the patient that engendered inflation and flatulence, for that the belly be inflated and be extended, and the fracture be impelled to the parts outside.
But we would not avow that for that which it not be cause lighter to generate abscess caut, if it does not occur; and if it already occurs, then it already helps to that.
And they would say some of them that it be laid upon a ventouse and then that it is sucked with force; and it is seeming to ratiocination, but however it is feared that the ventouse drives the superfluities to the place by the weakness.
And they would say some of them: he who the place be covered with wool that already is submerged in hot oil, and that pulvils be placed between the ribs until that it be filled, that it be the bandage equal when it envelops that according to roundness; and then be cured the patient with cure of pleurisy of food and of medicine.
And if vehement cause constrains the patient who does not suffer it, and the bone puts the velament with painful puncture, they fear over the patient, then he who should fends over the place, discover from the broken rib, and then place over that instrument that conserve the ciphac, the memory of which is preceded, and that they incis the bone with facility, and extract that.
And then that they adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is great, with suturing, and cure that with plasters until that it be healed.
And if there occurs of it abscess, then you cut and put pulvils in rose oil and place over the place, and that it be cured the patient with that which cove to the abscess of it.
And be laid upon the side upon which he sleeps, until that it be healed.
Chapter IX.
Of the restoration of fracture of the vertebra of the back and of the neck.
Sometimes it must fracture to the bones of the neck, and it is hard to mend them, and seemingly to the vertebra of the back. And as that occurs to some and you want to know if it will heal or no, then consider, for if times their hands already softened and stupefied and dead and not can more those nor extend nor strengthen those and when you constrain those with your said or prick those with a needle and no feel in those pain, then you know that it is not healed, and in the most of dispositions it is mortal.
And if he feels those constrictions with his fingers and punctures, then you know that the bone's neck is saved and that the patient will recover with care.
And if you see in the spine of the neck the appearance of that and want to know if it is healed or not, then consider the feet of him.
Then if you see that they are already softened, accustom yourself to that which happens in the limbs, and when you press on their back, feel the wind and the urge, and sometimes he is turned on his back and wants to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not work in his cure.
But if you do not see any cause of those things, the cause is better and less serious.
And the cure of him is that you pierce to the sedation of the abscess, cautery that you place on the spine struck with oil rubbed sole, or with mugs of eggs attached; place over that one several times a day until the abscess is cauterized.
And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and strengthen over it with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and that he does not sleep on the part with which he feels pain until it is healed.
And if you see the separation of the bone of the  sagitta or any cause that is already separated from him, then cover that which succeeds on the bone and that you hold that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then care for it with some enguentz of the flesh, until it is healed.
But if it is broken the tail of the bone of the pelvis, and it is the end of the hip, then cover that you enter the finger of your left hand into the buttock, and that you align the broken bone with the other hand as soon as possible by equation second; and then place over it plaster and bandage, if you need those, and then strengthen that.
And if you feel broken fragments in him, then you cover that, and hold that, and cure the wound with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the Restoration of the Hip.
The bones of the hips are often broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is nothing but a communication in the extremities of those and are incised in the length and decline to the parts of the body; and it happens to the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is a fracture.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it is over the fracture as the figure of it.
And if the fracture is in the extremity of it only, then you align that according to what it is fitted by equation aligning until it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long or which already declines to the parts below, then you make the patient lie on his belly until it is prepared to you the restoration of that fracture. And therefore when you have aligned it, place over it plaster, and then place over it a bandage of splint or of bone, and strengthen by stricture over which you do not fear puncture of fracture nor removal of the splint.
And align the concavity with that which fills it until that presses the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or over his side.
But if it happens abscess caut, then you cease from extension of it and of its restoration until it is cauterized the abscess, and place over it that which seats it according to what is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it thus as you cover.
And if it happens in the bone fragments or are comminuted, then you  extract them.
Chapter XI.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Shoulder.
The shoulder is that which is between the armpit to the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which is one that you take a splint flat of medium thickness according to this form:
And be tied at two extremities two bandages, and then be suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a chair; and then throw out his broken arm over the splint until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place of which is annexed the curvature of the splint.
And then suspend over that some heavy cause, or the minister extends that to the parts below; and then the physician and that the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns as you cover.
And the other way is that the patient be turned on his neck and suspend the arm of his neck with a bandage; and then command two ministers that one of them holds that which is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the pus below of it; and whichever of them extends to their part.
And if you want that the extension be more strong, then you strengthen over the fracture with a bandage and over that with another bandage, and whichever of the two ministers extend to their two parts.
And therefore if the fracture is proximate to the extremity of the muscle, then cover that the half of the bandage be placed over the citillic and the other below the fracture of the armpit.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the hip, then it should be placed the bandage over that place and over that hip.
Wrap that with ease and work it, and as soon as it is wrapped according to how it should be and applied properly, then strengthen that if it does not happen to have an abscess afterward.
But if an abscess happens, then loosen the bandage within the seventh day, and place over it wool soaked in wine vinegar and rose oil until the abscess rests, and then you strengthen that.
And the manner of strengthening that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that support, and place your hand over their muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the support the arm so that the arm is in a place of stars, if no prohibits this any cause of the broken bone.
And then use of stars.
And it is that you place over the fracture that star that is pus wider and pus stronger of the other stars; and place between each star the width of the finger, and be the length of the stars according to the break with addition of three fingers of all part.
And then strengthen over the stars with the bandage which I have said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your bandage over the place of the fracture be pus tight. And as much as is elongated the fracture be the bandage lesser.
And therefore if you see the situation of the stars and the bandage as we have said in the hour in which you restore the limb to its situation, then you do.
And if you fear abscess, then you loosen the bandage and the stars within the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that no happens in the place proximate or inflammation; or is prohibited the food to arrive at the limb by disposition of superfluity of bandage; and therefore rectify all that according to what we have said.
But if you are over confidence that no happens any cause of this, then do not untie the bandage until after three days or more.
And be the sleep of the patient on their back, and their hands on the stomach.
And place over the support cushion full of wool wrapped, and consider in all hour of the night or of the day that not be loosened nor dissolved the figure of the broken limb, or that be the bandage softened, therefore rectify that all with your virtue.
And place the food of the patient according to the order which we have before said, in such a way that the food be subtle in the beginning while it is begun to strengthen; and then cover that the food of him be thickened.
Because of custom of the support and of the covering of it is that they be strengthened in forty days; and then cover that they be untied and be administered bath and be medicated with ointments those which rectify that.
And if the fracture is laid raw, then you do not untie of that the bandage and the stars within a day or within two months.
Chapter .xii.
Of the restoration of fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearms; of which one is small, and it is that which lies the finger towards, and the other is large and it is that which is placed below the little finger, of the part more towards.
And strong they is broken the major forearm alone, or the small, and strong they are broken together.
And when is broken the small forearm above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and the healing of it is lighter.
And when is broken the forearm of it below the fracture of it is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse of that is when they are broken the two bones together.
Therefore if the bone which is broken is the small forearm above, then it is convenient to the physician, he must the restoration of it, that place little extension with ease while that be wrapped.
But if the large forearm is that which is broken, then cover that place extension more vehement.
And if the two forearms are together broken, then cover that you place the extrusion more strong.
And cover that you place the figure of the hand the restoration of it and the extension of it extended over a cushion, and be the wrist of the hand to the parts above, more outward than all the other fingers, and the little finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be centered on a chair fallen.
And be a cushion in front of it in the height or upright of it, so that the patient not lean work.
And then the minister extends the arm of the part more below with his hand or bandage, and another minister extends above similarly.
And then the physician wraps the bones while reducing that according to the best figure that he can.
And if in the fracture of the bones are splinters, then you pierce to reduce all piece in its place with your virtue.
And if appear in it splinter separated that pierces the bone and is not to your hope in the restoration of it, then you finish upon it and remove that according to the manner which we have said above.
But if the fracture is with a plague, I have already made a singular chapter about it, and therefore take the cure of that.
And if a boil happens at the beginning of your restoration, then line a cloth with cerot made of rose oil and white wax, and it must be between solidity and subtlety, and strengthen the cloth over it with a subtle structure until the boil is subsided; and then remove the cerot and place a prepared plaster of powdered flour with clear of egg, and then place stars; and let the star be the one placed over the fracture more firmly and strongly.
And know that the name of the stars of the arm is seen in the greatest arrangements, or whether the fracture is in one focus or in two foci together.
And place your structure over the place of the fracture more firmly and more vehemently, and when more it is directed to the parts above the fracture or to the parts lower than it, place the structure a little more soft according to that it is preceded the remembrance of it in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are enveloped over the fracture be soft and moist cloths, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is strengthened be of its proper measure between subtle and coarse, as we have recounted.
And consider the limb and the ligament a proper few days. And if any cause happens for which rectification is necessary, as prudently as the one which happens to the limb, and then cover that you embroil the limb with cold water until that pruziment ceases.
And let the limb not be constricted until it rests, and then return the structure.
And if the structure is already softened and the bone is already remaugut and seems like those, then rectify all that with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb by superfluity of structure, for then cover that you soften that a little and let it for a few days until it runs to that nourishment, and then strengthen that.
But if the patient does not happen any of those causes that we have said, then cover that it not be dislocated within about twenty days or around those.
And then let the hand of the patient be suspended by its virtue of agitated movement, and make him sleep upon his two.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or rather it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter XIII.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the finger of the hand and of the digits.
Know that to the finger of the hand and to the joints of the digits, tartly it ought to fracture, and it does not happen to them but attrition many times.
And when a fracture or attrition happens to the hand, then cover that the patient follow straight and in front of him lies it according to equality, and then place the hand of him over that extended.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the physician aligns them until they are conjoined with good conjoining.
And then cover that you place plaster and lint, if no happens boil caut; and then place stars above according to the quantity of the place, and you have already enveloped that in cloth of it.
But if the fracture is in the parts of the digits of the palm, and then make a semblance of a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to strengthen that with his palm fractured; then be strengthened with long cloth.
And let the star be of hide with cloth in which it is levitated, so that the hide be applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to that cover.
But if the fracture is in the parts outside, then cover that you place above a star and another star of the lower part in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight; and then place the structure, as it is revolved the hand to the back between the digits with ligaments.
And if a fracture happens to one of the joints of the digits, then if it is the finger, be aligned according to that cover and then be strengthened with the palm and if you want, place a small straight star to it so that the fracture be elevated and not be mauguda.
But if the fracture is in the other digits, as in that of the middle place, or in the index, or in the auricular, or in the annular, then be aligned and tied with the digit that secues that; or be all tied according to continuity, and it is better; or place upon that small star, as we have said in the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and that, the disposition of boil caut and oppose — with your operation — with that which cover when any cause of those happens, according to that is iterated the narration of it.
Chapter XIV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the bone of the hip.
The bone of the hip many times is broken and is declared to the sentiment according to that it is converted to the part in front and to the most sovereign.
And the restoration of it is made as if the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient be prostrate upon his belly and upon the face.
And then the minister extends the entire ligament to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is proper to the root of the thigh, then the ligament is properly attached to the bone at the part of the pelvis, so that the extension is placed on it, and the other ligament is left at the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is proper to the bone, then the ligament is made proper to the bone, and the extension is to the parts below.
And then the doctor aligns the bones with both his hands while reducing it according to the natural resemblance and the bone is joined by a good connection; then, cover it with plaster and a splint, if it does not happen to the limb abscess. But if it happens to it abscess, then you leave it for some days until the abscess has cauterized, and then return to your cure.
The splint of it is made like this: cover over the fracture a hard bandage, and double it two or three times, and remove from it the superfluity; and then encase the leg until it reaches the hip and the root of the thigh.
And introduce a long stick between the thigh and the leg, from the bone to the parts below, and the ends of the stick from the sovereign part of both parts, and then roll over the leg and thigh what superfluity of the bandage.
And then place on the thigh in the place of that fracture splints, and place from those one splint on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the vacancies between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the splint is coagulated.
And then begin with a strong splint of the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as much as you go away with the ligament from the place of the fracture, your splint is less and lighter and softer.
And then extend both ends of the stick to the parts below until it reaches the heel of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the splints on the other side so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
And then leave the splint on it, so that it does not happen to the limb corrosion or cauterized abscess or inflammation and similar to those; and if it happens any cause of those, then cut yourself from it, and rectify what happens to it all again, according to what we have said many times.
But if in the bone is a piece of bone that puts, then cover that according to what is possible to you; and if not, then finish on it and remove that, and cure with what preceded the memory until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with another thing that are adjusted to it splints, as we have said in the adjutant and in the arm.
But however in the restoration of it in such a manner made do not happen to the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, then another thing that is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he limp from the one that is always.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few more or a few less, and all that is according to the diversity of the complexities and of the other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap of the bone.
Know that a fracture of the kneecap of the bone takes time, but it happens to it many times attrition.
But if it happens to it fracture, then it is not but a fissure or crack in its parts, and that is with a plaguer or several plaguers, and over that all is placed with the sentiment.
And the restoration of it is in such a way that it is aligned what is broken of its parts with the saids until it is joined and conjoined according to what is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
And then place plaster and place on it a round splint, if you need it; and strengthen above it with a splint to what is convenient.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in the other fractures, as well as cauterized abscess and similar to those in such a way that it opposes all accidents to what is convenient to it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick, and it is called by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle, and it is called fibula.
And it happens to some of the species of fracture that happens to the two bones of the leg, and for that reason is made restoration of it as well as restoration of the arm aligned, and the operation of it is one.
And if the two bones are broken together, the leg is converted to all parts.
And if the more subtle bone is broken, the leg is converted to the parts before.
And if the thicker bone is broken, it is turned below, and it is of those causes that are not to your liking.
And then administer extension, flexion, and ligation of the bones according to that alignment.
But however, if the fracture of the leg is light and has few splints, that the extension be less and more gently, and alleviate with your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you align the bones and that completes all your operation, then you will take pieces of wood of pine which is placed under the causes which are placed in soles, and they are made of palm branches; some of those to which is small thickness, and not be of the handles, and be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the foot.
And then envelope on each side in two envelopes according to their length, and place one on the side of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and be from the knee to the foot.
And then tie the two bones in three places of two extremities and in the middle place, for with this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left side, and it stands for good station.
And now is administered a splint of wood according to the length of the leg; and be placed in it the leg so that it conserve that of movement.
And mostly, that you do this in a fracture, and when with that is plague properly.
And then consider in each day the leg and study with that by behind study, and you guard it from abscess and from inflammation or other causes similar; and when it happens some cause of those, then oppose yourself to it with that which must be done until it be healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the heel and of the bones of the foot and of the digits.
To the heel, fractures do not happen often; but to the bones of the foot, fractures happen sometimes; and to the digits of the foot, few fractures happen, and they do not happen to them but attrition in the middle of the disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot, a fracture happens and sometimes those bones be elevated above themselves among them, then the patient places his foot on the ground prepared as if walking.
And then place the one foot on that which is elevated of those bones, and then step on them, and press, and align them until they return to their places.
And then place plaster and stoppings above, and place below the belly of the foot a small table to which are two plastic heads.
And then strengthen that with the foot in structure descent, because you have enveloped that with cloths and other causes of which you have indicated.
And when three days or four have passed, then you untie the ligament, because you have found the bones aligned, or be fractured or be dislocated, and the operation in those is so as you know.
But if some digits are fractured, then restore those, and align them as I have told you in the restoration of the digits of the hand. And then place on the fractured digit a splint according to the length of the digit, and be a little wider than it; and below the foot this table which I have told you, and strengthen that with stricture decent.
But if that which is fractured of the bones are two or three or more, then you place on each digit a splint of its quantity enveloped in linen cloth, and strengthen the table in the lowest part of the foot, and be standing on one of the heads of the table the belly of the foot so that it has with good retention.
And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which you have been told to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and oppose yourself to every accident with that which must be done.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the hip of the woman and of the bone of the thigh and of the groin of the man.
When the hip of the woman is fractured, then make that cease in a cradle fallen, and then incline that to the side of the back a little, and be held behind.
And then the matron impales the hip with a cloth, and be made in the hip of her as you hope; and then the woman be moved, and elevate the back of her little by little, because all that is cast out until it be in front of the hip as you hope and the fractured bone returns.
And then place powders on the back of her, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cloth with facility and then urine, and reduce and return that according to the manner according to which you have seen that at the beginning, and then return to her first powder.
And do so for seven days or around those, because that is restored.
And if you want, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen over the back of her a tube of cane; and introduce the whole bladder into the hip of her, and then insufflate into the tube with virtue until the bladder be inflated within the hip, because the fracture returns.
And then be filled with cloth and stay for some days according to which we have recommended, until it be healed.
And when the bones of the thigh of a man or a woman are broken, then administer in the restoration and stitching of it that which we have recounted in the bone of the hip.
And that which is straight is not hidden in these proper fractures and which few understand, mostly to him who has some study and use and understands this my book well; for that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions the straight way in the restoration and the stricture of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the leg of a man when it is broken, take a splint of wood, and put the leg in it; and then place on it a wrapping of cloth, and it be wrapped, and then be left for three days or thereabouts, and it be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the restoration of fractures of bones when it is accompanied by plague.
It is convenient for him to whom a fracture occurs with plague, and especially if the bone is large as is the bone of the thigh or of the arm, or similar to that, that you take care and flebotomize it as soon as the conditions of flebotomy to you or testify as we have said above.
And if the plague flows blood, then you must take care to its retention as much as you pulverize over it  zegi trissat, if to you another cause is not present.
And then as you begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it, if you do not occur an abscess.
But if an abscess occurs, then you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until it is yielded the abscess, and do not approach it in the third day and the fourth of all, for you will cause to occur bad accidents.
But if the broken bone is eminent upon the uncovered condyle, then you must take care to perforate to reduce it and stitch it with your hands with facility and with little extension.
But if extension is not to you prepared and the equation of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands with this instrument; and it is the instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is of seven digits or of eight and the width of which is according to the quantity of the plague; and for that it is necessary to the physician that he prepare of those three or four according to the quantity that you indiges ad that in the cure in all species of fracture.
And let it be round, and let it have in it little thickness so that it not be bent of necessity the comprehension upon it in the hour of the operation.
And let it be of acute extremity to which let be margin in its extremities; and let the underside of it to be of tending thickness, and of the majority of it within to the parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", so it is a little palette.
For that it must be placed the extremity of it attends elevated upon the extremity of the bone eminent.
And impel it in a single stroke while it returns the bone, and it be stitched with some equation.
And therefore strive you to stitch the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of it broken is subtle, and does not take that the instrument for good acceptance, then you must insert the extremity of that bone while the instrument has power of it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone of all with that which we have recounted, then inscise it with that which convenes to it of the incisors which we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner be to you possible.
And then ratze those which remain in the bone of asperity and of small scales.
And as the bone is reduced, and then the reduction the patient suffers vehement pain, then you know that the bone is not returned to its natural place; and therefore do that which you confer to the patient great help.
When is completed your restoration which you do to the bone, and then submerge cloth in vi stiptic black, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place upon the plague cerot nor other cause in which there be oil, so that it not do in it occur pox and corruption.
And then administer stelas in the hour of your compliment of the restoration of the bone, and leave the plague uncovered as much as you inscise the tract with forceps and uses of bandages according to the quantity of the plague.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the plague with the fracture, for many times have done this the foolish physicians, and have caused to occur upon their patients death or disease corrupting or ulcerating, so it is healed. And if your stitching is lighter, soft, different from the stitching of other fractures.
And if the plague is great or is a bad plague, and you fear upon that some bad accidents which we have recounted, and you suffer pain in the place, then you must not place upon it stelas, but do to it an enveloping of hard cloths in place of stelas and strain it with those.
And when about a day or two already the plague begins, that in it be engendered brac, then you oust from below the cloth which you had placed upon it with vi, and then administer calques, unguents with which of our custom is that we medicate the plagues, as well as unguents tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
And it is necessary for you to untie the ligament and consider the plague on each day morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and so that the limb is prepared in such a manner that the pus runs from it to the parts below with ease.
If many days pass to the plague, and it is not consolidated nor is it separated from it the limb, then you know that here are satagias of the small ones for which you should inquire the plague with care. And of those satagias those that are separated remove and extract, those that from them are not separated and put the limb and cause to occur pain, pierce to you to incise those according to what to you is possible.
And if it happens to the plague to become slimy or to ooze, it is a sign of a corruption and of putrefaction, then you should apply to each of those with the water that is necessary to them of the cure of which is preceded narration in its chapter.
And of this in which you should know the best way and you make present your person: when the bone is broken, set it upon the limb as the bone of the thigh and of the helper and similar to those of the large limbs, and that you do not presume to traction of it, nor the extraction of it for many times it happens by this death; have left it within that you are able, for very soon it will fall by itself in about twenty days or thirty; And then cure the plague if to you is seen, and if not leave that.
Chapter XX.
Of the cure of nodules that happen in the vestigi of any fracture.
Many times it happens this nodule in the vestigi of the healing of a fracture, and mostly that it is near the joints, and it is ornamented by it the figure of the limb; and very soon it prohibits the limb from its natural operation.
Therefore consider if the nodule is recent and administer in that medicines that have stipulated as such as aloes, and incense, and mira, and cercacollo, and acridity, and similar to those; in this way that you take of that some or all, and confit those with vi stiptic, or with album of hen, or with vi agre, and place that upon the nodule in cotton, and constrict those upon it for good constriction.
And leave the constriction that you do not untie that for many days; and about untie that and iterate another, within that it is removed the nodule; or strengthen upon that lamina of lead descentment, for lead has property of removing all that is inflated in the limbs.
But if nodule already is in a worse converted and tight is and necessity provokes to ostracize that coitadament, and then cut that by the part sovereign of it, and incise that the superfluity and eminent, or rat that with some rezoris within that it is removed; and cure that within that it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of restoration of fracture when it is restored and about that remains the limb subtle and frail not according to its nature.
When fracture of bone is restored, and about that remains the limb subtle and frail, then that is not done but for many causes: of which one is multitude of solution of the ligament and of the ligation of it made not according to what is necessary; or for superfluity of constriction of the ligaments within that the nourishment is prohibited to run to the limb; or for multitude of superfluous embrocation; or for superfluous movement not in its hour; or for paucity of blood in the body of the patient and for weakness of it.
And cure of that is to give to the patient to eat and make the heart of him tender within that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths; and introduce joy and happiness upon him.
And about place poultice upon the limb, so that the poultice draws to it much nourishment, or continues embrocation of it with water tebeza, within that the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter XXII.
Of cure of the bones broken when they are restored tortuously and prohibits the operation of them of that which is necessary.
When it happens to the limb already restored about the healing of it from tortuosity and eminence to the broken bone and nodule, and it is for that feeded of form of the limb, but however the limb is not prohibited of its natural operation, then you should not receive the word of that one who exists that member be of new broken.
But already are stood many foolish physicians and restorers the ones who have done that in our land; and this operation is very vituperable, perdoing a great fear the sign of which is mortal.
But if claudication and nodule are recent, then you should be embrocated with water tebeza in which are cotas mollificant herbs, such as are  roots of altea and roots of it, and melilot, and similar to those; and be made a poultice with mollifying poultice as diallaquilon well made; or that be prized mucillage of root of altea and be contused with gray of guanine or with oil of ceram, and be emplastered with that; or that be prized figs fatty and be trissated with fems of pigeon, and similar to those of the medicines that are called amermans consolidation.
And some times it is dissolved with assiduous friction lighter that be with the hands humid, and be administered movement of the limb to all part in all hours.
But if the curvature has already been added and is strong and converted into a worse state and the need for its cure arises with iron, then it is necessary that the pus be above the abscess and the continuity of the bone be dissolved, and it is incised that which is superfluous of the knot of that part with the bone with subtle scissors, and is administered facility in that with solicitude and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On the speech of dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints of the body, so that movement is prohibited, and the shape of the limb is altered, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately attempt to reduce it, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed and very difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And for this, one should not be negligent or stretched out during the time of inflammation, because often it brings on spasms and intense pains.
But when this happens, then it is necessary to cut the patient's clothing and allow the inflammation to rest; and then the limb should be enveloped with warm water and oil, and then it should be reduced with ease.
And every member should be treated with that which will bring remembrance to its place.
And now, I have ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what has been previously said about fractures; from the part of the body that is more sovereign to the part that is less.
Chapter XXIV.
On the cure of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So the two jaws are dislocated if not treated; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: either they are slightly moved from their places and softened a little; or they are dislocated completely and complicatedly, so that they are softened at the joint where the saliva of the patient flows and that it cannot hold or close its mouth, and the tongue of it is enveloped in its word.
But when the dislocation of it is slight, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself with little cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and complicated, then it is necessary to administer its reduction gently, and not delay it at all.
And it is that the minister has the head of the patient, and the physician inserts the tip of his finger into the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw from inside his mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both of his fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other said ones of his are outside with which he enguals; and commands the patient to cease his jaws and release those to go from any part; and the physician enguals the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both is made easier and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And therefore, when they return and are engualed, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place on them powders of cloth with cerot, and make it of wax and oil rubbed; and then it is applied with ease with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be standing between two pillows, so that he does not hurt either to the right or to the left; and do not force him to chew anything; having his food be forbidden lion, until when the pains are softened and the jaws are numbed, then allow him to chew as he wants.
And that be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth of the patient, the eating and drinking and spitting, until the jaw is numbed and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated in any hour and not converted to their places is difficult, then often this happens fever and continuous soda, and very much is alarmed the belly of the patient, and very much and vomits pure cholera.
And when you see this, then you know that it is perilous; and often many die to whom this happens in x days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the place between the feet by its continuity with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and this is declared to the touch.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then grasp the place with your palm with great force, so that it will return.
And then place on it an ointment and powders and strengthen that.
But the extremity of that which is tied and continued with it, is not dislocated in any day; then it is necessary to be reduced and engualed according to what we have said and according to what is your apparatus.
And then place on it an ointment, and powders, and an extrication, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And in this same treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated from the part of the thigh to the part below.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the part below the muscle, and that is done hard; and it is not dislocated at the parts behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the parts in front by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and exits outside at the parts below the thigh, and mostly in those whose flesh is little, it is easily dislocated; but in those in which there is much flesh, it is exited outside with difficulty.
And often it happens to some men by percussion or fall, and the muscle of him is apoplected by apoplexy, and it is cured by that which is already dislocated.
Therefore, it is necessary that you know this before you are over-certain of him, and then proceed in the cure of him.
And it is known the dislocation of him when it is at the parts below the thigh; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you find between those a manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the muscle concavity and below the thigh of the touch of the head of the muscle as if a hollow, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his armpit, nor move that by all movements.
If it is dislocated below the foot or above, and you then find a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And of this dislocation is made light reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of him is that the minister elevates the hand of him to the parts above; and then places his feet below the thigh of him, and elevates the joint with strength upwards to its place, and the minister elevates the hand of him, and extends that upwards; and then places that below as it returns slightly.
But if by what we have said it does not return, and it is from the beginning that the dislocation happened, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and be administered a broth that softens and lubricates as if it were cooked with roots of altea, fennel, and melilot in water, and be administered.
And then the patient be laid on his back and be placed below the thigh of him, waiting for a wool that be equal between levitated and stricture, and then the physician places his hand over the sphere, and elevates the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it not be moved to the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it not be moved to the parts below, for that at once returns to its place.
And if you want, reduce it this way: and it is that you make a man present who is longer than the patient, and he is on the part of that side, and interweaves his muscle below the thigh of the patient and elevates his thigh to the parts above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below his belly. But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that with him that another cause be suspended, so that it weighs that one, for the dislocation returns at once.
And it is reduced easily in another way: and it is that on the ground be placed a long pole the head of which be round in figure, as if a mortar, that it not be thick nor thin, and then it be placed below the patient; because being placed on the head of the pole cloths lions, and the patient be standing according to the length of the pole, and then be extended the hand of him to the parts below the other part; and be extended the body of him from the other part with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if it is difficult reduction of him for all the causes that we have said, then use of this cure: and it is that you take a pole the quantity of which be in the length of two arms, and latitude of that be of four digits, and the thickness of it be alleviated in the preon of the thigh according to this form:
And then on the round head be laid cloths lions so that the pole does not injure the patient.
And then it be placed below the thigh of the patient, and be extended the hand or arm over the pole into the parts below, and be tied the pole over the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then be placed the arm on a step of a ladder according to the latitude, and the hand be extended to the parts below, and the other body be suspended from the other part, for the joint enters at once.
And as the entry of him is completed according to whichever manner that is possible to you, then it is necessary that you place below the thigh a sphere of wool of equal quantity; and then place plaster prepared of powder of meal with eggs and album of hen over the whole muscle, as if it were rolled upwards, and then strengthen below the thigh with decent stricture; and the ligament be rolled over the plaster, and the hand of him be attached to the neck of him, and be left, and not be moved the hand of him for seven days.
And that the patient's food be kept meager, until the limb is comforted, for it is lighter to the healing of it.
And then the food should be given more, near wine or vinegar, and exercise is made; and therefore if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times by humidity that happens to it or by another cause, then it should be administered cauterization with three furrows, according to what was said before in the chapter of cauterization.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament is loosened and the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and strapping are reduced over it several times, and it is not fixed and catz and cannot raise that arm to the upper parts, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already severed or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Of the dislocation of which is made of the foot and the heel or the parts behind, the reduction is made with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And let the other strapping be administered there, and cure that until it is healed.
And if it happens that near the healing gravity settles in the limb and slowness in the movement of it, then the patient uses baths many times until that gravity is alleviated and that it returns to its first nature.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all parts, and mostly to the front part to the back part, and the dislocation of it is not easily guessed because it is hidden by the skin or by the touch according to which figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip with the hand, this is clearly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that its muscle.
And that you, with your hands, reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an abscess comes to it, because if an abscess comes to it, the reduction is difficult, and it is not healed entirely; and especially when it is to the back parts, because it is the worst of all kinds of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many times they die from it.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of it be extended with two hands, and the arm of it be expanded, and the hands of the doctor be upon the hip and below it, and he pushes the joint with the knuckles of his hands at the same time, or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is to the front parts, then it returns so that he bends his hand with his hand, until he strikes the hip with the root of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that raising of the ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
And then it be revolved the arm completely, because it is enveloped with a long folded cloth over the hand of it, or ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this is those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint with ease; and then push the joint with a vehement impulse until it returns.
And after the reduction of it, it should be laid upon that plaster in which there is a stich and a covering with album of egg, and it is extended with a descending strapping, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and be left for several days.
And after it is loosened; and then if the joint is formed in its place, then you untie the strapping of it and leave it.
And if sometimes the joint does not become stronger, then you repeat the plaster and the strapping, and leave it for several days until it is extended; and then untie it.
But if it happens to it gravity after the reduction of the joint, and the disposition of it is in movement, then administer moisture in baths and subtle friction, and compression, until it is alleviated; or pause upon the joint alleviated, so it is a soft cloth; and then be tied, and leave it upon the bones day and night. And after that, put that in a bath; and when it dries, then you rub the joint with temperate friction, and then repeat upon it the alleviated, so it is a soft cloth, once, and the second, and the third. Corruption has already arrived on the enamel inside the bath, while it is lined.
And if you wish, place upon it a piece of wet cowhide scraped with a knife and stretched over it; and do this several times, because it is moist and reduces it to its disposition.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the malassen, so it is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen of the hand some times is dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is lighter, and the contrary is of the other joints, but however, that it should be velocity in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place be apostemat or that something happens to it abscess.
And the reduction of the dislocation of him is that you place the joint of the patient's arm on a table and the minister extends the arm of that, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
But however, it must be considered if the palm is already placed in the belly of the arm, then the patient places the back of his arm on a table, both extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is anterior, then the position of the arm of that one intrinsically on the table, so that the hand of the doctor is placed on that prominence of the joint.
And therefore if it returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that with a poultice, yielding the abscess and leaving it; and do not repeat this, because if not, do not suffer nor can you on the reduction of it more than days pass.
But however, the joint remains according to its tortuosity; and do not notice to the patient any cause, except that the arm is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then there is no way but that it be strengthened with a cautery near the place of it and for a long time confer any cause.
Therefore, when the bad arm is returned, then place on it the poultice which you have recomposed, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and then it is removed and let it be left and the arm of it be exercised.
But if the movement of it is stayed and there is any gravity in it, then gently that with water cauda and with friction some times, until it is alleviated.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the cure of dislocations of the said.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated in every part.
And when a finger is dislocated of those to the back of the palm or to the belly of it, then stretch the finger and push the dislocation of it with your thumbs, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that with the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that and extend that until straight it be equal in that day.
And when it will be night, lie that according to that narration, and do not cease to untie that in the day and exercise with movement, and lie that in the night; and do this for some days until it be straight.
And do similar with this, if it is dislocated to the belly of the arm, and lie that to that part and do with this your first operation, until it be healed.
And similarly do with this when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocations of the vertebrae of the back.
When there occurs to any of the vertebrae of the back or of the neck a dislocation complicated, and are removed moved vertebrae from their places, then in that there is no cure, because death seizes the patient.
And a sign of this is that the digestion of the patient is outside his will, and cannot retain that; and many times are softened some members of him or both legs of him or two arms of him, or one of those; or is removed a vertebra from its place, because many times is removed and many times is made the removal of those to four parts.
Therefore that already is removed to the parts behind and is named gelbozzitat.
But the cure of it is that then you consider if the gelbozzitat occurs from puerility, because then in that there is no cure nor of that there is no healing of all.
But in that which comes from a wound or from percussion or similar to those, already said the Ancients the ways of cure with sermo prolixs, of which the most returns with prophecy; but I have already and abbreviated of that of which the little excuse of the excess of it, for my better proximity to my better understanding exposition, with which I have this exposed and formed ex instrument divers of that with which I will show this and expose that.
And of those there is no cured except that which occurs in the back properly with what I have recomposed.
And it is that the patient be extended on his face on a bed near a wall, and be extended below him a soft instrument so that the feet of him not be lifted.
And then a straight stick be placed, fixed in the ground at the extremity of the bed around the head of it, and another stick in the air the feet of it at the other extremity of the bed.
And the minister hold the stick, and not be stopped in fossa; and another minister hold the other according to that form.
And then envelope over the head of the patient and below the little limbs leon firm; and extend the extremity of the limb to the stick which is above the head of it, and lie that in it; and then strengthen the other limb over the hips of it the denols of it, and below the legs of it; and then adjust all the limbs and lie those in the other stick which is above the feet of it.
And then the minister, with a cascu, extends the ligament to the part of the shaft, and do not be removed the two shafts and ligaments of their places in which they are placed, but however, do not be fixed as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength while it returns, or that which places upon it a table, and then adjusts upon the table his feet while it returns.
But if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the width or length is in average of three arms, and carve in the side of which we have said that is near the patient a place in which enters the extremity of the table. And then place the majority of the table upon the spine, and the doctor places his feet upon the other extremity, and tightens well until the spine is shortened and returns to its place.
And if you want, open with a turn the one which is revolved with the hand; and it is that you fix in the ground the head of the patient in the rear of the pug two shafts, the length of which is of an arm, and in the rear of the pug also two shafts; and let the length that is between each shaft be a palm, and already is made in each shaft a hole in which runs the turn, and each one be fixed in the ground so that it is not moved.
And let it be also a shaft round in which is the turn, and let it be revolved in the two holes of the two shafts.
And in the extremity of it is a hole in which is formed the shaft, the length of which is a palm with that which is revolved; and in the two other shafts is similar to that.
And then tighten the ligaments that you have straightened in the feet of the patient in the hole which is opposite the head of it, and the ligaments that you have straightened in the thighs of it in the turn which is opposite the feet of it.
And then opposite each turn and there be a minister that twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor aligns the spine according to what we have said.
And as soon as the spine is returned, and the place is aligned, then cover with a plaster drying with album of egg, and then with cotton; and then place upon the plaster a board of the table of which the width is three fingers or about those, and the length of it is the quantity that engulfs the place of the belly, and upon the part of the spine.
And then tie it with the ligament which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment while it is healing.
And if there remain any prominence in the place at the end of the healing, then it is necessary that medicines be administered which soften and lubricate with administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already is administered in that place a sheet of lead.
And some times accidents happen prominence in the rear of the spines of the two, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already protrude because it is not necessary that it be done a prognosis to it with this medicine, because very strong it will make you happen death.
Chapter .XXXI.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should not be dislocated only, and accidents happen to those that happen to the other joints of small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four ways, because it is dislocated to the front parts, or to the back parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And most of all it is dislocated to the front parts, and few to the front parts or to the back parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it to the front parts is that, when you adjust the leg of the healthy patient with the patient, it is longer and the thigh is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his foot opposite the leg, and it is the place that if the leg is apostate of pus caut, so that the head of the thigh has already arrived here.
And the sign of that one which happens dislocation is to the back parts, is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of that one which happens dislocation to the front parts is that it expands its leg according to its completion, but however it does not bend that it hurts in the thigh, and if it tries to go and cannot upon that to the front parts; and the urine of it is retained and the groin of it is apostate, and because of the ambulation of it upon the talus.
And the sign of that one which happens dislocation to the back parts is that it does not expand the thigh, nor can it bend that in front that it bends the groin, and the leg of it is shorter than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is opposite that place.
But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and antique, that it is already fixed with that having it, then you administer reduction of it and remains according to its disposition, then it is not in that cure of all; and therefore it is not necessary that in that one be done a prognosis.
But in the case of a recent dislocation, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then take hold of it so that you turn the joint and extend it to the inner and outer parts, and move it to the right and left, for it will return strongly and does not need other treatment.
But if it does not return in this manner, then take hold of it so that you prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of him from the farthest part, or by his hands, or by a bandage which is tied over the leg below the knee; and another minister extends the hand of him from below so that it places his hands below the heels of him; and then tighten with a bandage on the root of the thigh, and hold another minister the extremity of the bandage.
And its extension from him or from the inner part to the shoulder or from the back to the part of the loins.
And the extension of all those at once while the patient is elevated with his body from the ground and remains hanging.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species to do what I will say of the proper cure.
In the reduction of the own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the inner parts, then the patient should be laid down on his side; and then place the bandages on the root of the thigh in that place which is between the head of the thigh and the place that is below the shoulder; and then extend the bandage from the part of the shoulder to the highest part of the clavicle.
And then another minister strongly presses the arms of him, and grasps the thick part of the thigh of the patient and extends to the outer parts by vehement extension, for that returns to its place.
And this species is of the lightest cure with which this member is reduced than the others.
But if it is excused upon you and does not obey the entrance with this species of cure of all, then take hold of the two legs of the patient together with a strong, light bandage, on both the ankles and both the knees.
And the length of each of its parts is the quantity of four digits, and the leg of the patient extended more than the other by the quantity of two digits.
And then the patient is suspended over the head of the pole, and that it is in the middle; and the length of him from the ground is the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong young man to pull the head of the thigh, and that it is suspended with the patient another young man, and the other young man pulls the thigh with strength and impulsion, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in the proper reduction, when the dislocation is in the outer part, then the patient should lie on his back as we have recounted in the having gelbozitat; and be tightened the bandage on the leg of the patient properly and on the feet of him.
And then two poles should be placed, one at his feet, and the other at his head; and then poles adjusted in the middle of the bed, on which damp cloths should be wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed because the pole is between his thighs, for that the extension to the inner parts is not pulled.
And then each minister extends to his part, and the doctor with his hand encircles the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then the leg should be extended slightly, and it is according to this same narration about bed; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the shoulder of the patient, and then pulls that with the other hand, and with that pulling pauses that extended to the inner parts to the part of the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended to the inner parts, and it is elevated on the ground; it should be placed on a hard cause, as it is necessary for the eyssament if the width of him is dislocated in the outer parts, according to what we have said of the jasement of him on two widths; and it is on his face and the bandages are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And it should be administered compression with a board on the place where the joint is.
Therefore, as the reduction is complicated according to what is necessary — the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend from the patient two legs, and when you see those enguals and the patient extends his leg and expands that ses excusacio, then you know that the member according to what is necessary has returned — and then you adjust two bandages and pause plaster and extend with bandage so that the width is not harmed in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or for four.
And then untie the bandage and the plaster, and compare one leg with the other.
Now, if you see those joints in alignment, then you know the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore let the patient go.
And if you see any cause for softening, then you return and plaster that, and extend that according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then unwrap that, and make that person delay walking for a few days, until it is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways, which is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inside parts, and to the parts in front to the back parts; and to the front parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply their leg to their thigh; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the ways of it is that you make the patient straight, so that he already extends his leg, if he can over that; adhere your two to the face of it, and place his foot between your feet; and then make adhere the shoulder of it to your palms, and keep those between your fingers on the shoulder of it with strength, and another minister extends his leg while the shoulder returns to its place.
And the sign of the return of it is that his leg adheres to the thigh with lightness without labor.
And then plaster that and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then tie those together immediately with a bandage for three days or for four, and then unwrap those.
And do not use the patient to walk for a few days, until it is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension with ligaments of which in the cure of the hernia preceding narration.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle some times is dislocated by slight movement, and some times is dislocated according to complement, and the dislocation of it is made either to the inside parts or to the outside parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the ankle inflated proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of the dislocation of it is of slight reduction, and it is that it be extended with ease with the hands and be aligned while it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to complement, cover that you make the patient straight, and have that one minister strong and valiant of the part behind the two of it in the middle location of it.
And then you with your right hand the foot of the most sovereign part, and with your left hand of the part most below of the foot in the location of the ankle.
And then you pull the foot to you with your right hand, and with the left two times, and then extend with the left; and push the foot of the foot with the right towards the thigh that the leg works.
And do this two times according to that we have counted.
And then push the foot of the foot to the thigh the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Therefore if it returns in one time or in two according to this manner, and if you see the foot aligned, it is good; and if not, then over it iterates the operation, for that it returns.
But if to you is forbidden the reduction of it with that which we have recounted, then make the patient lie on his two on the ground, and stretch a padded cloth on the ground firm, and that it lies between the thighs of it, and you already have enveloped over it cloth so that it does not hurt the patient.
And then the minister of it holds its thighs, and another minister extends the leg with its hands or with ligaments that lie on the collar of the foot; and then extend that each minister against extension of its part, and the cloth be extant between the thighs of the patient holding it, so that the body of it not be pulled to the parts below according to its extension.
And then the physician aligns the dislocation with its hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh to the parts below, for the dislocation returns with ease.
And therefore when the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause plaster and extend that with ligaments strongly, and tie the foot with ligaments to the thigh.
And cover that you fear or guard yourself from the nerves which are behind on the ankle, so that the ligament over it not be vehement and hurt it strongly.
And then leave that for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, extend that.
And then unwrap that on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from movement for forty days. But if it is forced to go before that space, it is not done with safety that the dislocation not be over it dissolved and corrupted, and then that which does not receive cure.
And if it happens to it an abscess caut, then cover that you administer in the cure of it that in the place of our narration, in another place of cure and embrocation, until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toes.
So that the one that is dislocated be straightened with little extension of its work; and that which is not difficult, lift it lightly.
But if the dislocation is in some joints of the foot, then make the patient place his foot on a level surface of the earth or on a table, and standing thus as if he were walking.
And then stand near the patient, and place your foot upon what is prominent of the joints, and then press that with your foot with virtue until it returns, and that you see it already straightened and does not appear in the prominence.
And then place under the foot of the patient a table that supports the whole foot, which has two heads, and then strengthen that with a decent and firm structure for three days; and then untie that and make the patient abstain from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its return is assured.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the kinds of dislocations that are made with plague or with fracture or with any one of these together.
When accidents happen from any of those causes, and you are engaged in the cure and restoration of it, many times the death occurs.
And for this reason, do not presume over the cure of it, but he who is wise in the art, of long usage, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not bold nor presumptuous; and that uses in the beginning of medicines that cause pus, only so much, and leaves the patient to the divine judgment, but to him whom you hope for health from peril, with the alleviation of the sickness, and in which you see some hope. And therefore, strive as soon as possible to make the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes suppurating.
And therefore, if the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen which causes pus and cures the plague with what is convenient for it from the dried herbs.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and happens in the bones separated, then you pierce the stem of them, and do in that what we have said in the simple ailments of this that is preceded in the places of those.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the entrance in the ways of fear according to what has preceded you my preaching; for this is better, you owe your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true body in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasim perfectly of which God be the benefit. Amen.
