O, sons, because I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the fulfillment of it, its consequence is found in it, and for the exposures of it, and for the declarations of it, it is my vision that you complete it with this treatise, which is a part of the operation with my hand, so it is surgery.
Because the operation with the hand is widespread in our region and in our time completely private, whereas many risk the science of it, and its knowledge is held hostage; and there remain of it only some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which are muddled and become subject to those errors and uncertainties, because within their clauses the understandings of it are and the force of it and the art are elongated.
And it is seen to me that you bring that to life with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for that it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, as it is for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the cause for which no good artificer with his hand is found in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and that he who acts it must before that be exercised in the science of anatomy, which reconciles Gualia within that he knows the joints of the members and the forms of those, and the conjunction and the separation of theirs; and he should have the knowledge of the bones, the nerves and the cartilages, the number of those, and the egress of theirs; and of the pulsatile veins and the quiet ones, and the places of the emission of theirs.
And for that, it is said by Hippocrates that with a name it is not much, but in the work it is little, and most in the art of the hand.
But we have already said of that in the introduction of this book; because whoever is not aware of what we have said of anatomy, it is not evacuated that he does not fall into error for which many men die, so as I have seen too many of those, because some are formed in this science and throw themselves away from that knowledge and their experiments.
Because I saw a foolish and inexperienced physician who had incised an abscess scrophilos in the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed while the woman died among the hands of him.
And I saw another physician who thought that the throat of a man who had been processed in his state should be treated with a stone, and the stone was large, and it came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, for that man on the third day died.
And I had already been called to extract that, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient, I knew on him that he would die.
And I saw another physician who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he undertook a black crutch who was broken in his thigh; and prepared the physician with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, on the wound, with splints and splints with strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And then he dismissed him according to his desires, and then he relieved him, and then he left him for some days and commanded that we untie the ligament; and it happened so that the thigh and the foot became infected with an abscess, and it came to ruin.
And I was called to him, and I prepared to untie the ligament, and obtained the tranquility and then he was freed from his pains.
But however, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, for that I could not restrain it, and it did not cease to wander the corruption in the limb until the patient perished.
And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it was ulcerated after some days, until the malice of it was magnified to its lord.
The cause of which is because the cancerous caut is pure of melancholic humor, therefore it does not come to it with iron at all, but that it should be in a limb that suffers that it be entirely held hostage.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be devised into two divisions: so it is in the operation to which health is associated, and in the work with which there is peril in the major dispositions.
And I have already exerted this in all places of this book in which I come to operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you that you guard this and leave that, so that the foolish ones do not attain a way to speak and to dishonor you.
And therefore, take your arms with solicitude and with the protection of God, and your patients with facility and with firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God, pursuing health and laudable success, and leave the terrible ailments of difficult healing, and keep your arms from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: because more is remaining to your glory, and more in the world and in the hereafter to your sanctities.
Gualia already said in some of his admonitions: “Do not treat a bad disease, so that you are not called bad physicians.”
And now I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and the first of the first part. The first chapter ordered within feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of suction and perforation, and of leeches, and of poultices, and of the extraction of arrows and of things similar to those, all chaptered and ordered of the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of the cure of sprains and of things similar to those; chapter ordered of the head within feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
Know that you should say the quality of the judgments of that cautery and of its inconveniences, and in what complexion cautery is prohibited.
Therefore I say that the discourse of the quality of the judgment of cautery and of its inconveniences is a long and prolix discourse, and subtle by science, and secretly hidden; and already of it many wise men have spoken, and of it they have disagreed, and to me a little of the discourses of theirs suffices, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I say that cautery agrees to all complexions universally which is with matter or its matter, except two complexions, which are complexions hot of its matter.
In the hot and dry complexion with matter they disagree; for some say that cautery is beneficial to that, and others say the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and inconvenient is that illness hot and dry with that which is caut and dry be healed.
And they say that who says the contrary of that, that by cautery is made benefit in all hot and dry illness that comes in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidities to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I say for the discourse of that, that experience this already to me some times has discovered.
But however, it should not come upon that which already is explored and exercised in the chapter of cautery by the previous exercise, and who has known the diversity of the complexion of men and the disposition of the illnesses in their own bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the expanse of time of those.
But in the other complexions, there is no fear over you, and more so in the cold and humid illnesses, because already all the physicians have agreed upon those, and they do not disagree in the judgment with cautery in those.
And know, sons, that of the secret of cure by cautery with fire and of the goodness of it, it is because fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member which is cauterized and does not reach the other member joined to it except with little inconvenience.
But the action of burning medicine reaches that in the members which are far from it, and it makes them come to the member illness of difficult healing and often worse.
But fire, by its sublimity and of its substance goodness, does not do that except to superfluously. And it is already known to us by experience and by length of service of study in the art about the truth of the causes; and for that I am excused of the length of the discourse, and if it were not that it is not written in my book in this place to you a secret hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and of its expulsion by which expels the illnesses, with a philosophical and demonstrative discourse, which would be acute in your minds.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to do cautery and they pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because so that the inconvenience for the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of that which with the cautery is thrown, and more so if the cautery is for pains or of necessary pains, strong and fistulas, which do not suffer delay because it is feared of those that come malice, which is greater than little inconvenience entering for time.
And therefore do not catch in your minds, o sons, that this is not esteemed by the vulgar people and the foolish physicians, because it is that to that illness that is healed by cautery is not reduced at all times, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not so as they care about that, because cautery is not but in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries the humidities which are the cause for which pains come.
But however, cautery superfluously over medicine by the will of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that its illness returns at some time of the time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of its illness, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of it of the aggregation of the superfluities in it, and what has reached it in its acquisition in foods and things similar to those causes; unless that the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and humidities, as cautery of teeth for pain and things similar to that, it is possible that in it it does not return that pain, but it is done in small.
And most common speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is true speech, not that I understand it in it, because I think that there is no cure that benefits with medicine nor with any other cause except cautery.
And the cause is the opposite of that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when they administer the healing methods in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause man administers cautery, and it benefits to that. And therefore it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand the common people and many foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen that and have found that it does not do so except in some bodies that have others, and cautery with that is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you do cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the roar of the gold, and that it prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust over it ignition, the gold melts for the fire, and in the fire some sheets so that the artisan catches for the occupation of that.
And for that reason cautery with iron must be done more lightly and more carefully to the rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that later the demander asks for that from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers on the humidity and cold over the nerve accident of which there are two causes, so it is the cause of soda and multitude of rheumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears it flows, and multitude of sleeping, and pain of teeth and of the goiter, and universally of all sickness that comes from cold, as well as paralytically, soda and apoplexy, and similar in those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is this, that first you command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine the head modifying, for three or for four nights, according to that it requires the virtue of the sickness and the age of him and his custom.
And then command him to shave his head, and then do that seizure between your hands on a chair laid down and that he place his hands on his feet.
And then place the razor of your palm near the nose between his eyebrows. But however, as the your word of the middle place is arrived, sign that place with a ten, and then ignite the cautery olive of which this is the form:
And then place that upon the place signed with a ten, in the manner that it descends, with which your hand be constricted little by little, and you revolve that.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see already of the bone being uncovered some quantity of the head, as well as the quantity of grain of ears, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand with that iron, with another of that, if it is cooled, until it is seen of the bone that I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve that on the place and leave that for three days.
And then place on it a cloth soaked in butter and leave that on it until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with tetrafarmacon ointment until it is healed.
And they already said that when the plague remains open, so much better gets the scar, because it is better and more helpful.
And they said some of them that the spine be cauterized into the bone, and be held the cautery until some part of the surface of the bone be burned.
And then be scraped that which is burned of the bone, and then be cured.
And they said others that with the cautery reach the back, until it presses in the bone strong pressure until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati small: And they estimate of that place expire the vapors of the head.
And be kept the plague open for long time, and then be cured until it is consolidated.
But to me no have been seen these two species of cautery of all, but in some men according to way of fear; and leave that, of me, better is with health, when it is; because the head is developed by solution of continuity of it as well as we have testified in the other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
And the species of cautery first is more safe and better of me; and of that use and with that work with health.
Second chapter.
Of the cautery of the head.
When chronic and prolonged pain occurs throughout the head and it is prolonged in the patient, and use of poultices and compresses and capipulges and plasters and guats and cadels and gualinas and semblances, and mostly if it is already cauterized with a cautery which recounts and does not benefit him from any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and is not frail and finds a great deal of heat, then cauterize him with another cautery than the one before. And then cauterize that on the corner of his head with a cautery until the skin is parted. Incise the skin and uncover the quantity which we have recounted and cauterize that with a cautery in the back part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and that is the place in which is placed a cupping glass. And alleviate your hand in doing so, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient by this feels a great deal of pain different from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And you say this cautery in its place, because whoever cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput with the cautery which is more subtle than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
Of cauterization of an old hernia.
When there is a sudden pain in the side of the head, or pain that extends into the eye, it should be evacuated with medicines that modify the head, and the other cure should be administered, which I have said in the divisions of the ailments; and if nothing helps, then the cauterization in it is in two ways: either cauterization with acute and burning medicine, or with iron.
But cauterization with burning medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and scrape that and cut off the extremities of it from both ends. And then incise the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet until it is in it made a place after the skin, until it is hidden.
And then strengthen over it with a stopper for descent constriction, and leave that for the space of three hours; and then untie the and take off the alum, and leave the ulcer for two or three days, and then place over it a poultice submerged in butter until the place makes a scab.
And then cure that with a gargle until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the two treatises of burning medicines.
But cauterization with iron according to this manner:  ignite a cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a clove cautery, because the head of it is as the form of a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small eminence.
And then place over the place of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery which is below is not burned — and revolve the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it that is burned by the thickness of the skin as much as the majority of it, and elevate your hand so that the artery below is not burned, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
And then imbibe a poultice in salt water and place that over the place, and leave that for three days; and then place a poultice mashed with butter, and then cure with a gargle until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize with the extremity of the knife cautery, and guard yourself from incision of the artery in this hernia properly old.
Chapter Four.
Of cauterization of an old hernia.
When you cure a hernia with what we have said of the previous cure, and what we have said in the divisions of the ailments, and if nothing helps, and sometimes because of the illness that does not reach him what we have said of the first cauterization with medicine or of the cauterization with fire, then cover that you ignite the knife cautery until it is white-hot, because it signifies over the place of the pain with a line of length of which is the majority of the said, or which that is; and pause your hand for one time and strengthen that into incisions the artery and reach until the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is bad for chewing, and that the nerve that feels that, and that it does not become a spasm.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is incised, because in the incision of it there is fear, and most to him who ignores what is done and is not studious and experienced; and leaves the operation in him at the beginning.
And I will come with a remembrance of the regiment of blood flow accident of the artery according to its manner, in its place of this book.
And if you see of this illness that does not reach this cautery and see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the ulcer until it is healed.
And if you, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of the strapping of the artery with cautery having two handles, and this cauterization is better and more convenient.
Chapter V.
Of cauterization of the pains of the ears.
When in the ear there is pain by fire and it is cured with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have said in the division, and the pain is not removed, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one which has a point, of which this is the form:
And when you point it to the ignition, and it is led around the entire ear as a wheel is rolled, or in the circuit of each time if the pain is in each. Lengthen it with the cautery from the root of the ear little by little so that you can feel the place with the tip.
And if the cautery of ten points in the whole ear, and that one, and then cure the places while they are healing.
Chapter VI.
Of cauterization of the tumor.
Tumor which is cured and with cauterization is only of the kinds which come by phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the species that should come from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that species of tumor with herbs and purgatives and gargles, and if you do not comfort your cure, then when you cauterize the tumor with three cauteries: the first you must the root of the ear, the second a little below its temple, and the third you must the junction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery for the opposite side of the sick part, because softening does not come except in the part that is healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with the cautery in the right of the extremity of the ear more sovereign a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which be according to the length of the said finger, and pause your hand with cautery while the quantity of the majority of the species of the codena is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the cutler, the form of which is placed opposite. But however more subtle is that one a little as you see; and that handle in its place of superfluous thickness a little.
And then cure the place with that which is oppositely proceeded until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of cauterization of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you cure that with the water which we have said and if you do not comfort your medication and the sickness has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: above all the horns of its head; and with cautery and the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with cautery in the cheek. And the manner of the cautery is made according to what is said above.
And already it is cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then it be cured with the water which you proceed.
Chapter VIII.
Of cauterization of forgetfulness made by phlegm.
Then when the patient is given in the beginning large gargles and pills the serving to modify.
And then shave the head of the whole patient and pause on the cheek of him a plaster of cetre described in the treatise of the plasters.
And pause that some times, for that is the manner of cauterization. And do water according to that same order which I have already said.
And therefore if by those he is healed well; and if not, then make to him three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which are descending from the most sovereign part of the head into the part more below the neck. And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cautery with the water which is proceeded.
But if you add it and the patient is that water tolerant, then make to him cautery in the middle place; and if you add more, then cauterize that above the two horns.
Then cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive according to the form previously given.
Chapter IX.
Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of the whole body.
Then when you proceed in modification of the head with gargles and with the water which we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with cautery in the middle place of the head, and with cautery above all the horns of the head, and with cautery above the rear part of it, and with three cauteries above the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the sickness of softening of the body of too much that and the sicknesses tolerate and the sickness is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries above the vertebrae of the loins, and certainly with cautery until it is burned from the codena of it, and elevate your hand. And then care for that one inside that is healing, and this one be olive oil cautery.
Chapter X.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized, but rather that epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, whoever modifies the brain of him at the beginning of him with years and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is great and is tolerating the excess of the medicines.
And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer safeguards and  masturbators to the  brain, before that for several days, with the blessing of the foods.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize him with a cautery in the middle location of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery in the nape of his neck, and on each horn of his head cauterize. And if the patient is strong and is tolerating, then cauterize him with cauteries the ones which I have said, having paralytically and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And be olive cautery according to what is preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then pause cautery subtle according to this manner.
Chapter XI.
Of cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are humidities corrupted and phlegm thick, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we have said in the having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink water that purifies the brain of him according to what has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a tortoise decently made of him on the circle, and then place that in the middle location of the head.
And the patient be feeling cauterized, and be held from all parts.
And then pause liniment; and it is more worthy of border anti of sheep. And warm that on the fire for moderate heating by measure, which the said suffers when it is most in him. And then put that in the middle location of his head in the circle, and let him inside that it be refrigerated.
And make water with the patient every week once, with the other regimen of him well inside that it is healing; or if you want, cauterize that making little points according to the best of him, unless you have the hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is a special cautery the one which moistens the brain with equality.
And then put that coated in border or in grease of quail.
Chapter XII.
Of cauterization of water descending in the heel.
When to you is declared the beginning of water in the heel by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that purifies the head of him, and guard that from all humidities.
And make that suffer in bath in dew for some days.
And then command him that he shave his head, and cauterize that with cautery in the middle location of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of the ailment of water in two heels, or of one side if it is the beginning of the water in one heel.
Incise with cautery all the veins and arteries which are left the chain; and be the cauteries in that length in the latitude of the temples.
And guard yourself from fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see of him fluxes of blood, stop him with some medicine, the one which is to you possible.
And you will come with wisdom the one which is in the extraction of arteries and with the abscess of those and caution of fluxes of blood.
And some times it is cauterized in the cervix below two bones with two cauteries deliberately produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of cauterization of old tears.
When tears of the heels are old,  and by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluity of phlegmatic, then cauterize that with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water descending in the heels, and with cautery in the middle location of the head and with two cauteries in the cervix below two temples, and with two cauteries in the cervix below two bones. And if you need of addition, then cauterize that in all place of the tail of the heel above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of cauterization of stench of nose.
When you medicate him with the water which we have said in the division and it does not profit your medication, then you equip and give to drink to the patient the cochies for three nights; and then shave the head of him, and cauterize him with a middle cautery with olive cautery. And then cauterize that with a pointed cautery with two cauteries on the two eyebrows above the hairs a little.
And guard yourself from the arc that you do not burn that.
And of the pointed cautery this is the form.
Chapter XV.
Of cautery for softening eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or by humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in every part, and be elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid be cauterized.
Chapter XVI.
Of cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs are converted to the parts of the eyelids and pierce the eye.
When the hairs of the eye are converted to the parts of the eyelids so that they pierce the eye, cauterize in those in two manners, whether cauterize or is with a burning medicine.
If with cautery of it with fire, command the patient in front of it that he pluck his hairs as those which they pluck them, until they are prolonged and equal; and if you pierce that of them, then you strengthen the eyes of him with a bandage so that it may not be bad until the hairs are born.
Therefore, as they are born and equal, then place the head of the patient in your knee, and then send over the eyelid of the eyes of him with a tent, with a sign which is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the sign near the hairs.
And then place a poultice embedded in a broth of herbs or a mucilage of ptilli on the eye.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it.
And then cauterize over the figure which you have signed, little by little, in several times, until the surface of the skin which is as a myrtle leaf, is entirely burned, properly.
And the sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already be contracted and the hairs of it be elevated above the puncture of the eye.
And therefore elevate your hand and leave it for three days, and then place over it a poultice with border until the scab is eradicated. And then cure it with an enema until it is healed.
But if it returns for the hairs any cause to their piercing and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery over that all as you had done first.
But if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is elevated to its natural place and be equal and that the hairs do not pierce the eye.
But the cautery with burning medicine this is that you command the patient that he pluck the hairs until they are prolonged and equal, and then be made of cloth the form of a myrtle leaf.
And then take of known soap and of live cautery one unc. i., That is,
And place the said over the medicine and press it a little and not the badness until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for biting is in it as of fire.
And therefore as it will persevere that the burning biting, then remove the medicine and put it with your hand; therefore as it ceases the biting, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if times the eyelid already is lifted as it is washed above the constriction with fire or with incision, for then it is well; and if it returns over that of the medicine over the place in which it has not put the medicine and not be diminished until it is equal your operation and be contracted the eye.
And then place over it a poultice with border until the scab of the cauterization is eradicated, and then cure it with an enema of defunction or with another until it is healed.
And it is necessary to you, above your operation that you keep with most vigilance that in the eye does not fall any of the medicine, and if the eyelid apropos some days is softened and any cause of the hairs pierce the eye, then iterate your medicine over that place the which of the eyelid is softened, and properly as you have done at the beginning, and then navigate it until it is healed.
And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to the magnitude and the smallness, and therefore according to that is made your constriction.
And the way of rectum is not hidden from him who studies this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of cauterization of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you cure a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of the diseases and do not confer your cure, then you must cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head in your lap, and have some minister hold his head between your hands in such a way that it is not moved or agitated by his head.
Then place a cloth soaked in hot water or in a poultice of ptilli on the eye of him.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
which is concave, as is the shape of a cane or a vulture's feather, at one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it may be penetrating into the other end. And if you wish, it may be sorted as it tends.
But nevertheless, the one that is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out from it pus and dry it up. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold with your hand a little of the cautery from the eye to the side of the nose, so that it does not burn your hand or the patient be agitated, and then place the cautery on the edge of the eye and corrupt it.
And therefore if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if it is necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and then place on it a cloth with border and surround it with an astringent enema until it is healed.
But if ten days had passed and it is not healed, then place on it a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and is scraped according to what you have ordained in your chapter.
And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some first said:  enter into the place of the fistula and cut it open, and then place in that fissure a fine thread of which this is the shape: And put into it the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with a good hold, and do not move the patient so that the melted lead does not reach the eye of him; and cover the eye of the patient with a cloth soaked in hot water or in water, for the lead will burn the place of the fistula and heal it by a miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said of the cauterization and the cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a treatment of the nose and reduce the fistula to the cavity of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
Of cauterization of the fissure of the anus.
Many times fissures occur in the lips, and most often in the lips of children.
Therefore, as you cure those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and it does not profit your cure, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this shape that is taught:
And let its concavity be according to the fineness of a needle.
Then place that initiated carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then cure that with cerotz until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth a boil develops and then bursts, and then it is old, and pus flows and a fistula is made, and then you cure it and the cure does not profit, then you must ignite the cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then place that ignited one in the tract of the fistula, and hold your hand so that it reaches the tip of it, and after it you do this once or twice; and then cure that with the water that we have said of the cure until it is healed.
And therefore if the pus is abscised and is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and host the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
Of cauterization of the teeth and softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are bad, and you cure them with medicines and it does not profit, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then ignite the cautery the shape of which will come next, so that you place the point on the tooth and introduce into it the ignited cautery swiftly, and hold your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching to the root of the tooth.
And then remove your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to what you wish.
And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, and then spit it out, for the bad tooth is stopped, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
Chapter XXI.
Of cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness, or a worm is in it, or the cure does not agree with medicine, then cauterize it in one of these two ways: with a cautery of cow's hide, or with a cautery of fire.
Cauterizing with hide is that you take the hide of cows and boil it in a cauldron of iron, and then take a stick and wrap it around the tip of the cautery, and then immerse that in the boiled hide, and place it on the painful tooth, quickly, until it is burned.
And then repeat that several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or a stick in the above-mentioned hide, and place it on the painful tooth, and place a red-hot iron above it until the iron reaches the tip of the cavity of the tooth.
But however, cauterization with fire is that you wait for the tip of the iron or of the cautery to be somewhat thick and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery, the shape of which will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cautery is burned; and do this several times until the pain is subdued, either on that day or the next.
And cover that with the patient's mouth with good hide, and keep it there for an hour, and then spit it out; and this is the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize with whichever extremity you wish, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
Of cauterization of extrophulos.
When extrophulos are of phlegm and humors, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you wish the digestion of those slightly, then you ignite the cautery, whose shape is this following, having two ends open so that the smoke of the cautery may escape through the other end, and place it on that abscess once, and another if you need it, until it reaches the tip of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the amount of the abscess, and then leave it for three days and place a stick covered in hide over it until what the fire has burned is subdued.
And then cure it with gargles and poultices and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
Of cauterization of a sore throat and constriction of the ale.
When the humors come upon the throat of the lung, and mostly when that is of coldness of constitution, then the patient should be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that, the root of the goiter in the depressed place.
And guard yourself that you do not reach the cautery to the goiter nor burn the skin of it except a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery, at the junction of the neck at the last vertebra of it. And the cautery of it be like the previous manner.
And then cure it with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
Of cauterization of lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are of cold humors and the patient has no fever nor phlegm and it is an old disease, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the breastbone in the depressed places of the left and right; and with another cautery in the middle place of the foot between two toes; and be the cautery like the previous shape.
And if you wish, be your cauterization pointed with the cautery that is called a point, the shape of which you preceded in the cauterization of ear pain.
And make points within those; and then cure it with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
And now let the cautery have three ramps because cauterization is done with this: in one time you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
Of cauterization of the tic that is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricous humors and is not fixed in the hour of its return to its place, and through a small movement it is dislocated again as it should, as we have testified, then cover that first you reduce the dislocation, and then the patient be reversed onto his back or onto his side; and then elevate the skin which is in the front part of the neck to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated to the front part.
And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is the shape of it:
And then cauterize the groin while it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will then be that of four cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries.
And then place on the cautery a piece of salt, and then make the patient adhere to the  flat surface, and the limb not be harmed for any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery or with a burning cautery, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of cauterization of the stomach.
When there comes in the stomach fire and many humidities, so that this extraction of its complexion and so multiplies in it, and if you continue the ways of cure and do not confirm it, then it is that the patient is on his two sides, and extends his hands and his legs, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one cautery, leaving the foot for the quantity of a finger with a pointed cautery, and with two cauteries, leaving the two sides of the cautery, until the triangular figure of cauterization comes; and elongate between those that are not adjusted that they will make a puncture.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the groin.
And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form, and if you will, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be cauterized pointedly to that one who is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want with tension, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the points; and then cure it with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of cauterization of the liver fire.
When there comes in the liver pain by heat or by humidity or by excessive windiness so that its normal complexion is thrown by superfluous egress, and it is cured the patient with that which we have said and do not confirm it, then it is that the patient is laid on his back on his neck, and feel with tension three cauteries according to this form and this quantity placed on the liver below the hypochondria, the honor by the decubitus of man.
And let the space which is between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the straight body.
And do not compress your with the cautery much.
And if the quantity of that which is adhered is the quantity of the majority of the width of the groin, and there is no more adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet; and if he is not standing, then he is lying, the one who has already extended his legs, and elevate his arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a pointed cautery, when it is with your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself that you do not process too much in the cauterization, and let the width of the whole groin be adhered so that it is adhered to the whole body and reaches into the intestines, for the groin here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery.
When there comes an abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient feels a heaviness and pain increases.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with the pain is increased greatly and sometimes that even exhausts the physicians the cure of it.
Therefore, cove that the patient is laid on his back; and then feel the location of the abscess with tension; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled to rag, the form of which preceded on the other page. And cauterize with that cautery until the whole groin is burned, until it reaches the hip, until it is healed.
And then cure it with the cure of the other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not cove that of this form of cautery use only that of which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the most of which many diseases have been known; but with experiment some times it is dared upon this operation, but however, let that leave us, and it is better.
Chapter .xxix.
Of cauterization of pleurisy.
They said the ancients cauteries of the roots of aristolochia to pleurisy heat according to this manner to be done, and it is this that you take of the roots of aristolochia long dry a root pointed long that is found, and let it be of the thickness of the finger.
And then submerge that in oil and place it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that location which is between the continuation of the clavicle and the neck; and with two small cauteries, I have guided, one slightly sloping towards the side that is below the beard, and with two cauteries in that which is sloping between the fifth rib and the shoulder blade, sloping slightly towards the rear; and another cautery in the middle location of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries from the rear; and one cautery in that location which is between the two shoulder blades, and two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, besides the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
And no cover that which you understand your hand with the cautery, unless it is in the manifest of the code in work.
And already said some ancients that some of men who use cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite that, and put that in that location which is between the ribs, until they reach that and that abscess and be healed, so as we have said in the abscess of the thigh.
But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, because he immediately accedes in the location fistula to which there is no healing.
Chapter .xxx.
Of the cauterization of the spleen.
When you cure the disease of the spleen with what we have said of the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize in it is according to three manners, all of which are straightforward, of which one is that you make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the thigh, the figure of which has preceded.
And be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the thigh equally.
And do not cover your hand with the cautery; and the patient be elevated on his two.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, so it is that you ignite the cautery having two verticles, the cause of which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the code which is in the straight of the spleen the honor to reach the lying of the left patient.
And be the elevation with which you elevate the code according to the length of the body, so that cauteries be made according to the latitude of the body.
And then, between the two verticles, ignite the mot, in that into which you penetrate the code from the other part.
And then you extract the cautery; and therefore four cauteries are made.
And if you want, cauterize with a cautery having three verticles.
And then you cure the cautery because it had laid off for too many days, because it is more conferable than the other causes preceding in the cure.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of cauterization of hydropsy.
Cauterize not cats in hydropsy but in alcinte3 properly.
When you cure the hydropsy with the manners of cure which we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then cover that cauterize with four cauteries in the circuit of the umbilicus and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the thigh, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the right of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the spicitude of the code.
And then lay the cautery open so that it gets laid off for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from cure after the cautery with that which cover so that two understandings be added to it, and it be festinated to it with auxiliary healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized be a key according to the shape of which is precedent, and it is that with which the back is cauterized an olive according to which is precedent to its shape.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of cauterization of feet and of the thighs.
When the feet are apostematized in hydropsy and are filled with watery pus, cover that you cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in nocrati that which is between the auricular and the annular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist that; and then elevate your hand, and do not return that of all, because the watery pus recedes.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on the two thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh be made cautery with the extremity of the cautery cutellar. And be the cautery according to the length of the thigh; and one below and the other below the middle location of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
And leave the plague open ses cure for a long time so that any water recedes from it.
And then take care of those causes that we have said.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of cauterization of the belly.
When the belly is caused by cold and humidity within that weakens the vertebrae, so is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured by these ways of healing and not by confections, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization to exhibit virtue, then cauterize with a large cautery on their stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries in the circuit of the navel subtle, with a subtle cautery, and with cauteries on the skin above the navel large, or with two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humors are exuberant and the patient tolerates this, then cauterize with them on the intestines and on the belly, and firmly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfect cure of healing from which you will not err.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in nature, old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors, cold or corrupted humors, and they are cured by what we have said in the division and not by confections, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus left spongy of the small and small triangular spine, and with cautery below the navel, in two digits.
And if you suppose that the stomach of him be cold and the food of him not digested, and the face of him sometimes pale, then cauterize with a large cautery on the stomach according to what has preceded; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the spleen with a subtle cautery, and leave the cautery for some time open, and then take care of him while he is healing.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of cauterization of a boil near the abscess of them.
When you abscess a boil, then you ignite the cautery that is assembled to a ray. And then introduce that ignited one into that abscess boil, and last your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if the boils are too many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and then take care of them with what confections you give them of the ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more effective for healing.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of cauterization of fistulas that are made in nature in the parts of him.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, be healed with cautery.
Therefore, when one has a fistula in nature, and it is old, corrupted by pus and corrupted humors, and therefore that which is most worthy of being covered is that you probe it with a subtle tentacle, and then you know the quantity of the depth of it with the aforementioned tentacle.
And then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. And then introduce that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you introduce the tentacle.
And iterate over that cautery within until those corrupted parts are burned once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself from burning of nerves and of veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.
And then take care of the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the materials are abscessed from it, and remain so for a long time, then you know that it is healed entirely.
And if the materials are not from it, then you know that it is penetrating or in the preon of it, or corrupted, or comes from those causes of which remembrance will come in its place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of cauterization of the boils.
When in the boils, there is pain due to cold or thick windiness, and therefore the patient's body is inflamed, then you should cauterize those on the boils with a cautery on each boil with a subtle cautery of which I will recount the remembrance.
And firmly cauterize them with the second one a little, so that three cauteries will come lined, and therefore they are more effective for healing.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of cauterization of the bladder.
When there is weakness and softening in the bladder due to cold and humidity so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize that in the part below the bladder, the one that begins the hairs of the navel, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left side of him.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the knots of the foot; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And the cautery should be held according to the process.
Chapter .xxxix.
Of cauterization of the womb.
When moisture and humidity come into the womb, and because of this, pregnancy is prohibited, and the menstrual flow of the woman is corrupted, and the provocation of it is delayed, and pain occurs in the lower abdomen, then the place should be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the place below the back, or with two cauteries, and the cautery should be held firmly.
Chapter .xl.
Of cauterization of the dislocation of the hip.
When mucous humidities are poured into the part of the hip, and they are caused by the swelling of their place, and the sign of it is that the thigh is elongated over the other when they are compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is felt in that which is soft.
Therefore, you should cauterize the patient on the part of the hip with a cautery in a circle shape, as you will have sensed with your finger in the circuit of the part as it is turned, and so that the part falls in the middle of the circle.
And the cautery of which preceded the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize that with three cauteries with a large olive cautery.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the whole bone; and take care of that so that it be healed.
Chapter .xli.
Of cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the part of the hip, and it is caused by cold and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said and do not confer, and that is ancient, then when you cut the patient of thick humors with fetid pills or with artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: the cautery with burning medicines, or the cautery with fire.
It is according to two scientific manners, of which one is that you cauterize that on the part of the hip of him with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make with those a good depth. And be the spaces the which is between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the olive cautery or large.
Sometimes, however, the cautery is on the middle part above the head of the hip, so that there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which the form is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, that is to say, a circle containing and burning the thickness of the whole bone.
And this is the manner of cauterizing in sciatica when pain is adherent to the hip and does not extend into the thigh.
But if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh on the place to which you turn the patient that is the pain; and with one cautery on the cavity for four fingers a little below the fleshy part.
And if the cautery is a knife-like one, and the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the bone.
And if the patient reports that the pain extends to the place near the toes, then cauterize that here where you turn with a cautery for three points or four or more if it seems necessary to you.
And if the patient reports pain being below the hip and the thigh, then cauterize that here with a knife-like cautery.
And guard yourself in all cauterizations that you do not end with the cautery as much as you burn nerves or large arteries, and that because of that to you is over the patient evil or contraction.
And I have already seen one and another of those who cauterized on the cavity and ended in the cauterization, and the foot inflated with fire until the tumor reached the foot, and fire perforated and corrupted the whole foot. And therefore, a strong solution of the belly, and that is death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise ones said in the cauterization of the hip, the cautery of which this is the manner: make a circle of iron, of which the circuit is the majority of a palm; and be the depth of it according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
And from the inside of that circle, make another third; and be the spaces which is between them the quantity of the knot of the foot; and be those circles open on two parts; and be the length of those cauls a knot or two knots, and make in those marks of iron decently arranged in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then it should be ignited in the fire until it becomes red and throws sparks, and then it should be placed on the patient's back, the patient lying on their side. And therefore cauterize that with three red-hot cauteries at once.
And then leave that for three days; then plaster that with a poultice and leave the wound open for too many days; and then care for that with ointments until it is healed.
Says Albucasis: O, sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the terror of looking at it, and because we have found few who guard over it.
May the cautery on those who suffer it, and find it there.
But cauterize with medicated ointments is that you make two circles having a perforated arm in which they put the staff of the iron gate; let the length of the sides in the breadth of them be two walnuts or what those are.
And if the space which is between each one is the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and be open below and above, and be that they contain themselves between each other according to this form:
And then place on the patient's back, the patient lying on their side, and compress your hand on the area of the back; and then take some boiling water and pour it between the two circles, and the quality of that be with the small fire little by little, and keep that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the biting and the burning of it — for that biting is as if of fire — until the biting ceases.
And then elevate your hand with the instrument and wipe away the boiling water from the whole back with cool water.
And then leave that for three days and place on that poultice until the blackness of the burning is removed, and leave that for some days, and it will run from it pus; this is later in healing.
And then care for that with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or the leg, make for it a statue in it that contains water as it is done in the back equally.
And this is the manner of boiling water, and you have already written that in the treatise of the rectification of medicines. Take alkali and quicklime, and mix them in equal parts, and grind them and place them in a new pot of which the bottom part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters there.
And place below the bottom of the pot another pot inverted, and pour over that alkali and quicklime boiling water, which covers them for a finger's width, and as you compress them with your hand for good compression, and leave the pot that descends from it water sharply in the bottom of the inverted pot.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over other quicklime and other renewed alkali, for that which is the case is of strong sharpness, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for that operation makes of fire.
And so of medicines some with which is cauterized much, as tezizic and honey anacrat and quicklime with sabao in such a way that they are mixed.
And Gualia recounts of an ancient man the operation and cure with which the pain of the back and sciatica is cured, and magnifies it very well to be of that, and says that there is no need for other cure, and that it is healed in one go as he recounts, for very strong was that intrec in bath and he sees already from that.
And it is that it should be taken of green celery, and if it is not found green, it should be taken recent fig; and much be ground with a little of gray and be placed on the back in which is the pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and be tied.
And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels cessation of the burning.
And then put that in a bath and therefore when the body of it is red, introduce that in the sun, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
And know that no one should use cauterization with these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
But already Escorides says that when with a goat's wound the sciatica vein is cauterized, it profits him very well; and let the cautery be with it in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the heels.
And then take dry goat's gut and char it with fire until it is made into charcoal; and place it on the wool and leave it until it is extended. And then repeat that, and do not cease to do that until the feeling of the biting reaches the back and repauses the pain.
And this manner of cauterization is called cauterization of the goat.
Chapter .xlii.
Of cauterization of pain of the two.
Sometimes pain is in the two by many causes, as by accident or by percussion or by superfluous evacuation, and by causes to those similar, by infusion of cold and humid matter.
And cauterize only this kind of lesion which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the patient with pills and similar ones, which are made on the two sides where the pain is, three lines according to the width of the area, because you should apply cauteries or more, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
And make cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a medial chisel-shaped cautery according to this form:
Chapter .xliii.
Of cauterization at the beginning of yellowing.
Many times this disease happens to young children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that they stumble over their structure in the leg and feel elevation and movement.
And it protrudes in the last vertebra of the lower back and its joints that already begin to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that with a cautery that is circular according to this form: which presses the cautery over the entire part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with the pointed cautery two or three lines. And let the points be close together.
And after cure the area until it is healed with what we have said.
But beware that cauterization is not administered in yellowing that is made by a spasm of the nerve.
Chapter .xliv.
Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, as gout caused by cold is cured by the method of cure and not only the pains are removed, then the pains are removed by cauterization.
And it is that you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And let it be an olive-shaped cautery of which this is the form of it:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the toes or to the other joints, and this many times happens, then cauterize that on each toe with three or four cauteries of the whole part with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize that and do not press too much your hand with the cautery before, it is only around the shape of the bone.
And if the pains rise into the toe of the foot, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the heel only, and it is called suagra, then puncture in the circuit of the heels as they are revolved, puncture in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture in the circuit of the heels on each joint and on the knuckle of the hand.
And if the pains rise near certain joints in the elbows or to the muscles, then cauterize those of the whole part of the helpers.
And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done good regimen and it is evacuated with this cautery if it is healed, God help.
Chapter .xlv.
Of cauterization of ruptures.
When it happens rupture in the groin and saying the intestines in front of the hernia, and this is beginning to happen, then, as you command the patient to leave his food on his day and that he uses of gentle causes so that the wound descends from his belly.
And after follow the patient between your hands over his back, and command him to keep his leg straight until it is thrown or the hernia or the intestines appear.
And after return that with your fingers and feel with your hand the rupture on the bone of the pubic bone with a sign the extremity of which is similar to the majority of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And after ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it:
until it is very hot and throws sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And after pause the cautery on that sign with your hand with cautery straight, and take that until with it you can feel the bones of the pubic bone into the middle of the groin; and repeat with that other time if to you that one has not achieved in the first time into the bone.
And observe carefully the position of the intestine during the time of your cauterization, so that you do not burn that intestine so that upon the patient there comes no death or other great evil.
And know that when you have the cautery do not touch the bone, do not confer your operation.
And cover that the cautery of children be subtle according to the size and measure of them.
And after care the place of the cautery for three days with border until the scab of fire is healed.
And after care that with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient shall lie upon their back for forty days until the place and the plague are sealed.
And cover that you pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time of the cure of him the which linesca the belly of him, and that the intestine does not come out because of the effort of healing.
And after when it is wanted to raise him after forty days, then administer him decent food, and keep that for another forty days.
And be wary of work and repletion of food and drink, and of much voice, for when he uses this regimen of healing entirely he will be healed.
And you say the cure of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want them not to be pulled, then cauterize the rupture of that with a round cautery according to the quantity of it, and be that which is exhumed from the codena as such as the third part of it; and after care that with that which we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And already some first say that rupture be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with a tenta:
And it is placed a line which goes by the latitude in the latz which is most superior of the rupture, and another line below; and pause your hand with a cautery clavilh, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter .xlvi.
Of cauterization of torsion.
When it happens in some members by accident or by percussion pain and that pain persists for a long time and does not confer to the cure with medicines, then cover that you cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And be the cautery of every member according to the magnitude and smallness of it, and virtue and weakness of it, and location of torsion and pain of it.
Therefore if it is healed by the first cautery, well is; and if not, then iterate upon it the cautery; for of custom of those pains it is that they be pointed of member to that member which approaches to it, for that cover that you cauterize those within that the patient is healed.
Chapter .xlvii.
Of cauterization of leprosy.
Leprosy some times with cautery by great help, and more so if the species of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And therefore as you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and has that cured with that which we have said in the division and do not say, nor is it, and fear upon the patient that the corruption comprehends the whole body of him and the whole complexion of him, then cauterize that upon the head with 5 cauteries: with one in the middle location of the head, and with the second further below it, and ves the front to the end of the hairs; and both upon two horns; and with one behind, upon the nape of the neck or service.
And lastly your hand with the cautery a little while until it impresses upon the bone a small impression, and from it the scabs are displaced, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from it; and cauterize upon the flesh according to that which is necessary.
And if the leprosy is already expanded upon the patient and appears manifestly, then cover that you cauterize that with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and with a cautery upon the extremity of the nose, and with two cauteries upon the two cheekbones, and with two cauteries upon two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries upon the vertebrae of the back, and one great one upon the vertebrae near the hip, and one upon the rib, and with two upon the ankles, and one upon each ankle, and with two upon the knees, and one upon each knee, and with two upon the elbows, and with two upon the muscles, and with two upon the tendons of their feet; and cauterize that upon all the joints of the fingers of the hands and of the feet, and upon each heel of their feet, and upon the hollows of their hands.
And guard yourself of the nerves which are upon the talus that you do not burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery upon the bone of the penile and with another upon the mouth of the stomach, and another upon the liver.
And know that when you adjust more cauteries, so much is more helpful and more conferent; and know that the patient has no pain in the cautery, as such as they have, for so that the body of him already is stupefied.
And cover that the cauteries be great or few according to the members and the joints according to that which is preceded of the species of the instruments.
And then carefully apply the cautery with flour of herbs mixed with honey and the other cure within which it is healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
Of cauterization of stupor.
When some limb is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that numbed limb with cauteries according to what merits the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the  depth of the flesh a little. And then treat that with an enema until it is healed.
And sometimes it is cauterized, some stupor which extends to the arms and feet, and to the vertebrae of the spine, and the emergence of the nerves which move that limb, and the stupor is removed.
Do not presume about this, but only he who is wise in the anatomy of the limbs and the egress of the nerves of the whole body moving.
Chapter .xlix.
Of cauterization of ulcers that are mortified.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal enemas, then you cauterize over it with a cautery, a little, according to the quantity of the depth of the flesh, until it is removed, the whiteness and color of it, and the color of it is changed.
And then treat that with flour of herbs and lentils mixed with olive oil and leaves of arnica, and the blood of a dove or the blood of a round, from each one a part and all are mixed, and then apply a cloth and place it on the spot until it is healed.
Chapter .l.
Of cauterization of crabs.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is turned.
And some wise people say that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle place; but to me, this is not seen, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is more right that it be cauterized in its circuit with a circle as we have said, or with moving cauteries.
Chapter .li.
Of cauterization of  abscesses.
When some abscess is delayed in maturation, and so it is because of the superfluity of that which makes it, or because of the state of the patient, who is old or decrepit, of little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize it in its circuit with small, moving cauteries; and then let it go so that it will hasten in maturation.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form: and place that in the middle place of the abscess until it penetrates the flesh.
And if the cautery in that place that is furthest, so that the body of the arm be relieved; and then treat that until it is healed.
Chapter .lii.
Of cauterization of corrodents.
Corrodent is a corruption that walks in the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corrodent in a place that suffers cauterization with fire, then you ignite small, moving cauteries, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrodent is.
And then cauterize that from every part until you eradicate all the corrosion and no cause of it remains.
And then let it go for three days, and place on the cauterized places a cloth soaked in oil mixed until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption.
And then treat that with enemas that generate flesh.
But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is born in which there is no corruption, well; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what is raw in the corrupted places.
And corrodent is medicated some times with sharp medicine, which that is placed in the place of cautery. But however, cauterization with fire is of more light help.
And I have already said the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when from you will have need.
Chapter .liii.
Of cauterization of warts and other similar things.
Many times there is a disease in the lower parts of the foot that is called a wart, and it is a large, fleshy cause, which deforms the foot; and cauterize those in two ways, so it is cauterization with fire and cauterization with boiling water.
But cauterization with fire is that you ignite the cautery concave in the shape of a vulture's beak, which is made of iron according to the quantity which contains the wart from every part, and be of subtle margins.
And then place that ignited on the wart, and then revolve your hand with the cautery in the circuit of the wart until the cautery reaches the depth of the wart. And let him rest for three days before he begins to wear a bracer. And apply a poultice made with wild mallows crushed with salt to it, and leave the poultice on it for one night, so that it is eradicated from its roots.
And cure the area with a wash of generative flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not converted, and many times this happens on the surface of the body, mostly in the hands and feet, then you should administer cautery with water to those. And take a small nozzle of lead or iron or vulture's bone, and place it over the boil; and pour into the nozzle a small quantity of water, and hold your hand, and you turn it with compression of your hand, and press the edge of the nozzle into the root of the boil, and it will draw the water a little way into the depth of the root; and wait for the patient a little the biting of the water for an hour, and then remove it, because the boil with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do with those, and the other until you come upon all of those on the body.
And cure those pus that the roots of the boils are eradicated with this wash that the flesh generates.
Chapter .liiii.
Of cauterization of tremor.
When someone has a tremor due to a fire in the nerve or from a feverish cause, or from another similar cause, then you should cauterize that with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with a cautery; and with cauteries on the feet of him, and on his stomach, with olive cautery.
And the tremor of him is rested and hastened the health of the feverish disease.
Chapter .lv.
Of cauterization of white accidents on the body.
When on the body are spread white spots, and they are pustules split which are made of coarse corrupted matter; therefore at the beginning when it appears, that it be cauterized over all head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with twigs of myrtle, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of erestologia long; or with a lentecular cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized additionally at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and they are not believed, and the superfluity is broken, doing those, and heals from those.
But nevertheless, it must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter lvi.
Of cauterization of flux of blood accident by incision of artery.
Often times there is a flux of artery that is incised, the plague which must be for sure, or the incision of abscesses or cauteries of the limb, and then similar, and it is difficult to remove that.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you must cover with your hand the orifice of the artery, and place upon it your finger, pressing it strongly many times until the flux of blood is stopped by your finger, and that it does not come out.
And apply on the fire the olive cauteries few and large, by number a few, and exhale over those while they are a little ignited.
And take of those one small or one large according to the place and the plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein swiftly pushing that you have removed your finger, and place the cautery until it is abcised and restricted that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery well heated from the cauteries which in the fire are prepared, and therefore do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is restricted.
And guard yourself that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it comes upon the patient another malice.
And know that when from the artery flows blood, then it is not possible in those to restrict the blood, and especially when the artery is large, if not by one of four ways: or by cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of him are much burned and the blood is restricted, or that it be tied with a thread or with a ligament for strong structure, or that medicines be placed upon it of which the virtue is to restrict the blood; and be tightened with a cushion with decent constriction.
But he who administers decent restriction to him with a ligament and with constriction with cloths or by position of burning causes and similar things, do not confer otherwise than sparingly.
But if this happens to someone and the physician is not present nor medicine, then open with the placement of the finger indicated upon the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of him until the blood is stopped from the sovereign part of the plague, and upon the artery the finger is not removed; and over the artery be sprinkled with cold water of much great coldness until the blood is coagulated and thickened; and more sew in that which has to cauterize or of medicine necessity.
Of incisions and perforations and ventoses and of phlebotomy and of poultices and of their likenesses.
We have already said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which the use of a cautery with fire is convenient and with medicine that is burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for it with the forms of the cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters of the governance of the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in that same manner, so that the reader may be instructed on what he has asked.
And first of all, know that in this chapter what is said is in terror of what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for that, know that great caution must be exercised in this chapter, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many times, a catz evacuation occurs, which is with blood, with which the life of the person is at stake, the sprinkling of the vein or incision on the abscess or opening of the fistula or purification of the wound, or the extraction of the arrow or incision of the stone and their likenesses. And of all those, fear and trembling accompany, and in the midst of them, death.
And I admonish you that you should not fall into that which is stated, for sometimes the case of illnesses requires that you handle men with many illnesses. And of them, some will go away with their illness and it is lighter for them to die, and thus because of the vehemence of what they find of their illness, and because of the length of their illness, and with the illness is fear, which means death.
And of those is the one who gives to you his hope and says, "you await with that health," and his illness is pernicious.
And therefore, know that you should not consent to that one who comes to you of whom this manner is; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and your greed; and do not presume any cause on that, but only with certain knowledge which verifies that, and to which, through a praiseworthy succession, you will be rewarded.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses, prognostication and indication of them, to which health is converted, for in that, you are helped in the acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
Oh, children, may God breathe his understanding into you and guide you in your direction and protection, for that is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter, distinguishing it into chapters, as it preceded in the chapter of cauteries, from the care of the head down to the feet, so that what you have asked for and of which you have need may be alleviated.
First Chapter.
Of the cure of the water which is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness often happens to children during childbirth and when the midwife tightens the head of the child, it is harmful.
And sometimes it happens for a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this illness except in children; and to all those whom I have seen, death came, and thus it is that I have seen the laying down of work in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head was always so magnified that he could not sit on himself because of the size of his head, and more than that, the humidity increased so that he died of fire.
And this humidity is either added between the bone and the bone, or it is added outside the bone on the skull.
For the operation in that case, if the humidity is between the bone and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should make in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and the length of the fissure be two nights, so that the humidity runs, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore, if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two fissures according to this manner:
And if the humidity is outside the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open from all sides and the water is squeezed when you compress that with your hand on the sides of it and it is not hidden from you. Know that you should make in the middle of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
And then, extract all the humidity with the incision; and then tighten the fissures with cloths and cotton; and then apply that above with wine and oil until the fifth day, and then untie the bandage and cure the wound with tents and ointments, and tighten the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, which you should consider, honoring the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore, attend to the incision where the abscess appears and the repletion of the water, and do it according to what is best for you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and it does not flow with blood and the patient dies from that flow of blood with the evacuation of humidity.
Chapter Second.
When a catarrh or wound occurs in the foot or toes, and it becomes chronic, and no relief is found in this cure through medicines, then the following cure is incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries, the patient raises their head, and you press the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and consider where the vein is; and the places of each on the places that are near the ears are depressed, and they are so hidden unless in some men.
And then, you press on the artery with a tent, and you incise each one with the sharp edge of the spatula, making the incision go into the bone, and this is done for the width of the head.
And if you wish, you insert the spatula below the artery and break it at the incisions on the upper parts.
And the length of the incision should be two fingers' width, because when any vein is incised, the blood is emitted with a pulsatile egress, which jumps out by frequent jumps.
But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then you must measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then press with a tent, and go into the bone.
And this is the quantity of blood that must be extracted is the quantity of one ounce. And do not take more or less than this, and all this is according to the quantity that appears of the virtue of the patient and the repletion of the artery of him.
And consider the plague, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the plague, then incise this so that it does not become a purulent abscess.
And then strengthen the wound with cotton and bandages of cloth, and cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When a certain ancient migraine or acute catarrh occurs, due to humidity of the air and the quality in the temples, or a very violent and similar ancient ailment, and it is medicated with the ways of medical cures and this does not bring relief, then we have resorted in these ailments to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises their hair where it is in the temples; and understand the artery appears in the temple because it is shown by its pulse, and it is hidden unless in few men by the vehemence of the humors.
And if it is hidden from you, then the patient's neck is tightened with some cloth; and then press the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until the artery appears manifestly. And then you take the spatula of which this is the shape: And then you cut the tendon with that with ease until you reach the artery; and then you put it on and extract that to the upper parts until you extract that from the tendon and uncover that of the tunics which are below that, entirely.
But if the artery is subtle, then you wrap that with the extremity of the onion, and then you incise that one part according to the quantity by which the extremities of it are elongated and contracted, and there will not be a flow of blood, because if it is not incised it will not raise the blood of all.
And then evacuate the blood of one ounce. within three.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie that in two places with a double strong cord or with long ropes, and do not let it putrefy before the consolidation of the wound and it will become a flow of blood.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do this at that hour or another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cauterizer into the bone with a cauterizer cutter until the extremities of it are incised, and stay in place of that messy work.
And it is a better work if the patient has a fever or is of a hot complexion; because cauterization is of those causes that help the final humors, and therefore it is better in judgment.
And after the extraction of the arteries, you should apply the area of the incision with a poultice decently made, and then be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh rise and with ointments until it is healed.
And if while you are working another vein becomes a flow of blood from the artery, then you must take care to constrict that blood, or with cauterization, or that you apply the area of the incision, and tighten your hand until the blood is restrained. And if for any of those causes it is not present to you, then pause your finger on the area until the blood is coagulated, and apply the area with water of very great coldness until the sharpness is rested, and tighten it according to what is necessary.
And that which is lightest in the extraction of artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, because you have marked the two places with a probe, and after a pause, a little bit, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it be elongated that which is between the extremities of him, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two handles is at the same time. But however if it is less sharpness that two handles is better, because if it is sharp with two handles it approaches to each burn, and does not cut the flesh with velocity.
Therefore, as in those there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in those and the flesh is slightly cut.
And this work is better in all work and lighter.
And the spaces which are between two handles the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Chapter Fourth.
Of the cure of the bodies of acute and sour humors of the heels.
When the humors are sour, and the bodies of those veins which are on the surface of the head of the foot, and do not comfort in that any cause of the cure of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already reddens and feels in his forehead a walking as if it were walking of ants, and the heels of that are exhausted, humid so much that already the hairs of theirs are known, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the ancients mixed sour things in the cure of those of this operation, and numbered that cure with space.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hairs which are on his forehead, and then cut three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little of the movement of the lachrymals which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other part.
And guard yourself of the incision of the arteries which are in two places, and elongate your hand from the continuation of both mandibles. And if the space of each incision the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
And if to you a piece of sponge dressed or cloths dried a little with which you dry the blood.
And then insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of him: which is from the partition of the temples into the second incision. Excoriate with that all the flesh which is between the two incisions with the ciphrac which is on the bone, and then make that of the middle incision into the second incision. And then straz in this spatula and insert into the first incision another time an instrument which is called a cutellar, sharp on one part and on the other not sharp.
And pause the side of that sharp deves the flesh annexed deves the flesh, and the side of it lean into the bone, and push that until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But that the incision be continued to that which appears of the flesh, and then make that in the middle fissure into the other fissure.
And because it runs of the blood quantity equal, express the places of the pieces of the congealed blood.
And then pause in each fissure calf of old cloth, and pause over those powders put in wine and oil and wine vinegar, and vegas that it do not become a caut abscess.
And on the third day unties the bandage and administers great infusion of  cauda water or tebeza, and then cure that with an enguent bazilicon with rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of lagremas by catartz and in the heels descending from the parts behind the head.
When it happens that some come with catartz acute and continuing, and sometimes the heels of the patient exhausted little, and already the regard of them is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and of their case the hairs, and in the crown of the head is acute pain leading and exhaustion consequent, then you know by these accidents that the matters and catartz do not come but of few veins of the parts behind coming.
And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to shave his forehead, and then cut into that one fissure in the middle place of the forehead, a little by the latitude (and begins with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and be incision into the bone; and elongate your hand of the lachrymals of the temples which are maught deves the mastication), until it be the bone discovered.
Exsicca all the blood with sponge or with dry cloth and then repleys between the two lips of the fissure with old cloth or with rags of linen. And then strengthen above with powders put in wine and oil so that it do not become a caut abscess.
And when you untie this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then cover the bone within which the flesh begins to grow, and then take care with that drying regimen that makes the flesh grow, thus as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix it, and of it make a poultice and administer it in these sores at the birth of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
Of the cure of that which catches in the ears.
Every cause that catches in the ears is one of four species, or it is mineral stone or a similar cause like iron and lead, or it is of plant such as onion or bean, or it is a fluid cause such as water and sour wine and their likenesses, or some beast.
And therefore when stone catches in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit or grow in the ear, and place the ear in the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill in it some cause of violet oil or sesame, and then administer the extract of it, and make the patient snort with a condition, and plug the nostrils to prevent the event of snorting. And then place in the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, because many times it is thrown out with these causes.
And if it is not thrown out, then administer the extract of it with the instrument called the gesti epicicarios subtle of which this is the form:
And if it is thrown out with the gesti, well is; and if not, then administer the extract of it with a subtle onci of little duplication.
And therefore if it is not thrown out by this, then make a canula of silver and introduce the extremity of the canula into the tract of the ear and close around the canula with wax and softened oil so that it is not open except the canula. And then extract with your wind with strong suction, because many times as with the water that we have recounted.
But if it is not thrown out in this manner, then take of a lit halka or of a vecz apparellhat with which the birds are taken a little quantity, and place that in the extremity of the ray, and then envelop over that cotto decently placed. And then introduce that into the tract of the ear with facility, and then dry the ear of the humidity.
And therefore if it is not thrown out with all the causes which we have recounted, then you must resort to cutting that before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the manner of cutting that is that you at the beginning lances the patient of the cephalic vein and extracts the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make that cesser between your hands and convert the ear to the upper parts, and make with a small fissure in the root of the ear, over the grey of it in the place well pressed of it. And let the fissure be of lunar figure until it reaches the stone, and, the stone being caught, remove that if you can with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure in that hour with velocity, and take care of it until it is healed.
And if the catching cause in the ear is one of the greases that grow and swell, then administer the cure and the extract of it; but if it does not obey your treatment, then you take a subtle teune spatum according to this form: and administer with that the abscess of that grease which is caught in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place that in many pieces, and prop extract it with the oncis or with a subtle gesti, or with an incision as we have said, because the extract of it is alleviated.
But in the water which is introduced into the ear, cover that the patient uses of snorting with a condition at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cotto, and pour over that ear in which is the water, and if by this it is thrown out, well is; and if not, then take many small pebbles and leons according to the length of the finger, and calve those in the fire a little, and the patient introduces one of those into the tract of his ear and jumps on one foot of that part and percusses with another pebble on the pebble which is inside the ear. Therefore do not cease this with pebble until all the water is thrown out.
Therefore do not cease this with pebble until all the water is thrown out. And already the water is thrown out so that you take paper or of gonc, i., and put one extremity of it in the ear and extend the other extremity with fire until it is burned the most of it.
And then put another gonc and do this as many times until all the water is thrown out, and straz that with a canula as it is said from the stone extractor.
But in the extract of beast entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, as it is to it and similar, cure that as we have said in the division; but if it is of a large thing which causes appears at the end of the vessel, then administer the extract of it with gesti and oncis, and the cause of it is pus lighter of all the other causes that catch in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat that with what we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations and do not compare your cure, then it is necessary that you watch the ear in the sun.
And therefore if there is here any cause of the worms, then extract that with a tool or with subtle instruments, but if there appears no cause, then take a cannula that is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, the form of which is this: And introduce the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can bear; and then suck with that by strong suction, and do this several times, until all the worms are expelled.
But if you do not obey this, then you plug and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been prepared in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise of distillations.
And this is the effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form: And make that of silver or of brass, narrow at the bottom, and with a small hole at the top, and flat at the bottom.
And therefore it is as if it were in the concavity of the cannula, here where it is necessary. And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it at the end decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the concavity of the ear, or juice of some herb, or water that you want of these medicines into the cannula — and that is in the ear — and then introduce the reed with cotton on top and express with your hand that with moderate compression of it until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is infused into the ear be already scalded with fire a little. And guard yourself that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too cold, for the medicines of the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter .vii.
Of the cure of ear opacities.
Sometimes babies are born from their mothers' wombs unperforated, and this sometimes happens to some men, opacity in the meat of the ear due to plague or by flesh nothing in that; and this opacity sometimes is made in the preon of the ear canal which does not see the light, and sometimes is in the parts outside.
And that which happens in the preon of it, which does not comprehend the light, is in the greatest dispositions of difficult healing.
And in that one which you can see the light, then it is necessary that you place the ear of the patient in the sun and watch it. And therefore if you see opacity appearing, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
If the extremity of it, in which the width is small, of which one part is sharp and the other not; and the spatula is of two latz leon so that it does not make a hole in the ear.
And therefore if the opacity is by flesh born in the ear or in the meat of it, then take that with subtle instruments and cut that vehemently easily until it is stayed all the flesh.
And if the opacity is in the preon of the ear, then take a subtle reed and scald that with fire a little, and then put that in the meat of the ear.
And therefore if you have felt opacity with that which the patient feels easily, by gravity of hearing, exert the oppression of it easily; and guard yourself that you do not plague the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a cloth according to the quantity of the width of the canal which you have wrapped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or that you take some and put that in water and pulverize it over it, following the three times, and use it; and if you see the ear already being aposthemed, then it is necessary that you extract the one and replace it with another one which you wrap in cerot that is made with rose oil, until the pus is cauterized; and then cure it until it is healed.
But if there happens a flux of blood, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure which you restrict the flux of blood, which is said in the treatise of distillations.
Chapter .viii.
Of the cure of the itch which happens to the eyelids.
The itch which happens to the eyelids of the eyes sometimes is humid, sometimes is dry.
Therefore, it is necessary that you have those with tweezers or with instruments, and you cut those with a spatula from their roots, and then place over the spots three times a day.
But if there is pain with a flux of blood, then you cauterize those with a subtle lancet cautery.
And the best cauterization is after the incisions and several times return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment of swelling that comes to the eyelids of the heels.
Often, a swelling appears in the eyelids of the heels, some cause which is assembled to a great hardness and rigidity, and by its greatness it is called.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid below and above.
Therefore, the operation on them is that you consider if the swelling is proceeding in them in that which appears from the eyelid and is bad to all parts; and the cause of it is lightness.
Therefore, cut on that with a fissure along the width, and then drain that from all parts with ease while it evacuates, and then suspend that with a bandage and cut off that.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for that while it is healed.
And if it is small, to you it will not come to harm for that because the ointment of it restores that and encases it.
And if the swelling is declining to the parts of the inside of the eyelid, then you scrape the surface of the inside, then you open the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage, another that you do not dig into incision, and press that from all parts, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, then that you do not notice in any cause.
And then to the incision, wash the heel with salt water; and care for the location with water that encases while it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the cure to be done on the eyelid above the heel.
The ailment is gray which is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and mostly happens to children, it aggravates the heels of those and accedes to their cataracts the most; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because of that because tears are collected to those.
And because of that, those times they make about their faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; and on the eyelids of their below the eyebrows are humid, the ones that already have covered inflammation, and the imminence of encasing appears in the eye; and that when you press the location with your fingers, you feel encasing within those.
And some manner of operation is in that which the patient puts his head in your, and then you put cloth on him and make a poultice, and make of it a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach from all parts, and then you put that on that and press with your fingers from all parts so that it may be aggregated arcernach in the middle of the circle, and then you cut in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incisive with a fissure along the width, and the fissure not be greater than the fissure that is made in a flap-cutting.
But in the pressing cover that you make the incision whole until you reach arcernach, because in the most appropriate processes arcernach is processed by fissure according to the form of white gray.
Therefore, extract that with cloths the ones which you have enveloped between your fingers to the parts before and revolve between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And guard yourself that you do not adjust in the fissure so that with the spatula you do not reach the heel and you scratch that.
But if it does not appear to you arthernach at the beginning of the fissure, but that you adjust in the fissure a little with ease until it processes arthernach; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths of it in water and wine and put them on the location and strengthen those with powders.
And so those that crush salt and put that in the concavity of the fissure so that that which is remaining of that humidity.
And then care for that while it is healed.
But if it happens in the location abscess caut, then care for that with poultices cedatils until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
Of manners of touching the heel.
When in the eyelids of the heels the hairs are born from the adjusted below the natural hairs and they are antiquated, then those annoy the heel and make become manners of ailments as such as continuous tears and softening of eyelids and web until that is a cause of destruction of the heel that is called tactinir of the heel, and care is done in four manners: or by cautery with fire; or with acute medicine according to that which was said before in the chapter of cautery; or it is made tactinir by incision and suture; or by canes according to that I have said.
And therefore, cover that you put the head of the patient in your, then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, good is; and if not, introduce a needle into that in which it is faithful of the part below of the eyelid, and make penetrate the needle with faithful below, and that be - near the edge of the eyelid in which naysso the hairs - near the hairs, and pull the faithful to the parts below with the eyelid, and convert that with the ray.
And then cut in the part inside of the eyelid below the hairs adjusted with a spatula incisive from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and then extract the faithful and put below the eyelid little powders of cotton or of cloth, and then send over the eyelid with tent, and be as such as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
But however, the figure should be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for this is already diversified in men, for some of those who are indigenous that it should be incised of the eyelid a large quantity according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
Then bring the spatula over the two lines which you have made, and begin from the greater lacrimal into the lesser lacrimal. And if your fissure is near the natural hairs as is the thickness of the king.
And then place the ounce in one of the two angles of the bone, and then scrape that whole thing, and then adjust with the incision the two lips with a thread or a fine wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere that which superfluous from the threads on the two eyebrows with some enviously causes, if you want to do this, and if not, don't care.
And then remove the suture of the threads within three days or four, and then care for that.
And if you want, leave the plaque with its suture, and care for that with something that dries and constricts, for the eyelid is raised, it deserves the sealing of the plaque and the adhesion of it; but suture is better, and therefore I say this as the ancients did taxanir.
But however, there should be solicitude over the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And it is another manner in taxmir, and it is that you make on the eyelid a figure as a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separate and congregated hooks according to this form:
But if it is not possible, have the hooks, and that is not equal, then take a needle in which there is a thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and introduce the other thread near the greater lacrimal, and the other thread near the lesser lacrimal, and adjust between those two threads with equality, and then with those elevate your hand with equal elevation, elevate the whole bone on which it is marked as we have recounted.
And then adjust the two lips of the plaque with suture, and care for that until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs from your incision or your fissure, treat that abscess with cerot and similar things, and with unguents.
And some times it becomes necessary for the eyelid that its hairs be converted, then it is necessary to use in that of what we have said of incision; but suture in some is more artificial.
To taxinir with canes is according to this form: And it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure which is described according to what I have recounted; and then by art make two canes or two subtle splints of which the length be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them be less than the width of the spatula. And you have already incised at the extremities of each of the parts, where you have the threads.
Then add each one with subtlety above what superflueys of the eyelid of the heel, and constrict the canes of each of the parts with a strong stricture, and leave that for some days, for the bone by the stricture will die and become denied and will be able to enter until by itself it falls.
But if it is late, then break it with the pliers, and then care for the plaque until it is healed.
Therefore, as it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this form: And have the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
Of elevation of stinging hairs in the heel with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are non-natural, hard and rough and stinging the heels, then the operation in them is that you take a subtle needle and place in it a subtle thread of cedar and linen, and then that you adjust the extremities of it and nuts in a very subtle manner. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of one palm.
And then you compose another subtle thread below it in short, and use the extremities of that if you want.
And then place the patient their head in your lap, and be near the sun so that your work be declared, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the hair adjusted which has need of engineering, and make that penetrate into the eyelid carefully until you extract that from the natural hair.
And then pull the hair down and introduce it into the alixati, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand with that until the hair be floated with alixolati in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if it is thrown alixalati and it is not floated the hair, you will throw alixati to the parts below with the thread which you have composed with that, until in it be floated alixalati of the trau sobira.
And vegas that with the vision of the heel, for then you will throw alixati and the thread, and grotan something and clautz the heel, and lay the claus for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place and grows on that good flesh.
And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a longer piece of skin from the natural hairs, and elevate it with that, or that you let it enter so that it is lengthened towards some space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cure of the cataract which comes in the upper eyelid.
When it comes in the pupil and is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted upwards, or on the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of a plague or a cautery, and it is called a leporina, and this cataract is either natural or accidental, and it is made by the consolidation of a plague or incisions or cautery, or by something similar to their malcuratz.
The manner of the operation in it is that you make that consolidation and that you separate the lips of it, and you place in it in that which is between those a piece of cloth, and tie those together until they are healed.
And no cover that you use of cure of it of the causes which dry it, constrict; because if you do that it returns cataract worse than any time no foc had.
Use in that of causes that soften it as is fenugreek, and embroca with the water in which they are cooked altea and its seeds, or enguent dyaquilon, which be liquefied with some of the oils, and submergeys in that the cloth, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all engine that it is not consolidated according to the form that foc at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is not but any rectification of cataract that does not return the form of the place according to that foc before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of cataract which is made in the lower eyelid.
This cataract which is made in the lower eyelid, which is truly called cataract; and it is of it some natural, other accidental.
More accidental is made by plague or by incision or cautery or by others similar.
And the way of the operation of it is that you take a needle in which make double thread, and fix that in the flesh, and that you make it pass from the lacrimal of left into the lacrimal right, until that the thread arrive in the two extremities of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the parts above with the needle and sew that with the needle, and incise with a spatula ample. And therefore if it returns the figure of the eyelid according to that cove, well is; and if not, take the ray and place that in the figure wounded, and with that converts the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the latz of the lower eyelid.
And be the extremities of the two fissures of two angles of the incision, which you have made until they meet, and be of their made angle until when they meet be made figure of them.
And this figure is Greek letter: the lambda.
And then put the flesh that by the quantity that is the latz of it acute below of it, that which thickens the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew those with the wool thread; and then cure those with that which we have said of the softening medicines and of the poultices until it be healed.
And if cataract should occur due to fissure or suture or cautery, then it is that you make with a flat fissure over the hairs of the eyelid according to what is preceded. And then separate with the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the sum of the sermon of the cure of cataract when it is above or below, that run in it operation, according to that it is prepared of the form of cataract, and that is in form of motas diversity.
And the artificers wise all times prepare engine in any manner that is possible to it until that it make return the figure to the natural form, or near that, and that patient according to that it convenes of the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When it occurs this consolidation to many men in such a way that it is solidified the eyelid more above with the album of the pupil, and it is prohibited of the facility of movement and of its natural works, then it is that you enter the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and elevate in upwards that, or extend that with the unci.
And then you incise the adhesion with a subtle spatula, the which not be with sharpness of the incisions, have blunt a little for that the patient not be troubled during the operation, and remove the spatula that it does not scratch the pupil with its sharpness.
And be your incision that which excoriate that adhesion with facility until that it be returned the eyelid according to its natural form and that it be healed all the adhesion.
And then you put in the pupil salt water with which you wash it; or distill in it of zunia dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the pupil with poultice of it, and place over the pupil wool infused in album of egg, and then the third day use of consolidative causes until it be healed.
Chapter .xvi.
Of the incision of the nail and the prominence of the flesh of the tear ducts.
Know that the nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous, and it is like a hard, fine cypress; or it is non-nervous, resembling white congealed moisture, which when you touch it, or it is forced to take on a prick, it is cut off and the prick is not put in it.
And both kinds do not begin except from the larger tear duct, within which it goes little by little that it covers the sight and prohibits the light and movement of the eye.
But the manner of working in the incision of it is that the patient places his head in the low place, and then opens his eyes, and elevates the eyelid with his hand, and then collects the nail with a small, double prick and extends that to the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert into it a little bit of horsehair or cowhair or wool, or something similar, or double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with thread the nail; and extend it to the upper parts, and excoriate with the wool the side of the nail which is close to the pupil. And thus you follow it with the wool into the back of it.
And then you incise the remnant in the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or with small scissors, and leave the flesh of the tear duct natural so that by incision of it there do not become continuous flows of tears.
And sometimes the nail with the sole prick extended or tied, as we have said, and then it is excoriated with a spatula lion of which this is the form of it:
And guard yourself that with the spatula you do not touch the cornea and that it comes to rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then the incision gets into the eye a little bit of coarse salt or a piece of clean, well-made sinew, and leave it in for another day; and then cure it with water that covers it until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle, nor is it put in it the prick, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as I and recommend in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a fine, sharp lion spatula according to this form: With subtlety. And if you see that it is rareified and is confused and enters into that root, then distill of your own hour into the eye of clean, well-made sinew or with clean wool or with coarse salt, and close the eye for another day.
And then repeat over that the operation until it is removed all the water that is of it, otherwise that the contrary abscess may be in the eye, for then you leave it, and cure at the beginning the abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation over it with reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the tear duct flesh, if it is seen in the eye for great harm, be suspended with thread; and incise it from that one side, and do not finish the incision so that it does not incise continuous flows of tears.
And then distill into the tear duct clean wool and well-made sinew until it is healed.
Chapter .xvii.
Of the incision of the albuginea and of the water that is born of flesh adjusted in the eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some, flesh is born red, and it is overlaid so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids at the sides and is assembled like a balustrade of roses.
But the operation in it is that the patient places his head in the low place; and then opens the eyes of that and collects all that flesh with convenient thread to water, and take it with a forceps or with a basket; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is all finished with the scissors, and guard yourself from the eye that you do not cut that of your operation.
And let your incision be with the one with which you incise those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which the ascebel is collected according to what will come the form of it in this chapter.
Therefore, as the incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the eye with coarse salt, or distill into it red powder and similar to it of the corrosive medicines, and place over the eye outside a cloth with album of egg until it is assured of an abscess being avoided.
And if there remain any cause of albuginea and it is swollen with blood and you fear an abscess, then leave the eye and cure that abscess with water that lets that abscess subside, and then repeat over it with the operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which happens in the eye of this kind.
But however, you cover that all cure of the eye be done by natural or accidental way, operate with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member suffers that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the collection of pus in the groin.
Pus veins appear which are located on the groin and prohibit clothing from its operation, and the groin swells in length for days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the groin in which is pus is strong and in it there is no other illness besides pus, then you collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a bandage or two according to your prudence; and that bandage of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two bandages gradually in one piece according to this form:
And then those veins are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and cleanse the blood hour by hour, until those veins are removed from the groin and are rolled up.
And guard yourself that you do not lead the groin with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the afternoon facing the sun, and be firm in your operation that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you will have finished, then you distill in the groin chief green or red for that with its sharpness corrodes that which is removed from the pus.
But if that is not possible for you, collect all in that hour, and then you plaster all with that which yields the pain of it, and leave it for several days until the pain of it is subdued and that it is assured of a cauterized abscess.
And then repeat over it in the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
Of the reduction of arizati to the nose.
When you cure arisati with cautery or with sharp medicine according to what is preceded the narration of it and it is not healed, then it is not generated in it unless you make over the abscess you see the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the power until it is discovered the bone.
And therefore as it is discovered the bone and sometimes in it corruption or blackness, then you root it with a tool of which this is the form:
And it is called a sharp cap, and it is made of iron, and its cap is round as it should be, which is made pointed by the point of a file or a scalpel with subtle punctation (as it is in the following form).
And pause that over the corrupted place of the bone, and then revolve that between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped.
And this be done several times, and then restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Therefore if the place is consolidated and there is born good flesh in it and the body of the wound is separated and remains for forty days, and it is not renewed and it is not abscesses and you do not happen in it accidents, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then there is not in it generated but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and in this manner: and it is that you discover of the second bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and as it is discovered the bone, then you take a probe according to this form:
Let the extremity of it be triangular, and the shaft of it be primely attenuated at the extremity as sometimes so.
And then pause that over the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little of the groin, and then revolve your hand with the probe until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient as soon as it finds air coming out from it when your hand.
Therefore then restore the place with astringent drying medicines as you have been taught.
Therefore as the flesh grows and the place is hardened, then the matter which flowed to the foreparts returns to the nose, therefore that is pus lighter on the patient.
Chapter XX.
Of the reduction of the prominence of the groin.
When the groin swells with its entirety and does not happen in the clothing harmful nor diminution, then you cover the patient, and then you follow him, and then you pause windy scarifications in the neck and suck by good suction; and then pause over the groin liniment which is made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster over the groin with fine powder.
And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of fine linen, and each cloth be duplicated in four folds; and make of those fine.
And then pause those one over the other according to the quantity of which the groin has need. And then strengthen over those with a hard cloth with strong constriction; and repeat the cupping with suction and scarification; and then remove the cupping and leave the groin straight the day and the night.
But if meanwhile the ligament is softened, then let it be very tight.
And then remove the ligament at the day and the night as we have said.
And if sometimes the groin already be reduced, well is, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the constriction and the cupping until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of the incision of the eminence of the tunic uva.
When there is a rupture in the tunic uva, and then it is prominent and proceeds out the eyelids like a grain of rasim, and the shape of man is made by this, and if you want to cut into this, then the operation in it is as we have recounted, that you insert the needle in the root of the uva from the lower part to the upper part, and then put the other needle, which is double thread, in the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then cut the place of the double thread and lift with that the part of the uva in the circle of the needle, and tighten that knot.
And then extract the needle and place it on the wool yarn infused in egg white and leave it until the thread falls into the uva.
And then cure the wool with water that comforts it until the plague is healed.
And sometimes gather from the whole part in a circle of cloth inside the wool, adjusted eminence large, and then be perforated with the subtle spatula that comes to the tip of the wool, and run the albuminous humidity, and descend the wool and enter so quickly.
And then tighten until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of alconati.
This illness which is called alconati is nothing but a swelling which is adjusted in the wool resembling a descending water and it is not that.
But the manner of working in it is that you make the patient sit on the prepared and straight saddle, and then take his head in your two hands and pull it until you see the swelling come to the lower parts, and then let it dry and not descend, and keep the light, and the patient sees the causes as he sees.
And if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared the descent to the swelling with water that we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and then take a subtle spatula and end it on that over the pannicol, carefully the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea tunic in the crown (inside the empty place), until the swelling is expelled.
Therefore, as it is expelled, then you distill into the wool water cauda in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey.
And then cure it with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of the descending water of the wool.
We have already said the species of the water in the division and which you should pierce with a sermon declaring, then this according to the health.
Then you must make the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and tie his wool, tightening it.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his wool, if the wool in which is the water is the left; or on your right hand, if the wool is the right.
And then with your right hand take the almond, if the wool is left; or with your left hand, if the wool is right.
And then place the tip of the almond near the crown for the thickness of the ray in the album of the wool from the side of the lacrimal gland, and then press the almond with virtue and roll your hand with it.
And then penetrate into the album of the wool and feel that the almond has already reached the void cause.
And it must be the measure of the path of the almond to the tip the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the crown of the wool; for you will see with that pupil in the vision of the wool by the clarity of the cornea tunic.
And then place the almond into the place where is the water, and then you throw it down once, and then if the water descends so quickly, then vetz the patient water over which he covers his sight immediately, and almond in his wool.
And then rest for a while; then if the water has descended, then you remove that other time as long as the almond is not thrown.
And then when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the almond with ease, and roll with it your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a little clear salt of gemma and with that wash the wool from within; and then place outside the wool cotto or stopa or wool infused in rose oil and egg white and lick with water the wool of it.
But not those who are of our time place on that commi trissat with egg white.
And if you do not obey your almond to the entrance of the wool because of its hardness — for it is some men whose wool is very hard — then you must take the spatula which is called alberid of which this is the form:
And then pierce with that that juncture, and do not end your hand in the trace, and it is not if you do not make way for the almond place subtle.
And then introduce the almond as we have said.
And you must complete the work, be prepared for the patient to sleep comfortably in a bed made in a dark room, and be prohibited from all movements.
And keep him in nature so that his nature is cleansed, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
And bind him according to his disposition within the third day.
And after, in that dark room, remove the bandage and expose the foot, and have him see some causes, and then return the bandage within the seventh day.
And do not allow him to do this during the hour of the cures or immediately after the infusion. It is necessary that you avoid this because the water can pass lightly through the great and vehement of regard.
But if an abscess occurs, then you must unbind the wound before the seventh day, and rectify it with water that drains the abscess.
Then you shall cover the sight of him and place upon his face an oral for which the movement of him shall be regulated, leaving him for several days, he existing in the dark room.
And then he shall be taken out of that room gradually and conversed about his causes.
And know that in alchemy the disciple of vision is not excused sometimes, and then you shall be bold about the operation.
And we have already come to some of those who are in the Artach, and some say that they made fire in the Ayrac magdaam perforated with which water is sucked.
But however, I have not seen in our land any who had perfect water, nor have I read water in some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is novel.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaam so that it is upon those those who ignore those:
And they are made of eram or iron properly, and their extremities are with this triangular subtlety, the acute extremity as such is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose are born diverse flesh growths, of which some cause is assembled like a scorpion of motz pes, or a polyp pes; and this malady is called polyp because it is similar to that pes represented. And of it is cancerous flesh, lapadea, of dusky color; and of it is that flesh leon not of dusky color.
Therefore, in that which is in these leon flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must make the patient sit between your hands and put him in the sun, and  dry his nostrils, and pick your onci in those flesh. And then extract that to the outward parts, and then incise the water that you have comprehended of those with a sharp, subtle spatula on one side, until you know that all the flesh is gone; if any cause of it remains, of which the abscision is possible, then you root out that with one of the subtle instruments with ease, until none of it remains. But if it bleeds or an abscess occurs, then you pause to him that which you must; or if it is of the malignant abscesses, then you cut and cauterize it until it is abscised blood and all the cavities are gone.
And then be placed in the nose after the incision vi agree and water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that deep within him is flesh wound in the pus surpluses bones of the nose to which abscision has not reached.
Therefore, then you must introduce a file into him of which there is some thickness, and place in it motz nuts, and place between each nut the quantity of the finger or less, and engage the patient and introduce one extremity of the file into the nose with the ray or with another cause which is to him possible.
And as soon as this is done, that he may throw his odor into it until it reaches the canals of the nose, and be spit upon his golayro, because troops of times the semblance to this action do the children at the schools, and it is easier cause to him who wants to do it.
And then place the two extremities of the file, one extremity that goes out over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a serration of flesh with the nuts that are in the file, and do this until you know that the flesh is already with the nuts of the file.
And then extract the file, and place in the nose after the abstraction of blood a poultice, and do this for three days or more until the engent corrodes all that is remaining of the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead pipe for several days until it is healed.
But if you need a cure that requires, use that.
And this is the form of the instrument a capipurge maker with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And make it of silver or of iron, which is similar to a small open lamp, as a small conch, and the meat similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a tube, and the cannula of the instrument to be used for purging is flat, uncovered; to which handle at the back of it, with which you hold it when you heat oil or water in it of the succus and of the suckable causes.
Chapter XXV.
Of the eels natz in the limbs of the nose.
Many things are said about the eel natz in the limbs of the nose, and it is magnified and mentioned on certain days in which the regard of it is not read.
And for that cove that you inscribe that at the beginning of the appearance of it, and eridiques all of that. And then place on the spot the cautery or medicine comburent which was in the place of it.
But if its incision is delayed until it is magnified, then consider if it is calcified, hard, of a dusky color and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron for it is a cranky abscess; for many things are said about that one who incides this abscess should be in great malice upon him who had it.
And if the abscess is of a lion's touch and is not of a dusky color, and times that incision is possible in all of that, then evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and cure the spot with water that exsudes and constrict within which it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of the suture of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by resemblances.
Know that when accidents dissolve continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer in that operation unless in some men.
Therefore, when it is necessary to have some cause of those, consider if it is fresh plague with its blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with suture, and then cure that until it is healed.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is necessary that you excoriate each part of its apparent code until blood escapes. And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and over those pulverize blood of dragon and incense, and place over the powder a piece of diafinicon plaster, or of some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave that tied for two days or three, and then untie that and change that plaster and leave it until the threads are by themselves abscinditz, and then cure with an enguent until it is healed.
But the manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread as to you and have it known.
Chapter XXVII.
Of extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts between them.
Many things are said about many men in the parts between their lips some abscesses hard resembling fat of worms, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, it is necessary that you convert the lips and fendas each one of those hardnesses from all parts, and then the abscess incision fill the place with incense blood until the blood is restrained, and then be washed with vinegar and be cured the place with water that is stipticitat, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Great many things are said about the flesh adjusted in the gums which the ancients called albulus, therefore it is necessary that you suspend that with an ounce or that you have that with the forceps and incision that you must cut its root, and let the sania run or the blood.
And then place on the spot incense blood or other stiptic or excicative powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise that secondarily, and cauterize that, for then the cautery will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
Of reason of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the parts between them and of the front and between the gums are adjusted rough, jagged, and some things are of nigrated and are made citrinas or vert until the gums see by that corruption and are made the teeth jagged.
And therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and pause the head of him in your lap, and ratz the teeth in which appear those roughnesses and causes resembling sand until of them remains no cause, and this make of the blackness and of the citrinity and of the others until they are modified.
Therefore, if it is stayed that which is in those of the beginning of the root, well is; and if not, then you iterate the root over those on the other day and on the second and on the third until it comes to the last statement in which you will.
And know that the teeth have need of diverse forms and figures of drills according to how it is prepared for your operation. And because the razors which the tooth is scraped from the gum are different from the razors which are scraped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you shall prepare as you shall see forthwith:
Chapter .xxx.
Of the Eradication of Teeth.
Know that you cure the tooth of its pain with all care and take time in its entire eradication, for there is no cause that should supplant the whiteness of it when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance within that which is excused in its eradication.
But know when the patient is forced to have that tooth eradicated, that firmly you must certify which tooth is the painful one, for often the pain deceives the patient and leads you to believe it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this by the operation of the barbers.
Therefore, as you must certify which tooth is the painful one, and that you know well, then know that you must scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gum of all parts, and then with your own fingers, or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that you concucesquas.
And then, with a strong hold, take large pliers for good articulation or strong stupor, and place the patient's head between your teeth which you hold well so that it does not harm, and then pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and put that one under it from all parts with facility and exert the removal of it as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then know that you must compress of cloth that broken and tighten that with the extremity of a subtle ray so that it not be broken in the hour of your constriction upon it with pliers.
And know that you must work exquisitely with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard well your strength that you do not break that and remain a part of it, and return upon the patient for the malice that it may be greater than the first pain of it.
And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their fistination and audacity upon the eradication of theirs, for they do not administer what we have recommended; for often times they bring upon men maladies great ones which are more difficult to be broken, and the roots of theirs remaugulated all, or some of those, or that which you extract those with some bones of the mandible as well as many times we have testified.
And after the eradication of it, the mouth be washed with wine caut or wine agre with salt.
And if it behooveth flux of blood thereby, as many times it behooveth, then take some quantity of zegi and sprinkle it upon the wound, and if you do not confer that zegi, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and subtle pliers with which the tooth is bad at the beginning be of long extremity, of short handle and thick, so that they not be bent when with those you must work.
And be as times of thick handle so that when you tighten with those they not be bent, be short extremities.
And be made of Indian iron descentment made of straight extremities, and in the extremities of those be teeth of which some intrude in the others and tighten by strong constriction descent, and some times the extremities of those be the form of the beak of a bird which has name ciconia, so it is guanta, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of the Eradication of Teeth and the Extraction of the Bones of the Fractured Mandibles.
When you must the eradication of the tooth which is broken remain any cause, then know that you must place upon the place a cloth with border for a day or for two until the place be mollified; and then introduce algesti or pliers the extremities of which are assembled to the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
The extremities of those be made of flint as well as a file or rasp.
And if you do not obey to your agreement with these forceps or pliers, then know that you must cave upon the root and scrape all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has name atali, so it is a small lever of which the form is this:
And be of short extremity thick a little, and not be embedded so that it not be broken.
Therefore, if by that the root is fore-gotten, well be it; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is of triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and of thinner extremity.
And already you are helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form near the following: And other instruments which I will describe in the shaving of teeth; because a help is made with this instrument which is assembled like a large onion, and this is the form:
of the triangular, twisted or short extremity, which has some thickness, and is not embedded so that it is not pierced.
And know that the instruments of the teeth are like the others.
But the skillful and subtle artificer in the art, finds for himself according to what the operation and the diverse ailments mean to him; because there are ailments to which the ancients did not say nor put proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is pierced, or if it can be, then it should be cured on that in its place with what is convenient to it of the instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help te with the gesture of which this is the form:
And there be some thickness little by little, and be enclosed or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all be pierced; and then restore the place with medicines convenient to it.
But if in the bone is a small puncture, then root that from that puncture and its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of the teeth eminent above the others.
When the teeth are eminent not according to their natural course, for those the form is laid, and mostly when it befalls to women, and mostly to the venerable old ones; therefore, as you consider: if a tooth is nothing near another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or liniment it, then root that; but that it is not annexed to another tooth, then you incise that with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to a pig's snout, and it is made of Indian iron of a sharp end.
And let your incision be with which you incise that in too many days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not gnawed by another of the teeth.
And if the eminent tooth is exposed to filing, then file that with a file of Indian iron of which this is the form:
And let it all be of Indian iron and the margin be well-made; and let it be of very small points as well as a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth be filed little by little in many days with ease, so that no other tooth is gnawed and broken. And then line that at the end, and root that with some razors.
And if it is a tooth of which one part is pierced and it lies the tongue, then as you file that until the projection of that fracture be stayed and leveled, and be filled so that the tongue does not touch it and the word does not break.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the restoration of teeth damaged with gold or silver filings.
When accidents happen to the teeth in front with concussion and removal by percussion or by fall, and the patient cannot bear what he eats, and you have cured that with styptic medicines, and it has not been of any use, then for that no decay is engendered in those that are strengthened with gold filings and not with silver, because silver becomes green and soon, but gold never changes.
And let the filings be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the straight one is that you take the filing and take twice its length between two healthy teeth, and then that you increase it with two tortuosities of the filing between two damaged ones, or if one or several, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And then iterate the placement within the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill so that it is not damaged.
And let your pliers with which you strengthen the filings be the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
And then incise the ends of the superfluous filings with the forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place with gesture, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then leave it so straight as a Roman.
But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen it or them with another filing in such a manner throughout its time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the straightness of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as well as these tied:
And when it is done that a tooth or two is returned to its place after the fall of each one, and they are regrown as we have recounted, and they remain.
And this is done only by a good artificer and wise.
And sometimes it is fitted some cause of the bones of cows, and it is made as the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and it is strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves with it for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which comes from the tongue some times or is natural with which man is born, or accidental and caused by a plague which is already consolidated.
And the operation on it is that men open the mouth of the patient, his head existing in the tieu se; and elevate his tongue, and then incise that ligament nerve according to the latitude so that the tongue is released from its recess.
But if in that there is some hardness or knotting, and this is due to the consolidation of plague, then you put an incision and split that by the latitude while you have incised the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And guard yourself that no fissure is made in the flesh of the jaw and that you split here the artery and blood comes.
And then wash the vestiges of the incision with water or with vinegar or with cold water; and then place under the tongue a linen; so is the way which holds the patient of the tongue in each night so that it is not consolidated another time.
But if blood flow occurs, place on the location vitriol trias; but if the blood comes, then cauterize the location with a cauterizing instrument which is convenient for this. And then this cure with the other causes so that it is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Sometimes a boil happens on the tongue resembling a small lump which prohibits the tongue from its natural operation; and it often grows larger while the mouth is open.
And the operation on it is that men open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and consider the boil.
And if you see it of dark color or of black, hard, which the patient does not feel, then do not touch that because it is a cancer.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put the incision in it, and incise it with a subtle spatula, and split it from all parts; and if blood comes to you in the hour of your operation, then you place under it trias, which is vitriol, so that it restricts the blood.
And then return to your work while you had treated it with compliment of it, so that it is washed with vinegar and salt; and cure this with the other cure with water so that it is healed.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of the extraction of a boil in the ears and of that which is nothing in the throat and of the other boils.
When in the throat a gland is swollen, so are the glands which are assembled swollen, which sometimes happen outside and are called boils, which when you cure them with water as we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the boil is hard, of dark color, of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; let it lie there until it is matured, and then either you will extract it, or it will break by itself.
And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of it is subtle, then this is that it should be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the boil has already rested of it covered with a complete rest or if it has diminished with some diminution; and then do that the patient stands before the sun, and the head of him is in the tieu se, and open the mouth of him, and the servant takes between his hands pressing the tongue of him with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it is made of silver or of brass, and it is subtle with a knife.
Then, as you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the boil, and you look at it with your gaze, then take an incision and place it in the middle, and pull that to the outside parts as much as you can. Other water that you pull some cause of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form:
Other water that you pull some cause of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form: And it is assembled like forceps, but the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the straight of the other, very sharp, which should be of iron, indi embedded.
But if this instrument is not at your present, then incise that with a spatula of which this is the form of it: And it is sharp on one part, not sharp on the other part.
And because you have incised a furrow, incise the other according to this same manner of incision, and then the incision the patient should wash with cold water
But if there is a flow of blood, wash with water of decoction of the bark of millefolium or of myrtle leaf and similar to that of the stiptic causes so that the flow of blood is restricted, and then cure this until it is healed.
And sometimes there are found in the throat other boils besides those ear boils, and incise those according to what I have said in the incision of two furrows equally.
And I had once treated a woman with an abscess which was located in the throat of her, the abscess was of a dark brown color, of little feeling, which had already closed the throat of her, and the woman breathed with a tight chest, and had already prohibited her to eat and drink water, and she had already come to death if it had not been for a day or two.
And the abscess had grown so much that it had two fistfuls within it which came out through two openings.
Therefore, I cut it open fisturally and placed myself in one of the openings, and pulled out that one, and it came out with a large portion, and then I incised that one from where I understood the other opening, and then I opened the mouth of it, and compressed its tongue, and then I placed the opening in that abscess.
And then I drained a large portion of it, and it did not flow out except a little blood. Therefore, the throat of that woman was completely opened, and she began to drink water immediately, and then she ate food, therefore I did not cease to incise that abscess many times for a long time, and a new abscess succeeded in its place, which incision extended as long as that one.
Therefore, I brought a needle and cauterized the throat of her, so as to add no more; and then I walked away and did not know what God had done to her from that moment.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of incision of a boil when it is an abscess.
When a catarr arises on the boil, and it is an abscess and it is long, then it is called a perpendicular; and if it is in the part below, thick and round, and then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with the water that we have said in the division, and it does not compare its healing, and sometimes you see that the abscess has already cauterized and is subtle, then cover that which is aggregated round; and if it is to that length, and is bloody, of dark brown color or black, and it is not felt there, then cover that incision of it, for in that there is fear over the patient.
And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient lie down and press his tongue with an instrument of which you process its form and then place the opening in the navel, and pull that out and incise that with one of the two instruments which are said in the incision of two wells.
And cover that you do not incise that but water that is adjusted over the natural term of its addition, for if you incise that more, you will lead to their speaking.
And after the incision, use of water which have been recommended in the incision of two wells, and cure that until it is healed.
But if the patient were frightened by the incision of it, cover that you use of a needle in the cauterization of it its fear, and the manner of the cautery in it is not but with sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient in your side, and then press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and then take of the water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and compare it with that living cause, and place that not thick nor subtle, and of that fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Let the extramitat of it concavity in which the medicine is placed be as the concavity of a spoon of ray, and place the instrument with the medicine on the vulva, and the patient yawns over his side so that saliva or mucus of the mouth of that one flows through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend from that any cause over the throat of it and that it leads that.
And then take your hand with the medicine, and express that over the uvula for the space of a middle hour until you see that it is being blackened and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cloth and envelop that over the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and introduce the ray with the cloth into a tube of over until the cloth adheres in that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then remove that because it has dried and fallen after three or four days.
And if you indigeysses that you iterate the medicine, iterate that one, and after the cauterization abstergeys in the circuit of the uvula with cloth immersed in border, and modify with that water that is in the circuit of it of the medicine, and be washed with cold water, and be cured afterward with embrocation, and dedicate with gargles until it is healed.
And this kind of healing is more saving than incision and more long of fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with water that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with fumigation in this manner: Take calament, ysop, origua, ruda, sicados arabic, camomilla, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in an olla, and be submerged with strong wine, and boil; and the olla be well washed with good lut, and be in the middle of the olla a hole, on which be placed an instrument concavity of ram according to this manner; be made of silver or of ram.
And the limb is inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the uvula over the palate, until the uvula is somewhat obscured.
And then repeat this moistening several times until it is dry, and be careful not to do this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would too much tighten the abscess, and instead of doing this, you must declare the abscess of him cauterize.
But if this instrument is not at your present, then take a cane and compose in the extremity of it a shell of wood, so that the mouth of the patient be covered, because the shell of wood prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat and of the other causes.
Moist things adhered in the throat or a thorn or any other cause.
Therefore, you must extract what appears of those, over which you look, because you press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it is declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is to you hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because very soon the cause annexed to the throat is thrown-up by vomiting; or that the patient swallows a piece of bread or a root of lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or put a piece of dry sea sponge in the mouth, and tie it firmly with a thread, and then the patient swallows it, because as it reaches the place where the thorns are and are extracted, then they are thrown-up. And but take an eel and tie it with a thread, and it is put and sucked out; or take a porr and suck the front and the back.
But if they are not thrown-up with those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it is thicker than a ray, and in the extremity of it there is a concavity which you insert into its throat with ease.
And hold its head elevated upwards, and be careful that the touching of its bone of the throat, so that it may be pulled to its body and with that which pushes the bone or the thorn, or that the physician with his hand.
But however, that the patient that is inserted is better, for his knowledge of the place of the cause annexed and pushes it down, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is prepared for him until it is thrown-up.
Chapter .xxxix.
Of the extraction of bloodsucking annexed to the throat.
When the bloodsucker is medicated with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and does not confer, consider then in the throat of the patient to the sun, because you may have comprehended the tongue of him with the instrument which to you we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the bloodsucker, extract it with a small hook or with a subtle gesture decently.
And if it is not possible to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and then place in the concavity of the cannula a burning iron, and do this as many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and is removed from the throat) and abstain the patient all day of water.
And then put a vessel full of cold water, and work the mouth of him in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow any of that, and wipe the mouth with his hand one hour after another, because the bloodsucker as soon as it feels the water catches.
But if it is not thrown-up with what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cymint or with asafoetida by the instrument which we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it may fall.
And there is another way of operation in fumigation of that, which is that you take a bowl in which there are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a blanket in the middle of which there is a hole, and it is composed in that hole the extremity of the instrument; and then let down the fumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation is not thrown-up until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodsucker, because the bloodsucker immediately falls.
And if it does not catch, then you repeat the fumigation many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and eat salty and spicy things, and do not drink water, and thus necessarily it is that with this regimen it is thrown-up.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker of the throat is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, unless that in it there is some curvature: Which is placed in the throat, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a stork, that is, it is blunt, in which it is sharpened by a file, so that, when we grasp any cause, it does not leave it.
Chapter .xl.
In which is the sum of the speech in the opening of abscesses and in their section.
Abscesses are special kinds, of many kinds, according to what we remember of them, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and section of them by two ways, of which one is by the species of abscesses in themselves; and by that which we understand of the humidities.
And the second way is according to the places in which they occur in the body, for the abscess that occurs in the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the buttocks; and the abscess in the fleshy place is different from the abscess that occurs in the joint; and to each of them is its own way of operation.
And more than abscesses are some that ought not to be perforated but rather upon the maturation of the matter in them or the completion of them.
There are other abscesses that ought to be drained when they are ripe, and not upon the completion of them, such as abscesses that are near the joints, for when an abscess is near a joint, its being is prolonged until it can pour out what is in its circuit, and then it is very likely that the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, so that it becomes the cause of contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is mature, it will harm the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, therefore perforate it before it is mature; and you ought not to perforate it raw, of incomplete digestion, but the one that is near the buttocks, so that you cannot scratch the perineum of it and extend it to the parts around the buttocks, and make a fistula, or that it be made in the term of it that it not be healed. But more, you ought to know the hour of the perforation of the abscess, and thus it is when it is mature.
And you ought to know that it is mature when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, and about the diminution of the heat and of the pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And that you ought to know the perforation to be made in the place farthest from the abscess and from pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
And perforation always be by the length of the flesh or of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the limbs or of the feet, and in places of the tendons, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, in the end, in all places equal in which there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use of perforation according to that limb.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is best that you let the perforation of it until the digestion of it is confirmed according to its completion, as we have said; for if you perforate it before that, it prolongates the course of the pus of it and of much filth, and then very likely the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it.
But some abscesses are perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or of the body, according to the necessity, or according to what the limb requires.
And you ought to administer small perforation, and in the large abscesses, large perforation and many sections according to the diversity of the greatness of the abscesses.
And others are of the abscesses in which the wound ought to be concave and be incised, when it is made so that it is like bread and it is made in a term that it already sticks, like that which occurs in too many boils and buboes.
And of those are those that are incised with section having three angles; and of those it is in the one that is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, like the abscesses of the angles.
And of those are those in which a round section and a lunar section, and similar to those, are administered.
But that one to which there is no such as his abscesses are superficial, you ought to perforate that with superficial perforation, or flat only.
And you ought when the abscess is large and has already collected much matter, that you perforate that and do not take that you extract all the pus in that hour; having extracted from it one part, and about close the abscess until the next day, and about extract a larger part, and about do that many times according to the graduation until it is finished.
And more so if the patient is of cold virtue, or woman pregnant, or little child, or old in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the egress of the matter, and very likely the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Therefore, guard this chapter with great care, and about the perforation in which you perforate these abscesses, you ought to abstain from the plagues and consider therefore if the plague of the abscess is little, or is a flat section, then you administer the qualms of it or of a counter-coction; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you ought to place a poultice in each one until they come together.
And if in the abscess is abscinded a part of the wound or you have concaved that in the circuit, then you ought to cover it with a poultice of old cloth or of a thread made of cloth of it, as when you have treated bread or roots, its humidity; and strengthen that until the third day; and about process that and cure it with that which you ought of the poultices until it is healed.
But if blood flows during the operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar to the cloths, and place that on the location of the blood flow many times.
But if the blood flow persists, then it is necessary that you administer regimen and cure and powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and of division.
But if it is in wintertime, and the location of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you must enfund pulvils in vinegar and olive oil caut, and place those on the locations.
And if it is in summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you must place powders soaked in water and oil or in vinegar and oil, and all that be cold until the third day, as we have said, and then you must open the abscess and cleanse that and administer in its cure what is convenient to it until it is healed.
And thus is what is necessary of the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said of every abscess in what manner is the way of its cure by chapters singularly.
Chapter .xli.
Of the section of abscesses which come in the neck of the head.
In the neck of the head small abscesses, and so of species of nodes which contain tunics which are to their making; and the species of them are many.
And of them are pimples, and of those are those which contain humidity similar to lime. And of those are those which contain humidity similar to dust, and resembling to them; and of those are those which are stony, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must the exterior of those does not make contrary artery.
And the operation in section of those is that you probe those with an instrument the shape of which comes close thus, the one which is called entromes, as long as you know that it contains.
Because if that which contains is humidity, then you split that with section according to the length by superficial section according to this form:
And beginning in the section of the line of .B. into the line of .G. Therefore as the humidity is evacuated, then you excoriate that peel which contains that humidity, and do not leave of that any cause of all, because troops many times return, if remain of that any cause.
And then you submerge the throat in Egyptian enguent, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with that the wound and leave it in for another day, because with that you corrode all that is remaining of that pellicle.
And then repeat on that throat with Egyptian enguent second and third time if you indigesties of it, as long as you trust that there was no remaining any cause of that pellicle; then cure the wound with enguent until it is healed.
And if abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise that according to this form: with a section having the form of a cross, and get oncis between two lips of the section and scorsa that of all parts, and exert your virtue in the extraction of the tunic which contains that.
But if to your artery makes contrariety, then do what I have told you first.
And similarly do in the lapificated abscess of section and cure according to that we have told you; and section on lapificated abscess is lighter, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
And some times there are some of these abscesses which are in the head in some men with which of all there is no humidity; the cause of which is because I incised upon an abscess in the head of an old woman and retrieved the abscess thus as a hard, rough, white, which could not be drained, and if to someone it was struck with that, it would plague that person.
But in the other abscesses accidents in the head other this is not this chapter, as well as the abscesses that come to the heads of the children and you must the roots of the ears, but the section of these all is superficial.
And pause the perforation of those of the lower part of them so that the body of the blood be relieved in the lower parts.
And then cure those with what is convenient to that of cure.
Chapter .xlii.
Of the section of scrophulas which happen in the neck.
Many times these abscesses become in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin; and some times happen in the other parts of the body.
And are those that happen in the neck, and so many that are engendered between them, and all scrofula of those is within its own tunic, and as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recommended.
And the species of these scrophulas are many, because of those some are stony, and of those some contain humidities, and of those are malignant the ones which do not obey to cure.
Therefore in that which you see of good disposition in the Touch, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the neck, and is good all over, and is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not swollen, then you must incise that with superficial section from the lower part to the upper part of the body of the line of .G. into the line of .B., and scorsa that of all parts, and extend the lips of the neck with onci, or with many oncis if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more caution that the vein or nerve is not incised.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, that it does not hurt your hand with incision, or that it frightens the patient, and that you cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and you prohibit yourself from your operation, then pause in the plague with vitriol or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and tighten the plague, and leave that which is inside that the sharpness of the abscess is paused and the plague is softened and begins to be pus-filled. When the blood is cut.
Therefore, return to your operation before you have completed it.
And then inquire with your little finger if there is any cause of the other small abscesses, therefore cut those and clean them.
And if it is at the root of the large abscess, cover it so that you do not cut that abscess from its root. Cover it so that you place that with a bent iron and let it fall by itself, so that it does no harm.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you cut that abscess entirely, then cover it so that you adjust the two lips of the wound and close it as quickly as possible so that there is no superfluity of pus.
But if you see that there is superfluity due to the size of the abscess, cover it so that you understand to cut the root of it, and extract it and administer suture and what is said.
And those of the abscesses that contain humidity, pierce it with a superficial puncture where you see the place of maturation of it, and place a puncture of what is the pus from the bottom of the body, as we have said.
And then administer puncture, calms with ointment and similar things to those, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, then cure it with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter .xliii.
Of the section of the abscess of the pile within the gullet.
The ancients said this section in the pile, and no one has seen in our land that it has been done.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men having a hernia, cover that it be avoided the extraction of the pile, as for that it is not done well because all the veins and the major parts of the body are here.
But in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or gullet or both ears, when the disease is not in the canal, cover to use the section of the pile to avoid the damage which is done by puncture.
Therefore, when we want this, that they cut the pile below three circles of the circles of the pile, or four with a small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, that the section be in the flesh, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the blood vessels of it are there.
And if the doctor is fearful, then cover that he extend the throat of the gullet with a clamp, and then cut the throat until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause of those.
And then cut the flesh according to what we have recommended; and it is significant over the section of the canal by the flame which is of that which is emitted with what is of it disrupted and by the abscess of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, as the hour is renewed in which puncture is feared, add two lips of the throat of the wound, and sew that alone if it is the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make flesh grow until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, exposition is not but that you see that some of these abscesses have already opened the gullet of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and the skin of it is dried, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound by any breathing, and be saved from death.
And for that reason, command to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and the malice of it is for three days; and then command so the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and put it in her throat and cut with it a part of the canal of the lung, and I was called to the cure of her, and I brought back the woman as if she was dying, and I uncovered the wound and brought back the blood which was coming out of the wound small.
Therefore, I was confessed that she had not cut a vein nor guidegi, and the wind was coming out of the wound, and I cured her until she was healed.
And I did not accuse the servant if not that she was hoarse in the voice, and after some days returned to the improvement of her dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epilhot there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of incision over an abscess which happens in the throat outside, and is called a hernia of the throat.
This abscess called a hernia of the throat is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it moves in women.
And it is according to two manners, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one it is not a matter of curing.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to an abscess which is made by the knotting of an artery, and in that one there is fear. And no cove that one should make presumption about it, like iron, but in the one that is small. And you probe that one and investigate that one with the finger, and if you find that one similar to a fatty node, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise that one as well as the nodes, and extract that one with what contains it from the skin and bursa; and if not, then you scrutinize the whole of its being, and then cure the place with what is necessary for healing before it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of incision of the kinds of nodes.
Of nodes there are many kinds and I have already said all the kinds of them in the division.
And I must recount thus the difference between a node and an exulceration as if making a doubt.
Therefore I say that in an exulceration there is heat and fever and violent pains until the boiling of the superfluity is subsided; and it is complicated putrefaction that at the hour ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
But in a node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that which is in the sac proper to it.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a boil and it is made as well as a cyst, whether it is larger or smaller, and they are according to two kinds, whether they are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the cure of a node, that you examine it and inquire about it at the beginning with the instrument which is called an intromes, according to what will come its form in the chapter which is about this.
And this manner of inquiry of abscesses and of all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you revolve your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the cord.
And then last your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the intromes and consider what is issued in the vestige of it.
And if the humidity is flowing out, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial incision according to what I have said in the other abscesses.
And if from the vestige of the intromes there is no humidity, then you know that it is fatty.
And dry over it with an incision having the shape of a cross according to this shape: as well as I have taught you, and suspend that with pins, and excoriate the cord from every part with facility, and guard the skin or sac, if you can, over it and extract that sania with the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many times it must be so, and then you extract it in pieces until nothing of it remains.
For if from it remains nothing, little or much, the node returns according to the most.
And if you see that from it remains any small part, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place over it a cautery of the abscess, and cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you sew the two lips of it and cure it with what encases.
But if a pulsatile vein is in it opposite, or non-pulsatile, then you cover and poultice the place with thrice-beaten vitriol and leave it straight for two or three days until you can re-open the wound and that the boiling of the blood is calmed; and then return to incise that which is broken from the node.
Chapter XXXVI.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary in incision and perforation.
Of those there are the forms of the intromes, and they are of three kinds, of which some are large, and of them some are medium, and of them some are small.
The form of the large introme is this:
The form of the small introme is this:
They shall be made of iron, of lead, of extremities properly rounded, so that they fit well into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experients, and they are called albereds, and one of them is called a berid.
And there are three kinds, of which one is large, medium, and small.
The shape of the large one, its shape:
The shape of the medium one, its shape:
The shape of the small one, its shape:
Convey that they are for those abscesses and fistulas and buboes so that among those are of the bones and other causes.
And they are made round, thick, like needles, as well as large needles with which the stitches are made, and they are made of citrus metal, or of copper, or of iron, or of silver, And the best ones are when they are made of citrus metal.
And they are made of black plum, the ones that are agreed that for those the fistulas are opened in the cavity of which they are reflected, that they are reflected with their lightness with those reflections.
And there are three species, because some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its stricture.
Shape of the large plum instrument:
Shape of the medium plum instrument:
Shape of the small plum instrument:
The shapes of the probes are of many species, because of those some are simple, to which there is only one curvature, and they are of three species: large, small and medium.
And of them are curved probes, and they are of three species.
And of those are probes having two curvatures, and they are of three species.
And of those are having three curvatures, and they are of three species.
And all of those are necessary in their place.
Shape of a small simple probe, its shape:
Shape of a large probe with two curvatures: Shape of a medium probe with two curvatures: Shape of a small probe with two curvatures:
Shape of a large probe with three curvatures:
Shape of a medium probe with three curvatures:
And these are the shapes of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three species, because of those one is large, medium, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of the medium scalpel:
Shape of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are blunt, and they are not placed in such a manner, but that it may be made gently in the excoriation of the nodes the fear of incision of vein or nerve, and by those the disease may be healed and tranquility be restored a little by the burning which removes the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the shapes of spatulas, and they are of three species: large, medium and small, as you see.
They are made of metal and are similar to a ray with which and alcohol is made.
And it is in the lateral extremity pointed with a spatula hidden and in that one runs to the parts inside and outside, when you want, as you see.
The shapes of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers during the perforation of abscesses and are not perceived by the patients, and they are of three species: large, medium and small. And these are the shapes of those:
The shapes of leeches with which the flow of blood is abscised, and they are of three species; large, medium and small; the shapes of them:
They are made of citrus metal, round with some length, and they are subtle.
And know that these species of leeches must you large, medium and small, so that by those the flow of blood is abscised with velocity in necessity, and then when to you first it is not medicine.
However, do not use those to abscise blood in every location of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places, such as in the folds of the arms and thighs, and in the folds of the breasts, and of the belly and of the groin, and similar to those of fleshy, moist folds.
And sometimes they are made of those instruments other small ones resembling fisacs according to this shape; by which the blood is abscised when it is made by phlebotomy, or by incision of vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this shape:
Chapter .xlvii.
Of the cure of the breasts of men which are assembled from women.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men become inflamed due to the way they sleep, and as they begin to be hairy, and then the breasts become inflamed, and the breasts are assembled like those of women, and are removed, pus is released.
And to him who suffers this, it is necessary that he incisions those areas with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B. into the line of G., and then scrape the entire thickness, and then fill the wound with a medicinal ointment, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with sewing, and care for him until it is healed.
But if the breast declines to the sides and is softened by its magnitude as it should be in women, then it is cut in two halves, its pus being removed, with two sections similar to the lunar figure, of which each one contains the other, as long as the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form of the line of B. and the line of G. And then scrape the tissue which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and the powders, what is necessary for the healing until it is healed.
And if you do not comply with the incision of what needs to be incised because of the restlessness of the patient, and the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with a cloth submerged in corrosive liquid and leave it until what corrodes is removed from the gray matter, and then care for him until it is healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
Of the perforation of abscesses that come from the nipple.
These abscesses that come from the nipple are of the kind of scrophulas, hard, which contain a skin that is sac.
And of these there are some that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G. to the line of B. And as soon as everything that is in the abscess of the healthy is evacuated, then you fill it with old cloth and leave it for the next day.
And then the cloth is removed and it is cured with a suitable ointment to the water, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the kind of nodes and scrophulas, then you cut it as we have said in the section on scrophulas in the same way.
But if the wound is extended in such a way that it is a cavity, then administer to it cautery according to what we have said before.
Chapter .xlix.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur due to artery or vein.
When an artery is ruptured, and the tissue that is above it is consolidated, then often abscesses occur. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: because when an abscess is due to the artery, it is long attached in the front of the body; and that when you pierce the abscess with your fingers, you feel in it a kind of hissing sound.
And that which is due to the vein is red and apparent on the surface of the body.
And the incision on this abscess is an error, and most of all in that which is in the armpits, and in the corners, and in the neck, and in most places of the body; and it is very large, therefore it is necessary that its cure with iron be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or in the head, it should be avoided.
But on that which is of them due to the inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut in the tissue a long incision; and then probe the incision with probes and then the artery, and deliver from the tunics until it is uncovered.
And then place on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places — which causes you to see the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then prick the place which is between the two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is extracted, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer a cure in which power is generated until the ligaments fall; and then care for him with suitable ointments to the water until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to the section of a vein, then you must have in your hand that which is possible of the abscess with the tissue, and then introduce the needle from the place which you have had in your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a good ligament according to what I have told you in the ligament of the grape of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then introduce the needle with that needle into the whole abscess, and then tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle of it until when it is said that the water that is in it is gone, then you cut the superfluity of the tissue, and leave what of it is tied.
And then place on it a powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with calxes and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess which happens by twisting of nerves.
Thus as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, and seemingly abscesses occur in nerves when they are struck or occur due to excessive labor, and in a similar manner.
And it is made most in the places of the auxiliaries or the talus, or in any place where the joints are maimed.
And it is a serious abscess, and it is assembled to the color of the other body, and in the majority of its dispositions it is of its own and when it is tightly squeezed with vehemence, the patient feels in it a semblance of stupor.
And it is not an abscess aggravated in the front of the body, and for this reason it is left the chain, and it is maimed in every part and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary that they be enclosed with iron, because it very quickly becomes a cause of contraction.
But the one that is in the head or in the front, finish the chain with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then take it with the forceps and excise it from the root.
And if it is large, then you suspend it with a hook, and excise it, and then you cover it; and adjust the poultice with suture, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter .li.
Of the section of an abscess which happens from the cheek that happens to the belly.
And it happens to some men, growths in the bellies of those and in other parts of the body of those, the ones that are called fungous due to a similarity to those with fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head of it is thick; and already the lips of those are turned, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are much magnified.
And I have already seen one, and in the belly of him there were two parts the ones that were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white, of fine root.
And already the lips of those were reversed and they were splitting, and humidity ran from that all the time.
Therefore, I incised those and attributed in the one in a weight of 18 ounces. and the other of 6 ounces.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider it, if the patient is humid, and the color of the one is white, humid, of subtle root; then you excise it with a spatula wide, and be in your presence cauterize in the fire, because many times the blood of the section of it is expelled much; and if you see the blood, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient fearful and timid, guard yourself from incision with iron; but then take a lead of recent lead made, and strengthen it with that one, the manner of which is that we have said; and leave it there for two days.
And then adjust in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease strengthening the lead greatly until it is excised and falls by itself from its labor.
But if the one is of thick root, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and of terror, and more so in the one that is in the belly.
But possibly it is that you incise the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then care for it until the wound is healed.
And guard yourself that you do not presume to incise the one that is of dusky color, of little feeling, of little regard, because that one is an abscess cancerous.
And I will come with a remembrance of cancer nearby.
Chapter .lii.
Of the cure of eminence of the navel.
Eminence of the navel is made by many causes; or by fissures of the fascia which is on the belly, and there are of it the cloth or bowel according to what it should be in the other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery according to what has been said, or by contracted wind in it.
But if it is by fissure of the fascia and by the protrusion of the cloth, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is lion its pain, and then it appears from diverse situations. And if it is by the egress of the bowel, then the situation of it with it of what we have recounted, of more vehement diversity, and when you press it with your fingers it is hidden, and then it returns; and very much is in it so, and it is magnified much of the introduction of bath and vehement labor.
But if it is by humidity, then it is lion and is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it believed.
And if it is by blood, then with these signs appears the abscess in black declining.
But if it is by flesh nothing, then the abscess is serious, thick and hard, and it is placed according to a quantity.
But if it is by wind, then the touch of it is lion.
And the operation in it is that you consider it, if the eminence of the navel is by blood of artery, or of vein, or by wind; then you must be prohibited from the cure of it, because in that there is fear and terror as you have been taught in the chapter in which I have said the abscesses by artery and by vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia or a tumor, then command the patient to hold their leg and stand extended; then, gently probe around the entire navel, and command them to lie flat between their hands on their back, and then surround the area you have probed with a spatula, large; then extend the majority of the abscess to the upper parts with a large hook; and then tie around it with a strong thread or a cord and in the manner of tying decent.
And then pull the tip of the abscess extended over the ligament and introduce your finger into that point and try to feel the hernia; and if you have found it or held it by the ligament, then you extract it and push the hernia to the sides of the abdomen.
And if you have found the tumor, then take it with a hook; and cut away the superfluities of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put in those two strong threads and introduce the two needles into the circuit that you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate; and then tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place until the stretched flesh can fall by itself; or cut that when it is subsided and can be done, and then cure that with water that comes from the roots until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh nothing in it or by humidity, then command that you hollow out the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and then cure that with water that comes and that consolidates the place.
Chapter .liii.
Of the cure of cancer.
As we have said, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner it is cured with medicines, and that it is dangerous in it the cure with iron so that it is not ulcerated; and we have said cancer generated in the marrow and the caution of its cure.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible the eradication of it, as of cancer that is in the nipples or in the groin and their likeness of the limbs allocated to extract all of that, and most when it is beginning small.
But when it is old and is large, you should not trust it, because I have not been able to heal from that ailment nor have I seen another, nor that has come to that.
And the operation in it is when it is allocated as we have said, is that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black bile sometimes, and then bleed him, if a manifest repletion is found.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which he is placed with the operation, and prohibit in the tract hooks which command to that; and concave from all part with the good bone spatula excavation until no remains any cause of the roots of it. And let the blood run, and do not cut that lightly, and express the places, and wipe away the thick blood all with your hand or with an instrument with which is to you possible of the instruments.
But if to you makes contrariety of thick blood incision of vein or of artery, then cauterize that until the flux of the blood is ceased, and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .liv.
Of the cure of hydropsy.
We have already recounted, in the division, of the species of hydropsy of water, and the signs of each species, of the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of althitas alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanistres nor to the species of yposarcha, because that is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of tympanistres hydropsy with medicines and do not confer your medication, then consider, that if to the patient already is obtained debility, or is with that other ailment another hydropsy, as if it is in it cough or body of belly and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not medicate him with iron, because fear is over that.
But if you see the patient of exuberant virtue, and in it there is no other ailment but hydropsy so alone, and not child nor old, then the manner of the operation of it is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister then expresses the belly of it with his hand, expelling the water to the side below the navel, and then take a spatula spines according to this form:
be of two parts sharp long, of acute extremity as a spatula; but however be in it some shortness little by little, so that in the operation with that you do not pass into the hernia, and that you lead that.
And then consider if the generation of hydropsy is of the part of the hernias, because then command that with the section you are to the navel for the quantity of three digits to the sides below, in the right of it above the navel.
But if the generation of hydropsy is by ailment of the liver, then your section be left of the navel for three digits.
And if the generation of him is by the measles, then the section of him should be to the right.
And do not let the section be on the side on which the patient wants to move, so that the superfluities do not run to that place freely.
And then pierce with the instrument the whole length, and introduce yourself into that section, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the length and the skin, and you will scrape that; and if the quantity of a fingernail or around.
And then pierce the skin until the spatula reaches the desired place, and it is the place of the water. And then extract that and introduce an instrument of which this is the shape: and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or lead or tin, to which at the lower part of it is a small hole, and on the sides of it there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the extremity of it is made blunt according to the manner of a feather, as sometimes:
And at the sovereign extremity of it is an armlet, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that instantly rises above the instrument, therefore evacuates the water in the middle quantity, for if you evacuate more than that in the hour, then very soon the patient will die by the resolution of his animal spirit, or you will cause him five-pi that is approaching death.
But evacuate from that according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what they signify to you the dispositions of the patient from the virtue of his pulse and of the goodness of it.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it for as soon as it is retained by the length which retains the hole that is on the skin of it and recommits to you that you pierce it again in that manner.
And then repeat the instrument on the other day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do water for some days on fear, and guard yourself from error so that you do not remain of the water but little.
But if you fear for the patient, and let out a large quantity of water, then cure him with burial in fine sand, and move his suzor in a bath, and in the sun wait for a long time; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the measles and the fitge approach the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in what precedes.
Chapter .lx.
Of the cure of children who are born with the places of the urine unpierced.
Sometimes some of the children are thus from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it is a straight hole or it is not in its place).
Therefore, it is necessary to cut with perforation of it as soon as it is born with a very fine spatula according to this form:
And then pause in the hole a fine lead nail and tie that, and keep it for three days or for .iiii.tre.
And when he wants to urinate, he is urged and urinates; and then return that.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is already possible that the urine which goes on the place, does not let this opening.
But that one of whom the hole is straight, be medicated with a lead nail, as we have said, for too many days until it is amplified.
But those in whom the hole is not in its place, are leddies, which causes it for those, that one who is born and the hole is of the end of the head of the vagina because he cannot urinate at the sides of it, until he elevates the vagina with his hand to the upper parts; and it is not to his generation, for so the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad disease.
And the manner of the operation in him is that the patient be laid on his back, and then extend the head of the vagina of him with your left hand with vehement extraction, and inscise the head of the head of the vagina of the place of the perpucii with a sharp spatula, as it is inscized of a feather, or that you do not graze any part, so that the middle of him comes to resemble the head of the vagina and that the hole falls in the middle place as it should.
And guard yourself in your operation of blood flow, for many times accidents happen there; and pause yourself to it with the water that you abscindeys the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lvi.
Of albater which happens in the prepuce on the head of the vagina and of corruption and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce of the head of the vagina.
Many times this albater happens in the vagina and is a prominence of bad flesh.
And of that one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
The non-malignant one, it is necessary that you suspend it with a fine unci and abscind it until that one mends completely; and then place on that, a cotto submerged in Egyptian enguent; and then that one, cure it with diafinicon enguent until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of a dark color, then you must administer cautery near the edge of it and the root of it.
And if the ulcer is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must remove the ulcer that is inside at the beginning before it is consolidated; and then you treat the one outside, because when you treat the one inside at the same time as the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
And if ulcers occur in the genitals and on the foreskin, blackening and corruption, then you must remove all that which is already blackened and which is about to corrupt or which is already corrupted; and apply a line over that with honey, which is mixed with ground rind of millet and crushed and sifted herbs.
And treat that with the other cure until it is healed.
And if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
Because cauterizing is helpful for two conditions at once, so it is for bleeding and for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed all at once, then you must introduce into the flesh of the foreskin a lead pipe so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is sound, and on which circumcision is not performed; and when adhesion occurs due to plague or abscess) you must scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
And if it is difficult to separate them delicately, then you must scrape with a spatula some cause of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily perforated by its own thinness.
And separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thread of linen, which has already been softened in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then treat it with a styptic until it is consolidated.
Chapter .lvii.
Of the purification of children and the cure of those who suffer from circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other plagues: but because it is of our operation and our will, and it is proper to those of our children, it is necessary that we assign in that better operation and way lighter loss to health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, the reason for which is that I have found the majority of artisans and barbers use circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use a ligature with a thread and an incision with the nail.
And I have already tried all these methods and have not found better purification with shears, with a ligature with thread than with purification with the nail, because many times the chain escapes from below, because the foreskin has two tunics, and the tunic remains further down, and it is very easily forced to another incision and certain pain. And in purification which is done by alphecati, and is digital, of which the shoemakers use, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not secure, because it very easily enters into the furrow of it.
But in the operation with a nail, very easily it obtrudes iron and corrupts your operation. And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and many times it stays in such a manner that there is no need for purification, and I have seen that.
But of the purification that is done with shears and ligatures with thread, the goodness, experience has shown me, because the shears are of proportional incision, for which the sharpness that is below is as the sharpness that is above; and therefore as you press your hand so proportionally to the two sharpnesses, and incise accordingly with a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the thread with a figure containing the foreskin of the penis from all parts, with which there is no error of all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie down most if it is of those who understand a little, that you do nothing but tie the thread on his penis just as much, and that you leave it there until the next day.
And then make him happy in all that manner that is possible to you from what receives his understanding. And then make him lie between your legs, prepared, and do not be seen; and hide the shears in your hand or at your feet, so that the child does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
And then put your hand on his penis and puff on the foreskin, and pull it until the head of the penis is released, and then purify that which is attached to it of filth.
The shape of the forceps for modification, this is the shape:
Let one pair of limbs be non-cutting and the other cutting, so that the ram of the key does not come out, and the length of the two points is as the length of two arms equally.
But the error in modification is that if too much of the internal spine is removed, or a part of it is cut, the incision will be too deep.
Therefore, as you extend that with your fingernail in front of the abscess and cut it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract it with a tool and cut it.
But if three days have passed, and the abscess remains swollen, then let it drain until the abscess is softened, and scrape it with ease, and cut it according to what you have prepared.
And guard yourself from the head of the bed, because it would not be good for that.
And therefore care for that with the poultice that the plague consolidates from the powders that we have recommended in the treatise of the powders.
And if it is cut from the spine beyond measure, and it sags on the parts above, it will not be good for that.
And however, care for that with the poultice that we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lviii.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction caused by a stone or blood clot, or by a tumor or a tumor-like growth, and similar to those of water that we have said of the ways of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with the water that we have said and the cause is very strong on the patient, then you must administer an extraction from him with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It is made of silver and is a subtle cone, as well as a tube of bird's feather with the subtlety of a long ray in similarity to a palm and a half, to which there is a subtle tube at the head of it.
And the way of administering the urine with this is that you take the flexible tube and tie it in the middle with wool or thread for good adhesion; and you insert the ends of the tube in the part below the syringe, and cut with the forceps if there is any excess of wool, but introduce it into the tube with force, and then insert the syringe with a border and with album of a cow.
And make the patient lie on the bed, and massage his bladder and the bed with wet oil, olive oil, and water.
And then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the bottom of the bladder; and then double the bed above the belly; and then push the syringe into that; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and that the patient has reached the cause, and it is not done according to this order, but the meat in which it goes in a tortuous way.
And then extend the tube with the wool little by little, because the urine will soak the wool.
Then extract it and do for the cure of urine, and use the syringe, do not cease to do this and use the syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient recovers relief.
Chapter .lix.
Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with clamps and similar instruments which are agreeable to this.
When an ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or a blood clot is found in it, or it is constricted by a tumor, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it is done with an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its shape:
But at the middle of it is a closed, so it is closed. And in it there are three tubes: two on one side, as well as the other.
At the beginning is the concave place, in which the water is poured, and according to the quantity that it fills, it is added, until when any cause is withdrawn from the humidities, it is withdrawn, and when it is expelled, with water it is withdrawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what the clampcedra does with which naphtha is poured into the battles of the sea.
Therefore, when you want to expel humidity from the bladder, introduce the extremity of the clamp into the humidity, and pull with that water that is pushed to the upper parts, because the humidity is pulled into the concavity of the clamp.
Then introduce the extremity of the clamp into the vagina as we have recounted in the language; and then push the humidity with water, because that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels that.
Shape of the subtle cristeri by which the bladder is cristerized, and that is the form:
And it is made of silver or lead, of which the cap is like a small feather, and below it a canal is threaded.
And then take the bladder of the patient, and place in it the humidity that you want to cristerize in the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong double ligament, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then introduce the extremity of the cristeri into the vagina.
And then press your hand over the bladder with the humidity and structure descending until the patient feels that that humidity has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder present, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and perforate that throughout its entirety; and then introduce a strong thread into those holes, so that it is rolled; and then attach the circle so that it is attached to the sofatur, because you place in that water that you want of the humidities, and oils and waters.
And then you tie that to the instrument and do with that as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter .lx.
Of the extraction of a stone.
We have already said in the division the species of stone and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have said the stone in which catz operation with hand, and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And you so narrating that with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly comes to children; and of the signs of it is that the urine that is expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in it as sand; and the patient feels his vagina, and many times it pains, and then it is raised; and with that water, it seems that the anus is full of those.
And it is easier the healing of children of those who have reached fourteen years; and it is difficult cure in the old. But in the young it is milder because it is among those.
And of that from which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, as we come to the cure of that, we must at the beginning of that modify the patient with the cristeri which extracts all the fissure which is in their bowels; because that fissure sometimes prohibits the entry of the stone, and the inquiry of it.
And then place the patient on their feet and sit them down and make them cough so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or what jumps from the place or some times.
And then make that cezer between your hands prepared, and the hands of it be below the things of it, so that the bladder is entirely made declining to the lower parts.
And then pierce that and all of it through.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you immediately take care with section over it.
And if you do not catch all with your touch, then you must that you anoint with oil your said index of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the said middle if it is a young complete, and introduce that into their anus. And pierce of the stone until it stays below your said. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon that with your said, and expel that to the outside parts, where the place of which you made the section.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand extend the genitals to the upper parts, and with his other hand re-make the codena which is below the genitals, in the part of the place where the section is made.
And then introduce the spatula, well-incident of which this is the form of it: And cut in it the water that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, but on the left side of the vagina; and let the section be over that stone and your said be in the anus, and let it be made transversely, so that the section outside be wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that exits of the stone be possible, and no more, because very strong compress the said which is in the anus the stone and it is forced-thrown its faculty.
And know that there is a certain kind of foot that has an angle and margins, so that the removal of it is made difficult by this.
And of that one, that which is like a gland, is round, and it is made of it light removal.
Therefore, if it is that one which has angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not thus formed, then cover what you have on that, or what you grasp on that with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is like a file with which you grasp on the foot, and do not release it; or you interpose a subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you cannot grasp that, then you enlarge the tract a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut it off strongly with that vitriol thrice.
But if the foot is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then cut into it; and then push a little near that; and similarly do so if there are more than two.
And if the foot is very large, then ignorance is that you cut into it with a large section, because it happens to the patient one of two causes: either it dies or it becomes a continuous distillation of urine, because the area is not altogether consolidated.
But administer expulsion of it while it is formed, or engineer in the fracture of it with the forceps while you extract that in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with a mixture of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that. And place on that a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rubbed oil and water, so that the cautery abscess may be yielded.
And then turn the patient onto his back, and do not untie the bandage before the third day.
And when you have untied that, embrocate the place with water and a little oil, and then cure that with a diaphanition gargle and a diazilicon gargle while it is healing.
But if in the wound there happens a cautery abscess, a putrid and corrosive one, and of that appearance as if the blood is in the bladder frozen, and for that the urine is prohibited (and this is known by the egress of blood in urine), then interpose your said tool in the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it provokes the bladder to corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and in opposition to all species, with what you deem convenient to it for healing while it is healing.
And cover during all the hours of the healing that you lie both things and adjust the medicines which are placed on the spot.
And if the foot is small and is in the middle of the groin, and it is lodged in it, and the flow of urine is prohibited, then cure that with the water that I recommend before you come to a section, because troops used by this healing are accused of section; and I have already spoken of this, and it is that you take a perforated iron, of which this is the shape of it:
of a triangular extremity, sharp, fitted into a shaft.
And then take a thread, and tie with it the groin below the foot so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then interpose the iron in the groin, perforating with facility until the perforator comes to that foot. And revolve the perforator with your hand in that small foot little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it until you make the other part penetrate; because the urine is immediately absolved.
And then press your hand on that which is broken of the foot from the side of the groin, because that is cracked, and it is formed with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this healing is not to your apparatus for any cause which prohibits you from that, then tie a thread below the foot, and another thread above the foot. And then cut into the foot in that groin between two ligatures. And then extract that. And then untie the ligature and modify the congealed blood, which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread below the foot, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when the thread is untied, the codena returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for that it is necessary to you when you tie the thread above, that you elevate the codena to the upper parts, or that you return to your compliment, and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter .lxi.
Of the extraction of a foot from women.
A foot in women is rarely engendered.
But if a foot is seen in any of those, then the healing of it is difficult, and it is prohibited by troops of manners.
One of them is that the woman is very likely to be a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman well-knowing who describes herself to the physician when she is chaste, or is of the women having husbands.
The third is that you have not brought a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the incision on the hip in women is farther from the place of the hip, so that you make a pre-wound incision, and in that there is fear.
But if necessity compels you to do this, then you must take a female physician who knows well, and few are found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek a physician who is skilled and subtle, or present a female matron well-versed in the affairs of women, or a woman who in this art has been partly trained.
Therefore, do this present, and command her to do everything that you tell her, from the inquiry about the hip to the beginning; the reason for this is that she should regard whether the woman is a virgin, then she must put her finger in her anus and want the hip.
Therefore, if you find that, force that woman, and then command her to insert it on that.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and inquire about the hip, because she puts her left hand on the bladder, and comprehend that with good understanding.
Therefore, if you find that, then command her to gradually push that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the sum of her virtue until it reaches the root of the vagina.
And after inserting it on that position of the majority of the vagina, reach the root of the vagina from whichever part she is stopped and center the hip in that part, and the finger of her not be removed from the hip, short of her.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; and after inserting the ray on that incision, and if she feels the hip, then adjust in incision according to the quantity which she knows that the hip is thrown from that.
And know that the species of hips are many: for some are small and large, and lion and sharp, and long and round, and having ramps.
Therefore, you know how many species there are of them by what you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust in the location vitriol trissated and put that for an hour until the blood is abstained, and then return to your operation until the hip is thrown out.
And do that you prepare with you of the instruments which are said in the extraction of hip in men, so that you may be helped by those in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of the blood is from the artery that is incised, then you put powder on the location and strengthen that with poultices and stricture descent, and do not repeat that; and leave the hip and do not extract that, for very soon the patient will die. And after that, cure the wound.
Therefore, when the sharpness of the blood is ceded after a few days, and the location can be moved, then you return to your operation until the hip is thrown out.
Chapter LXII.
Of incision about hernia.
Hernia ayguoza is nothing but an accumulation of humidity in the white membrane which is below the codena of the genitals containing the huou, and it is called membrane.
And sometimes it is in the proper panniculus which nature has prepared it in the part of the huou, before it is cuyat that it already is another huou; and it is the codena of the genitals between the white membrane which we have said, and it is not that but tart.
And the generation of this hernia is by weakness which happens to the genitals, so that to those this matter is poured, and sometimes it happens by percussion made upon the genitals.
And this humidity is having many colors, for the color of it or is declining to citrine or to sanguine, or rouge, or it is black and feculent, or it is aqueous white, and that is the most.
And the signals by which it is known where this accumulation of water is this: for if it is in the white membrane which we have said, then the abscess is round declining a little to length as such as the figure of a huou, and appears the genitals, for the humidity contains that of all parts.
And if the humidity is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is round in the part of the huou and therefore one estimates that it is another huou.
And if the humidity is between the codena of the genitals and the white membrane, then catz below the centiment.
And as you want the knowledge of the color of the humidity, then you probe the color of the humidity in the abscess with an introduced catheter of which the form is preceded; and according to what is seen in the vestige of the catheter, judge of what is contained in it.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of it with iron, then we must command the patient to be fleubotomized if that is possible to you, and times the body of him full.
And after that, be resuspended over his two on some cause a little high, and put below him many cloths.
And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow on the right side of him, the one who extends his rope to one of two sides to the groin and to the part of the navel of the belly.
And then take a spatula wide and split the groin of the patient from the middle point along the length until you reach the penis.
And make the section according to rectum, equally distant from the line that you should follow the skin of the genitals, until you reach the white cyph, encompassing.
And scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not cut that; and your scraping with which you scrape by a gentle partition that may be suspended with the most subtle and carefully examine with the scraping according to the quantity as much as possible.
And then perforate the cyph full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two labia of the section with a hook, and extend the cyph to the upper parts; and do not touch the groin encompassing, and cut the cyph in that manner as much as is possible. And cut that with its totality or in pieces, and mostly its subtle side, for if you do not scrutinize exquisitely the incision of it, it is not done with certainty that the water will not return.
But if the fluid proceeds from that outside of its groin in the time of your operation, then when you will have completed the section of the cyph, return it inside, and then adjust the two labia of the groin of the genitals with suture, and then care for it as with other plagues, until it is healed.
And if you find the fluid corrupted by another malady, then cover that you cut the vessels that are on the suspensory, and extract the fluid, and then care for it with the water that we have said.
But if the water is aggregated in two parts simultaneously, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that partition according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it is to your view that it should be an operation, then you do it.
And then you cleanse the blood, and introduce into the sections wool submerged in oil or in rose oil; and place before other wool which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand that over the genitals and the navel of the belly; and place over cloths folded and powders, and tie those above with a bandage which is according to this form:
And then they are taken two cloths and they are humpled with carded wool according to this resemblance; and they are made the extremities with which it is pressed of cloth or of wet wool, and they are added with structure in the waistband of the breeches, and one of the extremities presses from the buttock inside to the two, and the second presses to the part of the penis, and two extremities over two thighs and two other extremities over two groins, and all structure is adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with a cautery in place of section with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cutellar cautery and that you cut with that the groin of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what we have recounted until it is discovered the white cyph containing the water, and then you take cautery according to this form: And it is assembled like a Greek letter.
And then perforate with that cyph, and it is ignited until all the humidity is expelled.
And then extend the cyph with hooks, and scrape with hooks, and scrape with a subtle cautery ignited; and cut that according to what is possible until you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself of the fluid that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is most safe and most distant from flow of blood, and better than operation with section.
But if to you makes contrariety abscess caut in the hour of section or in hour of cautery, or flow of blood, then cover that you cure that contrariety that makes to you by that, with cure which convenes to him according to what is said.
But if the patient is fearful, and does not expect the second operation for its horror, then administer perforation according to what I have recounted here; and it is when it is certified you, by that which we have said of the significations, that that hernia is aqueous.
Now cover that you make the patient lie on some elevated bed, then perforate the abscess in the lowest part of it with a wide spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the aperture be wide until all the water runs out.
And then place over the place cloth and tie that and leave that, so that the remaining water runs. And then cure that until the plague is healed.
But if contrariety is in the emission of the water in that hour you perforate that: and this is not done otherwise than because the white panniculus in the orifice of the plague makes contrariety and prohibits the emission of the water, then cover that you put in the plague a probe or instrument with which is extracted the water from the hydropitz, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the oppression of the plague a small one.
And know that the water returns, and is re-added after about six months or around those; and as it is added, then it is pierced according to that same manner, for the patient will thus pass their days.
Chapter .lxiii.
Of the section on fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section on this hernia, there is fear of losing to harm in the major dispositions; for to me it has been seen the dismissal of it and to be saved by that better.
And you should remember the operation in that one and the kinds of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that the abscesses arise in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and this is done for many causes: either by acute superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not troubled in it pain, and it is a serious abscess.
And very few is the abscess lapidified, of which the color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And some times it is made by the knotting of the arteries, and by the inflation of those thus as it is already perceived the memory of it, or by the inflation of veins.
But that which is by the inflation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and do not cover that which you touch.
But that which is made by the inflation of veins is not dispersed of it any cause of you the compression with your fingers.
And it is already possible that on this species a section is made and on the other flesh; and it is that you insert the code of the genitals, and then extend the fluid to the parts below, and extract that from the white cup, and deliver the suspenders of the vessels, and tie them, and incise the suspender more than you deliver that from all parts of the fluid.
Therefore, if the fluid is already in those flesh consolidated, then you must extract the fluid and incise it.
And if there is adhesion for any reason of the cup, or between that which is between the vessels, then you must deliver all that adhesion and incise it by a round incision.
But if it is the birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you must incise all that which is of it, and extract the fluid as we have said.
Therefore, as the operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and take care of it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
Of the cure of hernia that is of the womb.
It is an abscess enveloped by some wrapping resembling a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult movement exercise and walking on the patient.
And in the cure of this malady it is for fear of that of which it is preceded memory.
However, it is necessary that they say operation in that according to how I do the first.
And I say that you must make the patient lie on a raised bed; and then apply the suspenders of the testicles to the lower parts; and then take the code of the genitals with your fingers with the vessels that are pressed to the groin; and hold those other ministers that you, and extend them with vehement extension.
And then incise with a broad sharp spatula in a transverse section in the right of the vessels until the vessels are uncovered.
And then excoriate of all parts as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And then place in those a needle in which it is double thread, and tie that in the first of the places in which you have incised, and tie that other time in the back of them. And then incise those in the middle place by a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is added of the fetid and corrupt humors.
And then cure the wound with the cure of other wounds in which you want to be healed generated so that the vessels which are cut, one of the two genitals, because it is not harm for that.
But if you have incised all the vessels, then the testicles must be extracted or that the testicles by that are tied with the vessels, so that it be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they be stifled, or that tied so that it be not helpful to those.
Chapter .lxv.
Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
The advent of this hernia is by section that must be in the cup extended over the belly of part of the corners of the miracle of the belly, because by sending the bowels of that rupture to one of the bowels.
And this rupture is either of the cup or of excretion of it, and these two species occur for many causes: either percussion, or seizure, or clamor, or elevation of some heavy cause, or semblance.
And the sign of that, when it is by extension of the cup, is that it occurs little by little in a long time, and it does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess equal within ves the preon for so that the cup compresses the bowel.
And the sign of it is when it is by section of the head, because at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and after that an abscess appears diverse, after the codena proper appears, and this is because of the eyssiment of the intestine, and the body of it to the parts before the head.
And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine the cloth, and this intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is made with flatulence, and sometimes it runs in the intestine cut, and here it is retained, and this is a great detriment to the patient, and sometimes it makes the pain worse and more so when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the kinds of this disease with iron there is fear, because whoever is to be avoided the hunting in that.
And the manner of the operation of that is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand to the parts behind his cavity if he obeys his return, and then it is turned over on his belly between your hands, and elevate his legs.
And then stretch the cord which is the cord of the testicles to the parts below, and incise the cord of the testicles all along; and then fix in two lips of the section uncis according to how you indicated to open the section with those.
And if the section according to the quantity that to you is possible that of that the huou be forgotten.
And then exfoliate that cyphaqueth which is after the cord of the testicles, until that be discovered the white hard cyphaqueth of each part.
Now you enter your finger in that which is the testicle, in that which is between white cyphaqueth, which is after the cord of the huou, and between the cyphaqueth second, and absolve with that adherence that is in the part behind the huou.
And then hold with your hand the cord of the testicles to the parts before, and with that extend the white cyphaqueth on your left hand, and elevate the huou with the cyphaqueth to the part of the section; and command the minister that extend the huou upwards and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with careful solution.
And search with your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white hard cyphaqueth. But if you find of it any cause, then you envelop that to the belly after.
And then incise in the part after the cord of the testicles by section of which runs blood and heals as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And then administer wool submerged in oil, and place in the wound; and administer the binding which we have recommended (and sometimes the white cyphaqueth is cauterized, which we have said near the incision fear of blood flow, because many times those occur) and leave the binding until that by itself it falls.
But if the hunting of it is late, then of hot water be embroiled, and place on that until it falls according to we have said.
And then cure the wound with the other cure of the wounds until that it be healed.
Chapter .lxvi.
Of  ventous hernia.
In this hernia no one has been seen that has been dared on the cure of it with iron.
And the first said that it is made as we have recommended in the hernia that is with vi; which is that you tie the vessels near the section over that with facility of it; and then dry in the middle place around the abscess with that which opened it, until that the vessels fall.
And cure the wound according to we have said until that it be healed.
Chapter .lxvii.
Of the disrption that is made in the anguonars.
Sometimes it happens rupture in the anguonars as we have said, and emerge the place.
And do not leave to the genitals any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if they leave, that is little; and return it in all hours.
But if it is prolonged the time with that, it is adjusted fissure in the cyphaqueth until that descends the intestine in the cyphaqueth; and it happens that by the extension of the cyphaqueth which is in the anguonars as we have said, which cause is that the cyphaqueth is extended, and then it is softened and the place is apostemat and emerges.
And the care of him is with cautery as it is preceded by the narration of him.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and the patient lies on his two hands between his thighs, and then dries the place of the rupture of the abscesses with a section according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white cloth that is under the loincloth until it is uncovered.
And then take the ray and place it on the prominent place of the cloth, and press it to the front of the belly.
And then sew the two prominent places on the edge of the ray of the cloth, and adjust with the suture one of them with the other.
And then extract the edge of the ray, and do not cut the cloth at all, nor extend the intestine, nor any other cause as you may know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the cure of the plagues, and as you cut the threads, purify it and restore the plague until it is consolidated; because the cloth is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is more proper to health.
Chapter .lxviii.
Of softening the loincloth of the testicles.
Sometimes the loincloth of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is a matter of concern regarding it.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked in the cure of it that he make the patient lie on his two hands, and cut all the loincloth which is softened on the natural loincloth; and then adjust the two lips with the suture.
And if you wish, sew at the beginning the superfluity of the softened loincloth with three or four stitches and with firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then cure by the cure of the other plagues until it is healed and the threads fall.
Chapter .lxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but for the reason it is told to me that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except in two ways, of which one is so that it is in the knowledge of the doctor when he is asked about it, that he knows the cure of it to whom it happens; and the other way is that we many times have need of castration of other animals for our benefit, such as goats, and sheep, and pigs, and similar to the animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by fissure to section.
But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the beast to be cezed in warm water until its genitals are softened and are limp and that they hang. And then take them with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear after the touch.
But in castration done by fissure and section,  when you have the beast and press the loincloth of its testicles with your left hand.
And then lay the suspensory, and cut above each testicle with a section between two testicles processed.
And then cut those that you have each excoriated. And do not leave on those of the loincloth any cause, but the subtle loincloth which is on the vessels.
And this way of castration is better the one done by attrition, because attrition strongly leaves no cause of the testicles for which the beast desires coyt.
And then cure the plague until it is healed.
Chapter .lxx.
Of the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: one is that it appears in that which is between the testicles, in which there is a figure of a woman's cunt in which it is.
And sometimes from that comes urine which is in the loincloth of the testicles.
But in women it is a species: and it is that the cunt of the woman on the pubis is as two testicles of a man a little of all diminished at the front part as the penis of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of the men and of one species of the women. And it is that when you cut those joined flesh until the impregnation of it escapes, and then that you cure those with the cure of the other plagues.
And in the second species of men of which you see urine which is in the loincloth of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation in it.
Chapter .xxi.
Of lenting and of prominent flesh due to causes of women.
Lenting is very much adjusted on natural causes while it is stressed and is made less noticeable; and sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads as in men and interferes with coitus.
Therefore, you must have the superfluity of the entrails in your hand or in a basin and incised.
And in the last incision, mostly in the front of the navel, so that no flow of blood occurs.
And then cure that with the cure of the plagues while it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn that nays in the horrifici of the mayre entro that umple aquel, and fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa of coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove that nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro that sia sanada.
Chapter .lxxii.
Of the cure of alratica.
Alratica is that the conh of the woman is not perforated, or is the tract small. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is by sickness which has preceded, and that is made either by flesh not well fitted or by a subtle or thick ciph.
And it is made either in the front of the navel, or in the ribs of it, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and prohibits  coit and pregnancy and childbirth, and very much prohibits the menses.
And the knowledge of that is made by regarding the metrona, if the oppilacio is apparent, properly; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with your fingers or with the ray.
But if the oppilacio is by a subtle ciph, and it is proper to the two labia, then you cut and disrupt that.
And it is that you pause on the two labia pulvils, and then you place your fingers, indicating both of the masses at once.
And the woman be on her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two labia with force so that that subtle ciph be broken and the oppilacio be opened.
And then take wool and imbue it in oil and place that on the location, and pour hot water on it every day so that the incised location not be consolidated.
But if the ciph is thick and thick, then it is that you incise that with a spatula or with a leaf of myrtle.
But if the oppilacio is by carnation, then suspend that with a basin, and incise it.
And be with you the medicines that make cease the flow of blood by biting, such as ahacatia, and dragon's blood, and incense, adjusted with album of egg.
And then administer a wide lead pipe so that the plague not be consolidated lightly.
And keep that for some days and administer calgua of the dry.
And then be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And some times it happens in the navel birth of other flesh, and then it is that you incise according to this manner. But if that is by a rotten abscess, to the rotten abscess which is in the navel, let no contrariety be made with iron in any manner.
Chapter .lxxiii.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that happens in the conh of the women.
Hemorrhoids so appear from the openings of many veins in which from those flow blood continuously; and as so old hemorrhoids and are made theyls.
And already I have said in the division the species of those and their signs, and I say so those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the front of the navel and do not appear to the sentiment, then in those no cure be made with iron.
But those which are in the orifice of the navel upon which cats sentiment, those are the ones that are cured.
And so that you put the woman in a good position and then extend the tail with the forceps, or with rough cloth, and incise those with the rays.
And then pulverize upon those of the blood flow of one of the incised powders biting, such as acacia and similar to those.
And then enpellesca her feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
And if the blood flow persists, then make that sezer in decoction of sumat and of the peels of millegranas and of gualas and of similar things.
And then take flour of barley and comfiys that with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with that upon the back of it.
And if the blood is abscised, well is; and if not, make adhere with two ventozas, and to the nipples its escarification.
And then take wool and submerge that in the juice of coriander or in the juice of arnagloza or in the juice of guarravier with vinegar and make adhere to the location; and then cure the location with enguentz until it is healed.
And care for that within that is healed.
Chapter .lxxiv.
Of the perforation of the eyssedura that occurs in the womb.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the womb, as well as boils and abscesses, and ulcers and buboes and eruptions and fistulas, hemorrhoids, and varicose veins, and phlegm, and other abscesses. And I have already said these ailments and the kinds of them and their signs, and their cures in the division.
And now I say in this treatise of an abscess that comes in the womb when it is of the abscesses that coalesce and heal, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is done with iron.
Therefore, consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that redness and if it catches on that feeling, then do not cut with perforation of it, and care for it with that which helps on the maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
And then have you make the woman lie on a bed that has two beds; and recline on her two and adjust her feet to the part further behind the belly, and her thighs be expanded, and place her arms behind her shoulders, and tie her with a bandage to what is convenient.
And then the midwife follows from the right side and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the womb is opened, the form of which will come in those causes that will be done thereafter.
And then when you want to administer this instrument, you put it with the ray on the perineum of the woman, and that which of the instrument enters into the womb be no more than the perineum and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the perineum of the womb, then have you place powders on the texture of the perineum of the womb so that it be prohibited the instrument of all instruments in the perineum of the womb.
And then have you place the vertigo that runs in the instrument from the right side and that the minister have the instrument and revolve the vertigo until the orifice of the womb be opened.
And as the excrescence appears, and it is touched with the hand and is lion and moist, then have you succeed that of the head of it with a spatula lat.
And as the sania is evacuated, then have you place in the wound a mecha submerged in rubbed oil or green oil in which be some stippling; and place the calca7 in the section in the perineum of the womb.
And place defro the womb and over the pentenilh clean wool submerged in water in which be boiled mallows.
And then be cured after two days with gargling the which convenes to what within that it be healed.
And some times it is washed the womb and the wound so that it is christened with water and honey, and then with water in which is boiled root of lily or of aristolochia longa, and then returns to the gargling.
And if the wound is deep in the womb, then have you be prohibited from the cure of it with iron, have care for it with that which have we said in the division.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach the midwives in what manner the living embryos be medicated when they are according to unnatural figure.
Necessary cause is that the midwife knows in the beginning the figure of the natural birth by the signs of it, and is that when you see the woman express in the parts behind and desires to smell the air, and above that is eased by that which is above her of the part, and hastens the emission of the embryo, then you know that this part is according to the natural figure, and is the emission of it over its head, and the second one with that or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Therefore, as you see those signs, then have you the belly of it be compressed so that the embryo descends lightly, and when it descends over its head, they give it the second one, and is cleansed of those superfluities with good modification.
But that which is other this part is unnatural and not laudable, for when the embryo is emitted over its feet and the body of it is emitted before the head of it and the feet of it, and the hand of it one, or at the foot of it, i.e., or is emitted the head of it and the hand of it, or at the belly of it, and fort leu is converted over its neck, and resembling of the figures of it not laudable.
Therefore, necessary cause is to the midwife that be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
And I have shown all figure of those, and what kind of birth is in those by so that it be signified by it and be state upon it.
When the feyt is emitted over its head by natural egrecio, and that is vehement over the woman and is made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of it already debilitated, then make that sezer, or that which the women have it, and evaporates the conh of it with fenugrec coyt and with humid oils.
And then insert the metronome between the patient's small shoulder blades and cut it with that or dig it into it with your nail until you remove the humidity that is in it. And press the woman's belly while she pushes the fetus.
But if she does not push, then cover the woman with a poultice of parsley and a poultice of fenugreek with a knife.
And then command her, the one who is giving birth, to breathe and make that struggle with conditions; and keep her mouth and nose closed for one hour, because the fetus will be forgotten very soon.
And if the two hands of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then cover those with ease little by little. But if she does not obey the instructions, then place the woman on a cradle and lift her feet up, and then shake the cradle on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall during the shaking.
And if the hands are not delivered and the fetus dies, then cut those and extract the remains of the fetus or take its body in your hand with a cloth and extract it with equal measure, because that one will be forgotten.
When the fetus is on its feet, then cover those in upwards, and then turn the fetus little by little, and then straighten it, and then take one of its legs and extend those little by little.
But when it is born into the thighs, then command her to express herself, and make that struggle with conditions, because it will be forgotten if God wills it.
And if it is not forgotten with what we have recounted, then return the fetus little by little until you place it back in its natural figure, because it will be forgotten then with easy placement.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recounted, then take a poultice of althea and dissolved gum, and beat everything in the mortar with a good beating, and then line with that the woman's vulva, at the lowest part of her belly. And then make that censer in tepid water, until it reaches the hypocondriac.
And when the parts of her are softened, then make a fumigation of myrtle for her and place that under her. And when the fumigation lasts for an hour, then make her lie on a cradle, and then make that struggle and extend her mouth, and take that away, and press the lower part of her belly with light compression, because the fetus will be forgotten very soon.
Placement of the fetus latitudinally while holding one of its hands. Try to reduce the hand of the fetus, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the sheet, and shake her thighs with a vehement shaking, and then administer ointments which I have told you and recommended of poultices.
And if the childbirth has come, then make her lie on a cradle, and then study about the reduction of the hand, and straighten the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman struggle and command her to breathe in herself until it is forgotten.
Placement of the fetus on the back with its arms and the fascia of it on the side of its mother. Make the midwife have the hand of the fetus and then turn it little by little, and make that with ease.
And when it is and as much as it is straightened, and then place on its vulva what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
And then command her to breathe little by little, and when you have done that, then make her lie on a cradle and command her to be inclined on the right side, and then command her to breathe; and make that struggle with conditions. The exit of the prepared fetus on the side.
When the mother's horrifics are expelled in this manner, consider, and then cut the second with your nail until it is evacuated of the humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then cut that of the umbilicus, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then gently push the patient's feet towards their hips while you hold that second cushion, and tell the woman to compress herself a few times, and the sir should be gently laid down, if God wills.
Exit of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins are born sometimes, and sometimes even three or four, but this is strange and rare; but it is due to natural causes, and not to life.
And count those, whether they are multiplied, one after the other, and are separated by the sac, distinguish them by the ligament in the navel of each one. And sometimes they are born gently as if it were one fetus, and sometimes by unnatural means, as we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult in childbirth and arrive at what we have said of unnatural figures, then you take care of them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skillful and does what is done with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and is ingenious according to every figure according to what is prepared for her by the art, bringing to health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes ten, and it is now proven that one woman miscarries and gives birth to six, and another one gives birth to ten, the cause of which is due to the measurement of the glorious wise men.
And therefore, all that is in the science of the midwife, which is very important for that appearance of what, and therefore, it is necessary to be aware of what is necessary.
Chapter .lxxvi.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you cure the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of the medicine and it is not brought out, and you are forced to use operation with your hand, then consider if the woman is of sound virtue and is not with any of the accidents by which she is feared to be harmed.
Then, the woman must be laid on her back on her two, and her head be inclined downwards and her legs be raised.
And the minister should have those two parts tied on the bed so that the body of him does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with humid oils and with mucilage of althea and fennel and seeds of flax.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then she introduces her hand with ease into the mother, and then she searches with her hand in the place where the forceps are in the fetus.
And convenient places in this: therefore, consider if the fetus is prepared that descends on its head, and then you place the forceps in its heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or behind the beard, or in the fork of it, or in the places proper of the back, or behind the hypochondria.
But if the descent is on the feet of it, then in the pental, or in the middle of the back.
And it is necessary to have the forceps in the right hand, and to place the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and to introduce the hand with ease and place the forceps in one of those places which we have said, until it reaches the left side.
And then place and keep in the opposite position of it another forceps, or the third if it is necessary, so that the traction be equal, and not be extension according to its rectum only.
And be careful to every part, so that the extraction of it be eased as it is done in the case of the eradication of it.
And it is necessary in it that what is between them the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and introduces them with care and turns with those that are retained.
Therefore, if the part of the fetus is brought out, then the forceps should be changed into the place which is higher; and do so until the whole fetus is brought out.
But if the hand is outside the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by the constriction of it, then it is necessary to wrap a cloth over it; and then extract it until the whole is brought out, and incise it either at the junction of the hand or in the groin.
And thus it is necessary to do in the other hand and in the two feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is constriction in the extraction, or there is water adjusted in the head of it, then it is necessary to introduce between the fingers of the spine and split the head and extract the water, or what describes this with an instrument which is called "alundat", the form of which will come with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is next to this.
And similarly, if the fracture is of great size by nature, and then the bone is inserted, or the bone is pressed together as we have said, then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is pulled out and is constricted by the clavicle, then it is split until the moisture which is in the feet is poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor does it obey easily, then you insert the head as soon as it is possible to you.
And if the bowels of the belly are abscesses or are in them hydrops, then you must pierce that until the moisture which is in them runs out.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then the traction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the womb is lighter.
But if it is constricted by the belly and the feet, then you must extract that with a cloth which you will have enveloped over your hand, and that you make the belly and the feet until the water which is in those runs out.
But if the other members are stayed and the head returns, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the womb is obstructed, then she inserts her hand into the perineum, and seeks with that the head, and pulls it with her fingers into the mouth of the womb, and then inserts into it a hook, or two hooks, and pulls it with those.
And if the mouth of the womb is constricted by an abscess, a cautery which happens to the one, then it must not be trebled over it; abandon it, then administer an infusion of moist fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible, it is pricked; and it is administered the water that we have said in the living fetus.
And if that is not possible, then it is incised in parts, and it is extracted.
And you must leave no cause of the second birth.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer the water that we have said of the cure in the abscesses caused by the one.
And if there occurs a flux of blood, then send them down in astringent waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in whose belly was a dead fetus, and then over that fire another pregnancy, and then a dead fetus is the other. It happened to one a long time ago an abscess in his navel; and it inflated until a fire opened, and it began to throw out pus.
And I was called to the cure of him, and medicated him for a long time, and the plague was not consolidated.
Then I placed on him some causes of plasters of strong traction, and extracted from him a bone, and after passing some days, and extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, as in the belly there were no bones.
And then I thought that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore I pursued the plague, and extracted from him more bones, the woman existing in her thousands of dispositions, and already living in such a manner for a long time, correcting of her a little of pus.
And I do not affirm that it is strange, but that in this there is science and help to what the physician artifices with his hand for the cure administers.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of a forceps with which the womb is opened:
This is the form of a stretcher in which the free ends are engaged, to the engagement of which two forceps are at the two extremities of two futz. But however this forceps must be more subtle than the stretcher, and be made either of ivory or of wood.
And its width of each rod is two fingers and the margin of each one is one finger, and the length of each one is one palm and a half; and in the middle place of two rods are two adjustments of that same half rods, of which the length is the majority of one palm and a little more, and the width of each one is two fingers, or a little less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the womb so that it may be opened with those when you revolve the two prescribed forceps.
Another form similar to that more subtle and lighter:
It is made of ivory rods or wood according to the resemblance of forceps. But however, at the extremity of it are two additions as well, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
And as you want with those to open the womb, then you make the woman lie on the bed with her feet dangling, open what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps engaging according to the quantity that you want of the opening of the mouth of the womb until the midwife makes it so that you want.
The form of vertigo that the ancients said:
The form of impellent that is pushed by the feet:
The form of amisadat2 that is contained by the great head
And it is assembled like forceps, with its teeth at the end, sometimes, and some times it is made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes, with its teeth like the teeth of a saw, with which it is incised and contained. The form of amisadat few:
The form of a hook having a spine:
The form of a hook having two spines:
The form of a spatula having two extremities with which the head is severed:
The form of two spatulas wide:
All of those instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied the species of it and are prepared by the artificers, as much as it is lighter to their operation and more useful to men by their quantity.
And in the works of those instruments, whatever they may be, you should always be prepared, because the need for them is never excusable.
Of extraction of the secundina.
When the secundina is retained from the childbirth, then you command the patient to hold her breath, and then make her stir with condition, and strengthen your hand over her mouth and over her nostrils, and if by this it is expelled outside, it is good.
And if not, then you take a bowl and perforate in the cover a hole and place in that herbs boiling the mouth of the mother, as such as wormwood and rue and anise and chamomile and sicados arabic and cinnamon and centaury. All of these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the bowl, and place that on the fire.
And then place a tube of cane in the mouth of the mother, and keep that inside so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then make her stir as we have said, and the secundina will be expelled with velocity.
But if this cure remains and it is not expelled, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of alum, and then introduce that into the vagina and caress with that the secundina, and as she has found it, then take it and extend it little by little. But if it is annexed in the womb of the mother, then introduce her hand as we have recounted, and when she has found the secundina, extract it little by little according to rectum so that the mother does not feel the traction vehemently. It is necessary that it be changed to the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is narrow, we have already recounted the cure with stirring and with medication of the bowl with herbs.
But if it is not expelled with all the causes that we have recounted, then guard yourself that you do not tire over it in iteration of extraction, but rather that what is emitted from it to the mouth of the mother lies to the cloth of the woman, and then sterilize that with enguent and tetrafarmacon; because that will make it soften and after a few days it will be dissolved and expelled.
But when it is possible, it is elevated to the head and to the stomach, and that is read to the patient; and therefore it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered to that.
But some of the Ancients already are accustomed sub-fumigation of nazitort and dried figs.
The form of instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated for the retention of menstruation and of the secundina:
It is made of wood or of bronze.
And it is placed the subtle extremity in the vagina and the wide extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation is placed over the embers of the fire.
And keep that inside so that the sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate another.
Of cure of the unperforated anus of the child.
Many children are born and the anus of them is not perforated, which already has a subtle and opaque. Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to perforate with her finger that opaque; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and guard oneself that it does not touch the rectum.
And then place on that wool infused in wine and oil; and then cure it with enguent inside until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is opaque, then place in the hole a tube for many days, and remove it when the child will want to defecate.
And already accidents opacity of the anus by consolidation of plague or of abscess; therefore it is necessary that that consolidation be incised, and then be cured with what we have said of the cure and of the lead.
Of cure of the fistulas that come from the bowels.
The fistulas that develop in the lower part below the navel and the thickness of which develop near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
And it is a fistula or a tumor.
And as that swelling is old and flows from the whitish, watery humidity or a subtle pus, and sometimes from these fistulas some penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by what is emitted from them by the egress and by the windiness; and sometimes the patient uses the egress, and very often it is emitted from those worms.
And sometimes from these fistulas, some penetrate into the space into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and some of these penetrate into the junction of the thigh and into the notch of the hip.
And in which it is known that a fistula penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate, is that you put your finger inside the anus, and you introduce a subtle probe of lead or iron into the fistula when there is no turpitude.
But if there is turpitude in that, then introduce a subtle probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all, nor does any cause of evacuation or worms or windiness proceed from the tract, thus as we have said, then you know that it is not penetrating, and then you turn to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the vagina, then the significance of it is the emission of urine from it and prohibition of it so that the place may be consolidated with medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the thigh or into the hip and causing pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe penetrates here if there is no turpitude into the hip, and causing pain in the circuit of the part; and that from it there is pus always; and that it does not help in that medication, nor is it consolidated with an enema.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure of all, and the cure of those is the work and vanity of the physician's leaves on which they are based.
But in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is expected according to what I will tell you, and what I have already said and proved.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his two and elevates his legs into them, the thighs being inclined towards his belly, and then introduce a probe of lead, or of lead if there is turpitude in the fistula, until you know the place where the probe penetrates.
And if that feels the patient around the buttock, then cover that while you introduce your finger inside the buttock.
And if you feel in your finger the probe already by itself penetrates, or another thing that you feel between your finger and that skin or flesh, then you know certainly that that is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, because it is not in that healing, as we have said.
But however, some say that it is cured in some men tart.
And of the medication by which help is expected in it is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it is preceded, and introduce that ignited into the fistula until it reaches around the buttock; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those carns adjusted to the fistula have been roasted, which are like the quill of a bird's feather.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border until all those roasted carns can be covered, and then cure that with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, well is; and if not, then it is not healed in any time by other cure.
And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is always made of flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula in that which it seizes the surface of the codena, then dry the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you see it drying with the probe, and so in the fistula until the dryness reaches the place where the extremity of the probe penetrates, and by the probe it is liberated and caught.
And then purify those fistula carns which are assembled to the quill of a bird's feather and do not break from those any cause.
But if flux of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when you were inserting those carns, then the best that it may be and of the pus lighter instrument is cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts good two habits: it is the roasting of those carns adjusted, and the abscess of the blood, the excretion of the humidities.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border or in a caus trissat until the place gets warm, and then cure the plague with enemas of hard flesh generating and consolidating.
And so medicines in which there is astringency and excretion; when then it is restored it is already healed and you do not fear iteration.
But if the fistula already penetrates into the preon of the anus and is elongated from it to the surface of the body, then introduce your finger into the anus and inquire with that.
And therefore if you feel the probe and between you and it is always made of skin or flesh, and it is proper to penetration, then it is not operation in it but according to my trust and of hope.
This cause is administered in him in one of three ways: either that you cauterize that as we have said; or that you succeed that within that you obtain the concavity of it so that it is possible for you to intervene the parts and the proper cure; and do not proceed to any incision so that you do not cut the ligament containing the tail, and that it happens on the patient exactly as the will of the egg; and then cure him with what we have said that it is very strong sir, heal; or that you elongate that veil and cleanse that pus that dries that within towards the buttock, as we have said, or with a probe or another instrument of acute extremity, and then clean those carnations fistulous that are in the incision within the one where you can by percuction; and then strive to make the restoration of the whole plague with incision, and if the orifice of pus above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the buttock, and pus light for the patient. And in some cases the fistula is finished in this way: it is when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it is in the latz of the buttock around the surface of the body with the cord and in the margin of the buttock, then take probe of perforated extremity, which is as if an awl of preparing the hearts according to this form:
And introduce it into that faithful envelope of v veils or around them; and then introduce the probe with faithful in the fistula until you obtain the concavity of it.
But if it is penetrating into the margin of the buttock near the dent, then you extract the probe from that tract so that you introduce your finger into the buttock; and extract the extremity of the probe and adjust the two extremities at the same time, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you have incised the probe into the flesh, tighten well that within so that those carnations are incised that are between the two extremities of the probe and that they close.
And then cure the plague until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make that penetrate, in whatever way it is prepared for you, so that it is not in the preon, because it is not to you that you should do this so that you do not cut the ligament; and then make it with that until it is healed.
The form of spatum spinos with which the fistula is fended: the curvature of which is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that you do not cut what is not necessary, as sometimes.
Of suture of hemorrhoids in which blood runs in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are according to two ways, that they are between the buttock seeming like that of coals, or that those are like the fat of a radish. And of those are small and large, and that the blood runs from those always and is one, and are many, and are outside the buttock, and in the extremities of it.
But however those that are outside the buttock are according to the less of moisture, of which runs yellow water or a little blood with continuous body, and are according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is inside the buttock is that you command the patient to sit and to express it until the buttock is empty and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take it and suspend with hooks or whatever you have those with your finger, and then you cut those of their roots.
But if the hooks are not held in those by the moisture of them and softening of them, then take those with rough cloth or with a stick or with fleece of wool, and extract those with your fingers, and then cut those and pulverize over them some powders caudas near the incision, so that they are adhered to those in place of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterization. And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the buttock does not obey the egress, then cristerize the patient with cristeri in which is small bite, and wash it with that water that is in the buttock and that obeys the egress lightly when the patient is expressed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the buttock, then the cause of them is lighter, and it is that you take those with your finger, or that you take those with a hook, and cut those, and then cure those with the water that we have said until they are healed.
And that one who has an incision, cover that you administer suture of them according to this way: take faithful envelope and introduce that into a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and envelop the two extremities of the faithful in the part below of the needle, and it is longitudinally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong structure, and then untie the faithful and extract the needle.
And do that to all, and leave one of them and do not tie it, so that the superfluity of the blood runs from that one.
And then place over the buttock cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerot; and place that over the buttock and command the patient to rest. And then leave it until it heals; and when it is healed, cure those with ointments or with other cure until it is healed.
And since old remedies are ineffective in this medicine, when you encounter these, you should prick them with a spatula or your fingernail until they become moist and the discharge of pus from them is stopped, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat them while they are consolidated.
Then you must treat them with a sharp pus, the first one when it is bleeding and excoriated; and then treat them while they are healed.
Know that an ulcer, this is the key, and it is not if not a red spot according to the color of the body resembling a key, and it is made throughout the body and mostly in the parts below the feet and in the knees, and therefore by these pains you must treat the ailment.
And therefore, when it is incised, that which is in the circuit of the key, it should be held with forceps or an instrument, and it should be eradicated from its root; and then treat that.
And if you wish, cauterize the following as it is preceded in its chapter.
But warts are small, rough, fistulous, round prominences on the surface of the body, and many times they appear in children.
And the cure for them is that you extend and incise them, or that you tighten them with a thread or a needle until the pouch. And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with a sharp medicine.
But a wart is a small, rough, or fistulous prominence on the surface of the body, going into the flesh, and when the ant finds it, it is felt in it, resembling the bite of an ant, and it is made all over the body.
And the cure for it is that you take a tube of eagle feather or vulture feather, and it should be strong, and place that over the wart until it contains the circle of the tube from the parts of it; and then you turn your hand with the tube until you incise that which is in the circuit of the wart, and place it in the flesh of the preon, and that you eradicate the wart from its root.
And if you wish, make it with a tube of iron or steel according to this form:
Let the upper part of the tube be drawn to a subtlety, blunt (so it is not pierced), enveloped so that on the said, the apprehension of it is abolished and the revolution of it.
And if you wish, cauterize the wart according to what is said before in the cauterization of a boil in the chapter of cauterization.
On the form of the instruments that are administered to give christening.
Sometimes christening is done with silver or lead or iron melted or hammered; and sometimes it is done with those instruments small and large according to those to whom they are administered, that the one that is administered in the cure of small children be small; and of those whose buttocks are wrinkled or sore, the christenings of those be small.
The form of the large and few christening:
The head of the tube of it above in which the pouch is tied be wide according to this manner; and be to it the distinction where the pouch is tied as well as times.
And the extremity of it further down, which is inserted into the anus, be blunt (so it is not pierced) much lion, drawn to a subtlety; and in one of the sides of it be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and be the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and thicker one a little.
And be the pouch in which are placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheepskin, and the root of it be a palm.
And be perforated by many holes as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes the thickness of the finger.
And then insert into those holes thread strong of thread crude which be of ten threads, or about those; and adjust with that the pouch; and when it is placed in it the pouch, be straight in the head of the christening between two distinct ones with strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the pouch with the medicine, that it be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and guard yourself that it be not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient be laid on his back, and elevate his legs up and place below him a cushion on which already are the men or a bolster; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with album of hen or with mucilage of fennel or of similars; and then insert that into the anus with facility, and then the minister presses the pouch and expresses that with two hands and at the same time with vehemence until it be evacuated in the belly all that which is in the christening; and then extract the christening and the patient raises his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that to eyssiment, hold the as much as you can; and if sleep with that for a whole night, it is more beneficial in healing.
But if you find him in the diseases of solution of belly and the expulsion of it the curtain, then you repeat the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses that are painful, then the cautery should be very subtle and gentle, of the cauteries with which the children are cauterized.
Of the cure of the plagues.
And I have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues what was convenient to the free, and I say so the cure of those with my and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, I say that the plagues are diversified according to what they are made of the plagues and according to the place on which the plagues fall.
And the causes for which many times the plagues are made are like this: by a blow of a rock, or incision of a sword or of a knife, or percussion with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
But the plagues that are in the places of the body are like this: a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the arm, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I am recounting the cure of some plagues so that you pause that reasoning and rule over the other plagues.
And I will begin with the plagues of the head simple, because the remembrance of the composed will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is by a blow of a rock or similar, and the bone has been broken only and it is a great plague and fears about that patient having an abscess, then you cauterize and flebotomize the cephalic as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and extract from that of the blood according to the quantity of the virtue of it, if no other cause prohibits fleubotomia, more especially if the blood that is extracted from the plague is little.
And let the fleubotomia be on the opposite side of the wounded part; and guard the patient from repletion and from wine and from coarse foods.
But if from the little (blood) any cause prohibits, then let the food be lessened and do not approach to meat nor to wine.
And pause on the plague, if to it there occurs an abscess cauterize, coat infused in rose oil or in wine in which is steeped.
But if it is certain of an abscess cauterize, then pause on the plague, if it is recent with its blood and the air has not changed that the powder which I will recount a little.
And if the air has already changed that, then pause on ulcers until it is healed.
But if the plague is great or is by incision of a sword and of similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted by pupils, then adjust those with suture according to that I will recount of the suture of them.
But if the plague is already discovered of the bone and skin, and there is no retention of it but a little suspender, then incise that and at once cure the plague with medicines and restore the flesh about in the place of the bone, and command the patient that he be pescut of foods in which is grosezza: caps and form cooked and similar to them, until it is composed.
And if there is putrefaction in the bone and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that putrid and cast it out, and at once cure that.
But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it is not incised by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that not incised, then you incise that with a spatula, or tie that; and if necessity provokes that what we have said does not confer, then you cauterize until the blood is abscind.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is lighter; in this way that you pulverize upon those this powder, because consolidated that before the air changes those.
And the manner of the powder is this: receive olive oil parted one, of dragon's blood parted two, of caut no-extinct parted three; be all three ground and sifted, and of it be the plague filled, and be constricted by good constriction until well upon that adheres, and be coagulated with the blood.
And at once strengeys that desus with pupils and leyssa that, and do not untie it while it is so that it is not apostemated, because no medicine is eradicated from it until it is healed.
And sometimes do that sole caut, when it is not to you in present enses and dragon's blood.
And already do this same operation in the great plagues when it convenes that it be paused upon those and be streyted, and are recent plagues with their blood, those which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and more especially when it is in the time of summer, then it is not understood to the position of this powder, but rather cure those with what we have said, in this way that you pause upon those some digested enguents, or that you pause upon those powder of the flour of barley with water and honey until they get putrefaction; and at once cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if it happens that the plague fracture in bones, and it is small, then you extract it with a tool.
And I will say the cure for skull fractures in that which is venomous.
Of the plagues of the neck.
But if the plague happens in the neck, then there is no difference in medication, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in it's place but that its cure is avoided with that which makes vehement coagulation, such as ziniar and zegi that is vitriol and similar to their kind no harm to the nerves and against that. And do not put on the wound any cause of all cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of it is in the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
And if it is cured with light medicines, such as it is washed with sweet water, some herbs infused in oil, rose or not rose, and then when it is washed with sweet water and the other pieces minced according to this manner, and moistened.
But if the wound is large, then administer suture, or shorten the lips of it, and then cure that with powders until it is healed.
But if to the wound is depth or happens in it to the lowest part of the body, then perforate that in the most depressed place.
But if in the wound already is incised artery and is achieved flow of blood, then separate or dry that, or tie that, or cauterize that if necessary it provokes to that.
But if already has incised the vertebrae of the throat or all, and are saved the veins of the neck, then you adjust the lips of the larynx with suture over the canal of the throat and do not touch that; raise equal that and reduce that over its natural figure, and then strengthen that with a decent structure, and leave that for some days; and then cure that with ointments in which there is coagulation and excitation until it is healed.
But if the wound already in the bone has made an incision, then strike that, and if in it there are fragments of bone, extract all those that you can of them; and what to you does not seem appropriate, leave that within that the wound may be purified, and be separated and the discharge of it be alleviated.
And if the wound is recent then pulverize over that the powder which has been recommended to you. But if in the wound is made a fistula, then cure that with that of which the recollection will come in its chapter.
If it is a percussion of a lance or of a sword, and times of it the depth, then consider more if from the wound there is windiness when the patient is leaning; then you know that the wound is mortal.
And if in it there is no depth and the wound is recent with its blood, then you place in it of the first hour powder, and do not strengthen that for that the blood may not be retained in the depth of it and that it returns to the heart and that it suffocates the patient, but place in it attractive ointment, and unbind that twice a day.
And if the ointment is not to you present, then you place in the orifice of the wound a cloth old for that it sucks that which is of the humidities; and make that the patient sleeps over the wound for that it may run that which is in it adjusted.
But if already of the wound have passed three days or more and do not happen to the patient spasms nor tremor of heart nor constriction of the bowels, and times the other good dispositions of him, then you know that the wound is saved; and therefore cure that with poultices and with the other cure until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is excused, and already all time is open, then you know that already has been made a fistula; cure therefore that by its chapter.
And if the wound is by incision of a sword or of a sword, and is simple in the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure that with that which is preceded by suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if already has been made an incision in the bone, and so already of it are incised fragments, then you turn the wound and try to extract those fragments, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them within that the wound may be purified, that the extraction of them is alleviated.
And of the other wounds accidents in the other members the judgment in cure is the judgment of that which we have said.
Of the wounds of the belly.
The indisposition which happens in the belly is either great, or few, or medium.
And small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and if you see that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not try the intrusion of them to their place as soon as possible, for that it opens and is thickened for that the entrance of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best incision is the middle one, because in that one the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
And know that the suture of the belly is done in four ways, but two sutures are common that are used in sutures of other wounds of the body.
And two other sutures proper are common to others, but however they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you each one with exposition and explanation.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the hernia by that, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then it is done in one of two ways: either by the smallness of the incision as we have said, or when the hernia has come inflammation by the coldness of the air.
And therefore when this is so, then you cover that with a sponge or cloth moistened in tepid water, or that which is squeezed in water with squill, and spikenard, and embrocate the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes do this with the one which has astringency, and it is better than the water alone in the resolution of the inflammation.
And therefore when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the hernia with water in which is boiled rue and mallows, for by this it is relieved the inside of it with little cause.
But if the inside of it is excused by this cure, then you widen the incision a little with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first cure is better, when it is proper that it is not a section, and it is not an occupation to dry it up by necessity and need.
Of the instrument, this is its form:
One part of it is sharp, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is subtle, and it is not with the subtlety of a spatula, rather it is blunt a little.
And therefore when the wound is amplified and the hernia is outside, then it is covered that its reduction be according to the form of its natural, in its proper place, if it is possible over that, for it is better.
But when the incision is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it is covered that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you place the head and feet higher than the middle parts.
And similarly if the incision is in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your understanding and your consideration always in this way that the part in which the wound is be higher than the other.
And thus it is covered that you administer this in the large wounds and in the middle wounds.
And in the small wounds, place that which is prepared by you, and make that it be ministered between your two fingers, the one which has the incision all with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then uncover from that to that which sees the suture any cause to another.
And this is the common way of suturing: one that takes the needle, or count of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and then lets it from the end of the incision of the ring finger, and strengthens the needle one, or another that you do not put thread in the two extremities of the needle, with the two extremities of the finger that is left the needle of the parts of the fingers, until you make that penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the needle and two extremities of the finger, and four orders are made.
And then strengthen with double thread in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by decent addition; and then let go the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in that, and then tie that with thread as it is tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the whole constriction of the wound.
And let the needles be medium between thickness and subtlety, for the subtle needles move lightly into the flesh; and the thick ones are of difficult entrance in the finger, and therefore for that reason they should be medium in subtlety and thickness.
And do not let the needle be placed in the two extremities of the finger properly, so that the flesh is not lightly incised and that the wound be opened before its consolidation.
And do not be prolonged in suturing so that the wound be prohibited from consolidation.
And then cut the extremities of the needles so that they do not prick the patient's sleep; and place on the suture powders expanded of all parts, the ones which have the extremities of the needles; and let those be there until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And these kinds of suturing with needles in this way are most convenient in the small wounds, for it suffices in the suturing of them one needle or two or around those.
But the second suturing is common: and it is that you administer with suturing the four extremities, of the finger and two extremities of the finger, in one go, with a needle in which the thread is enveloped equal in subtlety and thickness.
And when you have pierced these four extremities with the needle, reduce the needle from that same part from which you started, so that the thread is withdrawn from the upper part to the wound, so that the suture is like a suture of cloth with which the cloths are tightened.
And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suture serves men.
And with this suture, I sewed the wound that was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been plagued with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was greater than a palm, and it was protruding from the bowels around two palms of the bowel of the middle location and the disruption was in the middle of the limb; and therefore, I reduced it after the bowel had been pierced by the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and I cured it and it is healed; and after that, it was visible for about months, and it was converted into its dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by miracle, it was healed, because I did not cure it with ointment, because it was in a place where ointment was not found nor any medicine, but I placed on the wound a clean cloth twice a day and washed it assiduously with water of honey until it was healed.
But I say two species of sutures proper according to the narration of the Word.
And it is that you begin with a suture of the chain, and insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
And therefore, as the needle penetrates the chain and in that middle lacertz according to rectitude and in length of the whole body, and leaves the extremity of the ciphac in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate in the other extremity the needle from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the mihat.
And therefore, as you have made that penetration, then you make that penetration another time in that same extremity of the mihat from the front part to the back part; and leave the extremity of the ciphac that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity from the back part to the front part.
And make penetration with that one with which you make that penetration in the ciphac in the extremity of the mirat which is in the part of it while all that penetrates.
And after, starting from this middle side, sew this with the extremity that is of the ciphac in the other place, and extract the needle from the chain which penetrated, and after, reduce that one in that chain and body the extremity of the ciphac that is in the other side with this extremity of the mirat; and extract that one from the chain which is of part of it.
And do this one time and another, and do this one time after another until you sew all that is front according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with suture of pellicies with which you sew the hairs, in this way that you sew the ciphac one time from the part of the extremity of the chain, and that you leave that other time while you make it complete.
But the second species of proper suture which I call Gualia, and this is of the sermon of it and by it recommended, is that you sew that one according to similarity with which some medicants sew that one, in this way that they join all part to its corresponding part to it convenient by nature; and apply the extremity of one of it and the extremity of the mirat to the other extremity of it, and that is done according to that which I to you recommend.
So that you put the needle in the extremity of the mirat to your own from the front part, and make that penetration to the back part in that same one, and leave two extremities of the ciphac; and after, revolve the needle and make that penetration from front to back in two extremities of the ciphac.
And after, revolve those each one, and make each one penetrate from the back part inside to the front part in two extremities of the mirat others that are in the contrary place.
And this manner of suture is better than the common suture lighter, and is the suture of which I before predicted recollection.
This is the sermon of Gualia
And some said to me, suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert in these each one a thread, and begin with the insertion of the needle of that which you owe you, and make that penetration into the other place according to the suture of those with which they sew the hides equally.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle place of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than of the other places of the belly.
But the judgment of the medicating of a wound is the judgment of the other wounds.
Which cause is because when you congeal the wound recent with its blood before the air alters that, and reduce the bowel and sew that and adapts that decently, then pause over that earthy powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause over that some ointments which are at your presence until they make hard and join the threads, and be consolidated ciphac and mirat; and after, cure that so as it is the cure of the other wounds until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines, then place a poultice on it immediately, because it begins to sweat, to become old, and to change two times a day, as you and I have taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medicine in many situations when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague will communicate to the main limbs, then you must submerge linen in oil of good quality, or in olive oil, and place it on the circuit of the places that are between the angles and leave the bandages.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the bowels, because many times this happens, then cauterize that with a black stippling vi, and more so if the rupture has reached the bowels and is made an exit that penetrates into the cavity of it.
And know that the one that is of the large intestine is of lighter healing than the one that is in the small intestines.
And it is of difficult healing because the intestine that is called "jejunum" does not receive healing from plague that enters it at all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of the magnitude of it that is in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of the proximity of that to the nature of nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and you get that recently, reduce it according to your recipe with which you reduce the intestines equally.
But if it has passed to it space and has already become green or black, then you must strengthen that with a file over the place that is decayed from it, so that blood flows, because in the fabric are veins and arteries.
And then cut that which is other that ligament, and place the ends of the file pendant from the part left of the plague furrow, so that over you be relieved the attraction of it, you must the caking of the fabric and emission of the sweat of the plague.
Reminder of the plagues when they happen in the bowels.
When a disruption occurs in the bowels and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some men, because by this I saw one who was plagued in his belly with a lance blow and it was the plague of the right side of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and he was free from it of passage and flatulence.
Therefore, I followed the cure of him since he was not confident in the healing of him, but I continued to subtilize that until it was healed and the place was consolidated.
And I saw that the place was already consolidated, I put on the patient that he should be careful about the accident of evil in his belly; and not to happen to him by that evil accident and to break in his many dispositions eating and drinking, and then to go in bath and be exercised in his limbs.
And already some experienced ones have said that when a plague occurs in the bowels, and it is small, then it must be bound in this manner: and it is that you take maggots of large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and place a maggot of those that have the mouth open on the two lips of the plague; therefore when it takes on those and strengthens its mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another maggot near the first, and do not cease this to do with maggots one next to another according to the quantity of the whole plague.
And then reduce those and cover the plague; and remain those annexed heads in the bowels until the bowels are healed; and do not happen to the patient any harm.
And it is already possible that the bowels be bound with a subtle file which is made of the bowels of beasts annexed to it, because it is more in needle; and it is that you take the extremity of those files of bowels, and be it well skinned, and then bind the extremity of it with a file of linen, enveloped, and then introduce that file in needles and cover with it the bowels, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this manner of suturing with maggots is nothing but according to a way of trust and of hope.
But if the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, because then it is not engendered but subtilization, and it is not healing of it at all.
Of the cure of a fistula and a wound.
Know that every plague and abscess when it is inflamed and becomes old, and it is made an ulcer, and it is not consolidated and sweats all the time and is not cut off, then, in any member it is, universally it is called a fistula and we call it that azukem.
And fistula according to truth is a flawed, hard, white nodule, with which there is no pain and to which the cavity is as the cavity of a bird's egg; and for this reason, some call it a rizatz, that is, a beak.
And it is in some men humid, the one that sweats; and very soon the humidity is cut off in some hours. And some times this humidity is much, and is little, and is thick, and is subtle.
I have already shown all those causes, and their signs, and their cure with medicines in the division.
And thus, so that I make you know the cure of a fistula which is made by way of operation with a hand.
And know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for some of them reach the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the head, or the intestine, or the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to any of the vertebrae of the spine, or to any of the joints composed by composition as if from the hand and the foot; and of these, some give to the proximity of the main member and similar ones.
And therefore, of these fistulas that are in this manner, those are of the diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and occupation with that is labor and ignorance.
And if it is of the fistulas, the depth of which does not reach those places that have been said, and you wait and trust in the cure of it, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or lead, and if the fistula goes straight, and you explore it with it.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of lead, because lead with the lightness of its body is eased and curved of its tortuosity.
And if the fistula is having many horrific things, it is not to you possible that you signify upon it with a probe.
Therefore, cleanse the orifice by its orifices, because the humidity by which you cleanse it must go to the other orifices and run from them.
And then inquire exquisitely, according to what manner to you is it possible that you know if here has bone or nerve, and if the cavity of the fistula is distant or proximate, or if it is a fistula which has many orifices and is upon that all with the sum of your strength, with your interrogation, with which you interrogate the patient, and the invention of the pain you take the compression of your hand upon the place, and similarities of the significations and of the causes accidental to the abscess.
And since you will have stood upon all those causes with true station, then come to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if the fistula is apparent proximate or in a salty place, distant from the joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which I have told you.
Then you dry the fistula according to what has been said before in the narration of it, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the nail and of similarities, and cure that within that it is healed.
But if the fistula is of distant depth, and is straight, then you must cut into it in the groin as much as to you seems possible, and then modify it of all its corrupted flesh; and then administer poultices enveloped in acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do this with that some times until the acute medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
And then restore that with poultices which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it according to what we have recounted.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify that, then you inquire into it and dry it according to what we have recounted, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is to you discovered and there is in it any corruption and blackness, then you remove that until the corruption is hosted entirely; and then cure that with what it encarves until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and throws back as it was doing, then you know that you have not come to the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you uncover it again and exquisitely do the scraping of it and the purification of it with the last strength of your hand, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, well is; and if not, then you know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been attained, and therefore to you in that there is born only to leave it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is to you possible to throw that, then you throw it with subtle forceps which are convenient to that.
And if there are many bones, then exquisitely do the extraction of all those, and of those leave none behind with your strength.
But if to you makes contrariety any cause of the humidities, and in their incision there is no fear nor error, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are there, and deliver the bones.
But if to you is not preparation to remove the bones from your hour, then pause upon the plaque that which you can place upon it, and leave that within that it is around those bones of flesh and of ligaments, and guard the plaque that it not be consolidated, and be constricted the section which you have incised in your operation.
However, if you fear, pause upon it a poultice submerged in sopre trissat with oil, or a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green poultices, because when they will ripen those ligaments, and the bones are of their separation the ablation, and of those attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone, such as the thigh bone or hip bone or similar to those, and what is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then remove that with a rasp, only from behind, so that the blackness and corruption remain, and then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted from it is a large portion, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and to cut all the way into the place where the corruption has reached, and then cure that within until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his thigh so that you place that as an example and helper on your operation.
There is a young man, around thirty years old, who suffers pain in his thigh, and from the parts around, the badness is over the matter of the body until the matter reaches the thigh, and it is matter of abscess with a large abscess, and it is not from an external cause.
And therefore he was extended for a time with that by the error of the doctors until the abscess was opened, and from it came out many matters, and his cure was almost stopped until the thigh was fistulated, and it was made in it many horrific wounds which all threw out pus and the humors of the body.
And therefore the cure took many years of doctors, and there were not many wise among them, until I was called.
And I saw the thigh of him and the matters that flowed from those horrific wounds for a great body; and already the body of that man was all debilitated and the color of him was yellowish.
And therefore I inserted the probe into one of those wounds and reached the bone with it.
And then I explored all the wounds and found that they reached to all parts of the thigh.
And then I took my knife and incised upon one of the wounds where I described a part of the bone, and I found that corrupted part, and it was already terrible and corrupted and degraded; and a part of the thigh was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I sewed up what to me was discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I cured that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I excised and sewed up, and I had already drained it.
And then I placed the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I repeated and discovered upon the bone again upon the first discovery, and I found continuous corruption with the bone.
And I sewed up what appeared to me of that corruption, and then I made a fair cure and restoration of it, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered upon it another time and did not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and perforated the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I incised around a palm of it, and that I extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
And it was not necessary to repeat the operation on him and the section of it, but by the disposition of the frailty of him and by the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, because it happened to him at all hours by superfluity of evacuation syncope evil.
And therefore he healed by entire healing, and nothing is in the place of the bone, hard flesh; and a good disposition was made of him in his body and returned the virtue of him; and he was converted in his dispositions and did not make him contrariety in walking nor harm in any cause.
But if the bone is prominent in the place of the body already protruding, then when you cut that according to this manner: and that is that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that upwards; and place that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then tie that over the flesh that is left the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you stretch the flesh to the parts below, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to sew so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
And place a board or table below the bone decently, because when you do this it is not forbidden the saw that does not cut the corrupted flesh.
And cover that the sawing be upon the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, and force the sawing of it another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, it is laid one part continuous with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh of all parts entirely; and then place a board below, and then saw that of the first part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continuous.
And be the sawing according to the place of the corruption little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in that reason but in the engineering.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is very difficult; however, as soon as you inquire about the corruption in what manner it appears to you, and that you open it, and cleanse it according to each disposition which is possible to you, and in each case make it rectified to you, when it does not cause you contrariety in the vein or nerve.
And know which are the saws and the chisels to cut these bones are very much according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and the greatness and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; for that whenever you prepare for every kind of operation, the instrument convenient to that operation.
And know that that operation signifies to you about the kind of instrument of which you indigeysses; when with you is great study and long and knowledge of the manners of this art, and testimony of manners of maladies, for that hour already you have by yourself those that are convenient to it of the instruments to every malady.
And you so to you forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments the ones which you will place as simple with the ones which you will proceed to your prohibition the one which you will experiment upon the others. Shape of saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Shape of chisel: Let the head of this chisel be according to the shape of the head of a star-shaped key, and the points of it be according to the shape of the points of an awl.
And it is not convenient otherwise than with that they be confricadatz the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or is the mouth wide and broad.
Shape of a smaller razor:
Shape of a broad razor:
Shape of another saw decently made: let it be arched as much as possible and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of boy's dagger decently made. Shape of it:
Shape of a razor which has a concavity:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another razor of curved extremity:
Shape of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Shape of another smaller chisel:
Shape of another chisel; this one resembling a ray, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Shape of a chisel which is convenient to the ratio of the one which is perforated of the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and of acute extremity.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly as all the causes that we have said of razors and chisels and saws.
Of incision extremities and of the serration of the bones.
The extremities may be either by intrinsic cause or by extrinsic cause, or as you will have medicated that corruption by cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption going from the member which you do not strike any cause, then when you incise that member into that which the honor accuses the corruption, so that the patient escapes by that of death or malice which is the major defect of the member.
And the sign of him to whom it happens, is that the member is made black before it be cured that fire has already burned it, or it may be brought near the blackness before the suppuration of that one enters into that member which seizes it and that it nourishes all the body; and therefore, you take care to incise that.
And similarly if it is cause of the corruption by percussion of some venomous causes as well as of scorpion of the sea or of viper or of ruetla and of similar things.
And if the corruption or the percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters into the hand.
And similarly if it reaches to the hand, then you incise that of the root of the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption so that it nourishes in the wrist of the arm.
And if instead of that, then you incise the arm into the armpit at the joint.
And if otherwise the corruption passes and sometimes encircles the armpit, then in that is the death of the patient; and administer another cause another to that in cure is quantity of virtue.
And similarly do of the foot when corruption envezeys the toe of the foot, then you incise that into one of the toes.
And if it takes in the heel of the foot, then you incise the whole foot. But if it reaches into the thigh, then you incise the thigh into the junction of the thigh.
And if the corruption has already reached the thigh, then in it there is no  engineered but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the manner of incising the member or of sawing it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part furthest from which you want to incise, and strengthen another ligament over the place; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, a lat spatum until all the flesh is uncovered; and then it is incised or sawed.
And cover that it be placed cloth from all parts so that it does not touch the place itself, and that it comes to the patient lesion adjusted and cauterized abscess.
But if blood flows when working, then you cauterize the place carefully, or place on it some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is complete.
And then bind the affected limb to the one convenient, and cure that until it is healed.
And I recommend to you what happens to a man in his foot, this same accident which I have told you, which is when it happens to him blackness in his foot with a burn that was assembled to the burning of fire.
And that corruption happens first in his finger before it reaches the whole foot.
And therefore that man prepares himself to put pus that he feels the cure going to the member with the vehemence of it that atrophies from pain and burning of it, and the incision that foot enters into the joint, and fire heals.
Long time happens to him that same corruption in the finger of the hand indicated.
And therefore it comes to me, and so I pierce to repercuss that superfluity with that which I place on the hand of the medicines, then the purification of the body of him; and it does not repercuss the superfluity and begins to go to the other finger before it begins in the hand.
And he begs me to cut his hand, and I do not want to do that hoping on the repercussion of that superfluity, but rather that I fear the incision of his hand dead, for the virtue of the patient was over coming.
And since he despaired of me, he returned to his land and I came to know that the man prepared and cut his hand all, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration except for that it may be helpful about what catz of this disease, and that its meaning by which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
Of the cure of the sinews and the quality of clysterization with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and pus is taken out of it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is above it as if it were fine cloth, and it does not reach the back corruption, and it does not imprint on the bone or on the nerve or on the ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
But however, if the space is prolonged until the corruption presses into some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure of it is that the skin is incised all as if it were turned, and mostly when it is fine and made like cloth, and composes that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin adheres and that that corruption has not achieved for a back consequence, and in the skin has passed through the face, then you cure that with clysters.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the brac that you see is of fetid odor, then you clysterize that with Egyptian medicine, which is of oil and wine and vinegar receiving equal parts, and they are placed in a vessel, and they are heated over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and clysterize with that the sinus, and tighten the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then extract that with a sponge; and do this for so many days until the sinus is purified and the stench is removed.
And some times it is clysterized with water of ash, when the medicine is not present to you; and it is that you take the ash of wood, and put water on it; and then mix that and clysterize with it until you confess that the sinus is then stayed.
And if the patient has no tolerance to the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ash, then clysterize that with water and honey and that it be mixed with vinegar, and clysterize that with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey is that it purifies and washes, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when in the wine there is an excess of astringency and dryness.
And as you do this sometimes and you confess that the sinus is already removed, then clysterize that with water that makes flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take of enguent dyphynicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or that you clysterize that with some medicines and other enguents that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise of the enguents.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow in which the cannula of the clyster is not received, then you enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and place in it a poultice wrapped in Egyptian enguent or in basilicon enguent until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the lips of it with sutures and leave it in the quantity in which between the clyster its addition.
And if the patient's orifice from which the arm exits is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the lowest place that is in him so that the arm runs below, for when the arm is shortened in the depth of the sinus the flesh is in it engendered.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus inside the environment of the lowest bone according to what you want, then perforate it so that you prepare the member with preparation by which the arm runs lightly according to what is to your apparel and that nothing be in it retained any cause of the arm.
But that which is over the orifice of the sinus, which you remove every hour so that what is adjusted in it of the arm may escape. And so that you know if what runs from it of the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is undigested.
And in this way you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is thrown over the orifice of the sinus already adheres, or approaches adherence, then the third day you untie it, and when you untie the plaque, then change the cloth for another and renew the enguent.
But if from the sinus a little space away there are subtle viruses, then do not despair of their adherence, for the healing of it approaches, for some men in whom the late generation of flesh in their wounds, and of those it is done the contrary of it.
And if from the sinus after many days it is issued arm undigested, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and is the prolonged cause, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as a diaphynicon enguent, when there is in it adjusted superfluity of addition of zegi.
And the last one which is cured, is that you take of diaphynicon enguent and it is dissolved in rose oil, and it is over it poured honey in its substance, and then combine that with it, and use of that.
And already it seems in that action, when there is no arm, diaphynicon enguent, honey when it is boiled so that it is thickened, and use of it; or that you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind all and pulverize over the honey when it is on the fire, and then line it with water over cloth and strengthen that over the sinus; and line it with the honey which you have boiled so that it is thickened, and pulverize over cloth and strengthen that.
And sometimes it is administered with it long and razitz of lily celestial (and it is lily celestial) and flour of errs and centaurea, and use of those simples or adjust them, grind them and sift and pulverize over the honey which I have recommended; and use of it.
And if the sinus is prolonged, and is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the depth of it, and already make inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or to the ligaments; then you cure it with fistular cure, as above is said.
Of the cure of panariti and ingrown toenails and finger incisions and sections.
Panarici is an abscess which arises from the nail of the finger or toe, and often arises in the other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less prized, or it is an abscess of a caut abscess, or it is corrupted, and throws out matter while it corrodes the root of the nail, and often corrupts the whole of it, and often spreads its corruption to the bone until it is to it a fetid odor, and is made the extremity of the finger lamed, and the color of it is made dark.
And therefore when you have that with the water that we have said in the division and do not combine your cure, then cove that you cut with iron all the superfluity that is remaining from the nail and then cauterize the wound with water, for cauterizing much is helpful in this.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail voids already comprise the flesh to the sides of the finger, and they begin to prick it and let it out, then cove that you place a fine ray below the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and impel it up and cut it with ease, and place over that which remains of the flesh of the medicines comburent corrosive until it be all removed; and then cure this with enguent until it be healed.
But if the corruption has already entered the bone, then cove that you cut the bone that and extract it, for no time is it healed that there is in it the corrupted bone.
And if you see the corruption and decay going into the wound, then you cut it in one of the nuts according to how it is pressed in its memory, and then take care of it until it is healed.
But if the nail is bruised or scraped, and there is pain in that area, then when you first begin to treat the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula, making a transverse cut from top to bottom, and be careful that the cut does not reach into the flesh that remains under the nail, because you will cause the patient severe pain, and it will lead to the birth of superfluous flesh in that area; and then take care of that area with what will reduce the pain.
But this adjusted flesh, which is born in the hands of some men, is very fleshy, and it is very much in the bones, or very much in the nail.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth of them in some nuts of the fingers. But that which is born in some of the fingers does not hurt, and this one that is born in the joints is very much hurtful.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is lighter, and it is that you cut it, following its root with a wide spatula.
But of that which is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore, be careful of the abscess of it.
But of that which is born in the fingers, when you first cut the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw it with one of those saws that are convenient for this, and then take care of it until it is healed.
But consolidation, which happens to the fingers either between their many movements or by nature of the man who was born that way, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similar things, then you must cut that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And then put between their cloths of the bandages in oil rubbed so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between them, or put between them a lamina of thin lead until it is consolidated as you should.
And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient to the figure of the limb.
Of incisions of vices, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and they are veins wrapped thick and full of melancholic superfluities which come in motion in the limbs of the body, and the major arrival of them in the legs, and most in the legs of the travelers and of the laborers and of the carriers.
Therefore, you must administer purgatives of black bile some times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
But the cure of them with iron is according to two manners: one is that it be incised and that the black blood be thrown out, and the other manner is that the vein be elevated and all of it be extracted.
The incision of it is according to this manner: first embroil the leg with lukewarm water until the thick blood be dissolved, which is the feculent of the leg, and then strengthen the leg of the patient to the most sovereign part of the groin, and to the part below the knee with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place, or in two, or in three with wide incision, and then elevate the black blood with your hand from the part below the leg and up, and down, until the quantity of blood be extracted that you want and that you see is sufficient, and which will take the virtue of the ailment.
And then tie that up, and command him that he abstain from the foods that engender black bile.
And iterate the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that night to the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you who raise the leg of the patient, if in it there are movements of the veins, and then put it in a bath and embroil the leg of him with lukewarm water until it reddens and the veins are exuberant; or that he be exercised by strong exercise, if the bath is not present to you, until the limb be warmed.
And then cut the vein in the right of the vein by incision in the length or in the back of the finger, or in the lowest part of it of the bone.
And then open the vein with pincers and excise the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and it is of the appearance of it that you see that red declining to blackness.
And therefore, as you evacuate and from the vein you see that white which is cord.
And then you put below that the ray until it be elevated and be thrown from the vein, and suspend that with a hook or lion's claw.
And then cut another incision near that one for three fingers, and then excise the vein from the part below the vein until it appears.
And then elevate that and cut that in the back incision of the bone, and then extract that and elevate it until it be extracted by the second incision, and then extract that from the incision that is above that.
And do this until you extract that from the incision that is most sovereign or highest of all the incisions, until all is extracted; and then cut that.
And if it does not obey to be extracted and elevated, then introduce a double strong needle with thread and ligature it and extract it, or introduce it below and turn your hand all around until it is ejected. And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it is made difficult to elevate that part and it becomes harmful to the patient for that night.
And when that whole thing is pulled out, then place on the area of the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil and un-rose oil, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity in its wrapping at the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then cover that on all parts of its tortuosity and at the places of its wrapping, and then suspend it with hooks until you elevate that whole thing.
And guard yourself that your section does not cut the vein and that you do not harm that, for it will be difficult for you to elevate that; and serve your prudence in that.
Form of the incision with which the vein is cut:
It is not pointed like the hooks nor is it of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of thick flexibility like a lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; having in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
Of the extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands as in the Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India hot and arid of little fertility and in which there are no herbs nor trees.
And it is strongly generated in other places of the body other than the legs.
And the gestation of it is of putrefaction that comes from the intestines as if venom from the serpents and worms and scarabs and worms engendering between the intestines and the flesh.
And the sign of the reception of the advent of it is of this vein that accidies in the leg inflammation vehement; and then the place is vesicated; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that vesication which seems rooted of a plant.
And therefore, when it appears from him the extremity, then you must wrap around it a piece of lead the weight of one dragon. Within two dragons, and no more, and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
And as many times as you see of it any cause to the parts outside, cover that with lead and bind that. And if the part is prolonged, then you must incise a part of it and envelop the remnant; and do not incise that of root until it is issued, for if you incise that it is contracted and enters into the flesh and makes happen an abscess and putrefaction in the place and a bad ulceration.
Because it must be treated gradually and extracted little by little, until it is pulled out from the end of it and no remnant of it remains in the body.
And of this vein it is issued in some men that is in its length of five palms and ten, and it has already reached me that one was issued of twenty palms.
And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then introduce the ray into the tract of it and perforate that with a long tract in the body, until it is evacuated all that is in the matter, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and there come to it many orifices, and it is issued from some orifice a branch.
And therefore cure that as we have said in the division and with that which is said above.
Of the section above worms generated under the skin and it is called the bovine ailment.
This ailment is named in some lands as the bovine ailment because it often happens to oxen and it is a worm few in number which is born between the intestines and the flesh, and it goes in all the body up and down, and it is shown at the feeling of its increase from member to member until it disrupts the intestines and is issued out.
And the generation of it is by putrefaction of some humors as if they were worms and serpents and earthworms and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for the malice of it, because when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and it has reached the brain, then it very strongly inflames it and enters and destroys the brain, and this happens many times.
And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done if not by its ambulation and appearance of it at the feeling, and then you must tighten what is above it and what is below it with a bandage and strong constriction, and then dry over it and extract that.
And if it is rooted in the flesh and does not come out, then you must place cauteries with fire over the place until it dies, and the major cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
If you see that being reached near the heel, then tighten the band around the eyebrow with great firmness, and then press upon it, and extract it; and that the patient use of modification of their body with medicines evacuating putrid bad humors, and guard himself from foods generating putrefaction.
On the section for the ailment of nafir.
This ailment is called nafir in our land, and it is pain which comes in certain limbs, and then it is changed from limb to limb.
And I have already seen this as I will tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and because it was touched for an hour, I saw that inflammation go as if a worm was pushing towards this, but more lightly than to be feared, as if it were living silver when it runs from place to place.
And then the pain went to that place and fixed itself in the muscle, and then it stayed there for an hour.
And then it corrected itself in the other body until I reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to myself that I should turn myself throughout her body as I saw; and it was too marvelous of the permutation of it and the velocity of limb to limb. And I had already seen this before in my own feet in that manner, however, I have seen many who attribute pain to be changed from limb to limb. But I did not see this in the feet as in the woman.
And I did not think it to be anything but that because the woman was old, on whose dry body and exposed veins, in this appearance, that windy permutation was felt.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retro-cure in those who are delicate and with moist bodies of well-covered veins.
And as you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not to you apparent at the heel as we have said, then you tighten upon it and leave it lightly and press upon it until that windiness is constricted, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it in your own feet, then you cure it with the shaking of the body and with what you expel windiness, and charms them with foul pills and pills of serapi and similar things.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they strike, because their diversity is that of those that have large points, and small, and concave, and blunt, they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have shafts.
And of the signs of the  servel is when it strikes in it an arrow, and pierces the bone, and it is taken out of the cyphne which is above the brain, because it happens through it a violent soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and roaring in the feet, and inflammation and roaring of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and very much is the speech cut off and the voice is destroyed, and it is taken out of the place of the wound a white humidity resembling powder, and eyes of it resembling the consistency of the flesh.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then you abstain from the cure and the extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart, are that it is near the left nipple, and feels with that which it is placed in a hard cause, and it is not a void cause; and very much the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the wrist, and blood flows from the wound black, and seizes that coldness of the extremities, and a burning sweat, and syncope; and therefore you know that death descends upon all.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung, are so much blood sputtered from the wound, and the vessels that are near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient is changed, and he expires great spirit, and demands the attraction of cold air.
And if the arrow strikes in the ligament which is in the feet, and the pain then is near the small of the back, and it is made the leg great with vehement pain and with sighs, and it is not bad all the limbs of the muscles.
And if the arrow strikes in the stomach, then very much eyes of the wound feed some undigested food.
And if the arrow strikes in the belly, and it is lodged in it, eyes some wound of the  plagua, or the membrane, or the intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope in the cure of it the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow enters the bladder, and urine is expelled outside, and there is a process from it to the outside parts, and there is a lot of pain on the patient, then know that it is mortal.
May the other members, as well as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, and arms, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the hip, and the leg and their likenesses of the limbs, be saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I recount to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may signify by it in your treatment.
The cause is, that in a man shot an arrow in the lacrimal of his eye at the root of his nose, and you extracted that from him from the other side, leaving the gray of the auricle of him, and he is healed, and did not hurt in the eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was shot in him in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be obtained from it except for a small extremity with which it adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head in which there were no auricules.
And the Jew healed, and did not hurt in his eye badly.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one that has auricules; and therefore I incised upon it between two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; and therefore I subtiliated with it, and then I extracted it, and the Christian healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who was shot in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and therefore, since forty days had passed and there was no change in him from his dispositions, I incised upon the arrow and engineered upon it, and he healed, and did not hurt him badly.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow was shot in his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and since it was about seven years, he extracted the arrow from the root of the thigh.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow was shot in her belly, and the wound was consolidated within her, and it was not changed in her dispositions in a year, and the woman did not suffer in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow was shot in his face and the wound was consolidated, and it broke the arrow, not finding much pain here, and many likenesses to this.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes who was shot in the middle of his nose, and it had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And I was called to the cure of him shortly after the shooting of the arrow, within three days.
And therefore I examined the wound of the arrow very strictly; and therefore I inquired about it with a subtle attempt, and I did not feel it; but I felt it prick below the right auricle, and therefore I supposed that that prick was because of the extremity of the arrow.
And I plastered the place with a plaster in which is attractive and digestive virtue, confessing to myself that the place would be abscessed so that it would appear to me the place of the arrow, so that it would dry on it.
And he did not hurt in the place significantly that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days and did not hurt; and the wound was consolidated meanwhile, and it broke the malaute of the extraction of it for a space of many days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and recounted this to me.
And therefore I placed on the wound medicine acute corrosive for many days until it was open, and with the probe I felt it, and examined the extremity of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the shaft.
And therefore I adjusted it in the appearance of the wound with that acute medicine until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the arrow, and passed to me time with that for the space of time within four months.
And therefore, since the wound was amplified, and it was possible for me to intervene with forceps in it, and remove it, without being able to do so easily, then I did not cease to subtly and engineer on it with ways of engineering, until one day I began on it with ways of engineering to hang it with forceps skillfully made, according to how they will come in the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and I restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it, and the wound was consolidated, and the ailment healed completely, and did not weaken him in any way.
And I recount to you the quality of the extraction of some arrows so that you may pause this rule and signification upon what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not understood with narration nor do they comprehend those in the book.
And the wise artificers compare with few about much; and with what is present about what is absent; and finds novel operation and novel instrument of the descent of the foreign causes of the art when it happens.
And therefore I say that arrows are not pulled out of the limbs in which they are lodged except in two ways: either by traction of the place in which they are embedded; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that one which is pulled out by the place where it entered, is the arrow proceeding in fleshy place, and it is pulled and pulled out.
And if it does not obey the easement of the hour in which it is caught, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it can be loosened, and the traction of it and its egress are relieved.
And similarly if it is lodged in bone and does not obey you to the easement, then leave that for some days and repeat that with traction and movement every day, and it will be pulled out.
And if it does not obey your easement after some days, then you must bore into the circuit of the arrow in that bone from every side with a subtle drill until the place of the arrow is widened, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already lodged in the place of the body, and is hidden from the feeling, then you inquire that with a probe, and if you feel that, then you pull it out with some instruments which are convenient to the traction of it.
And if you cannot about it because of the constriction of the plague and the length of the preon, and here there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then you cut on the plague until it is widened and that it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is to the ears in which it is held, then you deliura the flesh in which it is lodged from every side with all the skill that you can do; and engineer on that, if you cannot about the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in twisting of those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use with a twist of your hand with forceps at all sides until it makes that obey; and subtly with subtle skill that the arrow is not broken and that it is made to you difficult traction of it and of that extraction.
And if you cannot about that of your hour, then you leave for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of it can be loosened, and then repeat that because then it is relieved. But if to you makes contrariety flux of blood, then you administer that which we have said of cure in its chapter.
And guard your virtue of incision of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer skill in every manner to your possible of the evasion of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and tardiness and firmness as I have recounted to you.
And therefore that you make contrary the arrow so that the patient be according to the figure according to which fire you must the placement of the arrow in it, because it is more helpful. But if that is not to you possible, then you administer that which is to you possible by the figures.
But the arrows that are pulled out by the opposite of the other part, or that already from it proceeds some part to the parts outside, or make difficulty the extraction of the arrow by feeling of the part above the codena proper and sometimes that eminent; therefore you cut on that; and be the section according to the quantity in which the forceps take; and then pull that, because it is made lighter to easement.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lame according to contrariety until the arrow presses in the bone, and widen it to itself, and then extract that.
And if not, leave that for some days, and then repeat that until it is extracted.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you impel that with it.
But if the shaft is fallen and you want to administer impulse, then you introduce and that, if it is blunt, a concave instrument so that between the concavity of it in the tail of the arrow and then impel that with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then you impel that with a strong instrument entering into that, because the arrow is relieved by that.
And if the arrow is envenomed, then you must cauterize all the flesh in which is the wound, if it is to you possible that, and then cure that with that which convenes.
And if the arrow catches in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribs, and it is close so that you touch that with the probe, and it is to you possible to cut on that, then cut on that and guard yourself from incision of vein or of nerve, and extract that, and then close the wound if it is necessary, and cure that until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are shot:
Let the extremities of them be like a bird's beak that are made like a saw when they grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of these, many species are made, large, few, and medium, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
Like a ray so that the entrance of it into the concave arrow is eased and it is impelled with that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy of which it is customary to phlebotomize .xxx., of which there are in the head .xvi., There are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs which are in the two temples that appear; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of two heels that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and two guidegi that are in the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and - these are the veins that are called algelic - ; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are .v.; Because of those one cephalica is, and it is the wild latz; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and deaf, and it is a medium vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and of another branch of the cephalica; and people name that "vein of the whole body," and basilica is the vein which is placed in the domestic latz, and it is called "citillar," and people call that the vulgarians "vein of the belly"; and funis of the arm, and it is placed on the focil, and it is that in which it is phlebotomized, and it is that which appears on the poutz by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest said, and there are two ramps in it.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; the one of those is that which is below the curvature of the denolh of the wild latz; and the second is sophena, and the place of it is below the camba of the domestic latz; and the sciatic vein, and the place of it is below the camba of the wild latz; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
The usefulness of the veins that are near the ears is for ancient catarrhs and emigranea and sahafati and old bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: that it be scraped the head of the patient, and that the head of the patient be rubbed in the occiput in the place of both the veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then tightly bind the patient's neck with a bandage until the two appear and the places of them near the ears in two depressed places of the head; and touch that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here is the attempt.
Then you take the lancet, and it is that which is incisive, and then you introduce that below the vein into the codena until the phlebotomy comes to the bone. And then you elevate your hand with the vein and the codena to the upper parts and you incise the vein with an incisive incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and do so much of the blood as you want.
And then bind with pulvils and leave it until it is healed.
And already it has preceded at the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
But of the two arterial veins that are in the temples the usefulness of the phlebotomy is for ancient emigranea and sode evil and assiduous ophthalmia and courses of acute effusions of superfluities to the heels.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck tightly until the two veins appear to the feeling by manifest appearance and be demonstrated the pulse of them below your finger; and then you will feel the attempt.
And then you elevate the codena above the vein to the upper parts with your finger indicated, and introduce the phlebotomy incisive below, and elevate the vein upwards; and incise it as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood run according to the quantity of your need.
And then untie the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place on that coto and pulvils and bind that above with a strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
And already it has preceded the remembrance of them, and of those the incision, and the traction at the beginning of the book.
And therefore the treatment of phlebotomy of the vein of the front is close to phlebotomy of the cephalic in ancient diseases of the face and migraine and redness and foul ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to what I tell you; so it is that the patient stretches his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fossor, of which this is the form of it:
Pause the point eminent which is at the head of the fossor over that vein and strike upon it with a pen or with another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity which you want; and then untie the perforation of the patient and stretch that until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with phlebotomy, however, no that the phlebotomy be of acute extremity as well as the others, rather it be of blunt extremity, and phlebotomize it according to the transverse, for the bone is proper and strong, it would break it with the phlebotomy when it is subtle.
But the treatment of the two veins that are at the lacrimals of two heels for scabies of the heels for redness and seborrhea in the heels, and for diseases of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient stretches his neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you be standing over the head of it.
And be done the phlebotomy according to the transverse along a little with phlebotomy a little, for in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, very likely the extremity of it is broken.
And then make the blood run as much as is to you necessary, and pause over those cuts, and stretch those for a night, and then untie those.
But the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is conferent to acute fever and to soda vehement, and to the diseases of the face and migraine and redness that happen in the face, and mostly when it is ancient.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient stretches his neck and then take his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy subtle long and place it in the middle location of the head of the nose according to rectitude, for the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and for the blood begins to flow soon.
Cover that you end your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and make the blood run according to your necessity; and then tie that for a night, for that is restored lightly.
But the treatment of the phlebotomy of the two guidegui to constriction of the ale and to the beginning of leprosy and to many diseases and impetigo and bad ulcers corrosive as well as herpotromeno.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient stretches himself in each one in his neck with a bandage; and stay the artifices over the head of the patient, and the patient be sitting on a seat.
And then phlebotomize the vein along with phlebotomy ample little by little; and then extract of blood according to tempered quantity or according to what you times of necessity that is to water; and then make semblance of the other vein.
And then untie the bandage and stretch the two veins with a moderate constriction so that the patient is not provoked, and leave it until the morning when the plague is healed.
And the treatment of the phlebotomy of the algerich veins, conferreys to small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the circuit of it.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient sit in front of you, and stretch his neck with a bandage, and then turn the lips of it and watch the two veins of which one is of the right of the lip and the second of the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each one of both, and this is more because in the circuit of those so small black veins; and therefore cut each one with an incision.
But if doubt is of you, and you do not know which one of those is, then you understand the incision of the major of those, and of the most manifest of those.
And make the semblance of the two veins that are in the lips above.
But of two veins that are below the tongue the treatment is close to phlebotomy of the cephalic to inflammations that are in the throat, to the disease of the uvula, and to diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and elevate the tongue of it, and watch below the tongue, of one side of it vein and of the other side vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
And therefore phlebotomize each one; and guard yourself that you do not end your hand in phlebotomizing those, for below those so arteries.
And your veins that are phlebotomized in the groin are in those that run custom in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two manners, or put with the phlebotomy mirtilat or olive to subtlety declining; or cut with phlebotomy cutellar, and call it alnessil, and this is the form of it:
Let the latz of it be as if times, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full of apparent gross proceeds, and to those that contain thick turbid blood.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser latitude and of more subtle extremity, and it is necessary to make phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle citrine blood.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: that which extracts the blood of the ailments that are left the guolayro and the neck, and from that which seizes the feet and the belly.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when phlebotomizing that, to guard well that and be over-fear in that, because there is an artery below it, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will wound that artery and there will be a flux of blood, so that it is necessary that in the phlebotomies that with a phlebotomy pungent, it is necessary to lift it with an incision.
And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you leave that and that you change to the other, or that you seek some branch of it; or that you phlebotomize in the place of its end of the arm, because that is manifest; and dissect that with a phlebotomy incision as we have said.
But if you want the phlebotomy of the metyssa, then it is necessary before the stricture of the arm that you touch the place within that you know the place of the wrists, and then place your hand on it with tension; and then lift the arm and dissect the vein with a concave incision with a phlebotomy incision as we have said; and guard yourself that the percussion for some space of the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you strain the ligament, inflation in the place that you have marked with tension, then that inflation is the inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as if it were of a child, and the blood is subtle and red, then you know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then you cover and place your hand over that for a long space; and then oppose your hand, and if the blood is stopped, because it has been stopped several times, then you strain the arm and leave that.
And guard the patient from the moisture of it, and be over-fear of it and do not harm it for some days until it is healed.
But if the blood is not stopped, and you see that you must not present medicine to it, then you should incise the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is contracted, and the blood is stopped; or that you take a piece of fistic, and fen that, and take the one majority and strain that over the place of the vein with the stricture descending to the ligament and to the pulvils within the other day.
And then if the blood is stopped, well is; and if not, then cure that with the water of which it is preceded to the remembrance of the place of the pulvils that are stopping the flow of blood.
And the abscizio of the blood of it is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
But of the fusca vein the phlebotomy is a benefit that extracts the blood from the upper part of the head and from the lower part of the body; for that is composed of branches of the basilica and of branches of cephalica, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist that one be over-fear in the phlebotomy of it, because below that is a nerve; and therefore if it adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and touches the nerve, it will cause stupor to it, and it is difficult the healing of it, and fort it is not healed of all, and this nerve many times appears to the feeling; and if it is hidden to some men and is subtle and is not shown, then it is necessary that you pause the phlebotomy with the one with which you phlebotomize with a incision of the knife, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you fen the vein in the longitude.
The benefit of the phlebotomy of the cephalica vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and comforts the ailments of the joints.
And it is necessary in this very properly, if you want that the phlebotomy be done with a phlebotomy of olive or with a phlebotomy of myrtle; because it is the safest of all the veins, because it is not below it the artery nor the nerve.
But however fort it is an apostemat in some men, when it is not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but do not notice in re that apostema.
The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in the preservation of health and in the hope of it and the precaution of the occurrence of illnesses, and that phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins that are in the arm, namely: cephalic, basilic and median; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when signs of repletion appear.
And it should be performed phlebotomy on the third day or at the first hour that three hours have passed from the day.
But phlebotomy that is administered, more when it provokes convenience and necessity to it, either at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
And that a child should not be phlebotomized before they have fourteen years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month to the seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized those who have already passed sixty years.
And since whoever wants to be phlebotomized in any way, should purify their bowels before phlebotomy with a lion's enema, if in those there is a lot of retained feces, so that the veins do not withdraw the superfluities in the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the main limbs.
And should not be phlebotomized patients with nausea, certain vomiting, or who are suffering from illness or intoxication until that has been removed from them, nor those with dropsy, and more than phlebotomy should be feared near colic, vomiting, and abdominal pain, and near multiplication of copulation and labor and exercise of fasting or vigils and from every cause that dissolves the virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
And consider in the subtilization of humors before it, if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to it.
And introduce into a bath if no cause prohibits it, or exercise through any exercise so that the blood is subtiliated.
And pause the phlebotomy of him in the foot of the day, that is, around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And perforate that the foot of that be guarded on that day from all evils accidents animals, as is anguish, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, as is labor and superfluous pain and copulation and semblance to them.
And to his seizure make to be present the causes in the use of which custom of men by aromaticity and odor and by balsams and semblance to those according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is more soft than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
And then extract his arm, and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and then tighten the ligament with a strip and wrap that two times.
And let the stricture be temperate, for the stricture when it is not equal, or the stricture is with superfluity, then prohibit the flux of the blood; or is with softening, and then prohibit the body of the blood ascent.
And after the stricture, let him who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together meanwhile until the veins are inflated and declared to the touch.
And after the phlebotomist anoints his phlebotomy with a little of oil, properly; and let him place his left hand's index finger over that vein, below the place where he wants the phlebotomy, so that the vein be pushed a little, and the percussion be seated because of the veins is the one that atrophies as if the heart flees, and of those is that is full of vitality and when he places the phlebotomy on it, it is contracted, and the phlebotomist is discovered; and the phlebotomy does not pierce the vein, and if it pierces, then that is straitened.
And therefore, for this, let the phlebotomist be stopped and be solicited in all these causes.
And after the phlebotomy, but if the vein is pierced in one go, then it is good; and otherwise, you repeat it another time below that place a little, or on it with a festin, if the place is not apostatized.
And if the place is apostatized, or the patient fears, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligament, for it will strongly pull the abscess caut, nor enter into a bath.
And after repeat the phlebotomy if the need.
And if the aperture is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that there will not be the quantity of blood that you want, then you repeat the phlebotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the aperture a little, and do it with a festin before the place is apostatized, because the place is apostatized in many men because of a small aperture.
But if it is already apostatized, then do not repeat on it, because it excuses you for no cause; and pause on it some part of the incision of oil, because it alleviates the body of the blood. And it is better in this place than oil and than the other oils.
And seemingly administers a fenda of oil in all fleubotomia with which fleubotomes the veins of the prohibition of the body of blood, and do that tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when is placed from one of those on the spot, because the blood is subtiliated and is revolvut when is gross.
And if in the place of the fleubotomia is engendered great abscess, because many times happens, and mostly to him who has not been bled but that time, or at the opening of the vein little, and then you take, and place on the spot sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen that for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And cover that do this near the issuance of the blood of that vein with complement of it or of another vein.
And if remains in the place for some days some blackness or greenness, do not notice it; and if you want, place on that some cause of aloen and of myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mint or of calamint or similar to it.
And many times happens abscesses and eminences because fleubotomia of the basilica.
And therefore place your hand on that, and if then you feel softness because of your compression on that, then that eminence is bad and evil; and therefore beware that you place on that any cause of that which have been said, because it will flow strongly from the artery blood.
And make a plaster with that which is astringent, so that the place be endured, and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
And cover that you extract blood to every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color which appears on the blood according to what appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it issue until it is red; and seemingly if you see it thick, then you let it issue until it is subtiliated; and seemingly if it is acute, until the acuteness of it is stayed.
And cover to him who is full and strong and has need of extraction of blood in one time, that the fleubotomia of the vein be amplified and the fleubotomia be wide.
And in him who is frail, be done the contrary of that, and cover that you extract that in troops of times, and that the trauc be strait.
And the best that is administered in fleubotomia of vein is that it be the transverse section, not puncture.
And this manner of fleubotomia is safe from flux of blood and of incision of nerves, and is more praiseworthy and more safe than fleubotomia according to latitude and longitude.
And to which it is customary to happen syncope because of the fleubotomia, and cover that you cure that before the fleubotomia with a little of bread soaked in wine of millegrains or of simple oxymel scalded; and extract to l u of the blood in three times or four.
And if it is cold constitution, then pregna before the fleubotomia pa soaked in essence of myrrh or in essence of honey flavored with spices as well as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in essence aromatized and much odorous.
And if happens syncope because of the fleubotomia, and is cause of it issuance of much blood, then cover that you pregna in drink water of meat and essence much odorous subtle; and use of aromaticity with algualea, and be liniment the their feet with that.
And use of the other causes that have been said in the division in the chapter of syncope by evacuation.
And he who wants to even the his arm and dissolve the his blood according to time, cover to him of which the fleubotomia is for much evacuation, and the virtue of him is frail, that evacuate the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
May who wants to even the his arm, and give it the his blood according to the second time, and the his body is strong, then do that about seven hours or nine of the first fleubotomia.
May who wants to throw the blood of the his body to the contrary of the part to which declines, cover that it be evened in the second day or the third.
May that body in which is much blood already scalded and is acute and makes happen fever, cover that it be given of it blood in one time and be of it thrown a great quantity and be amplified the aperture until it happens syncope, because you will have conserved all the conditions of fleubotomia; and that you place your hand on the wrist of it because of the body of the blood, so that it does not become death in place of syncope, because many times it happens that when the fleubotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not cover when you want to untie the arm and evacuate the blood second time, as already be closed the orifice of the vein and be done difficult issuance of the blood, that you press over that with vehemence and curved be extended lightly, because that is too bad.
Have that let it issue until it be fleubotomat secondament; or remove that with the acuteness of the fleubotomia that is coagulated of the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place over that of tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress that with compression lighter until the blood be forth issued.
And if the vein is suppurating, then leave that one and do not touch it until the abscess is settled.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate blood secondarily, and there is no excuse, then you bleed that one in that location or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "artery of the arm" is flebotomized in the place of the cephalic or basilica, when they are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient inserts their hand in warm water until the phlebotomy site reddens and the vein appears manifestly.
And then tie it above that ligament with a tight bandage; and phlebotomize according to the small transverse, not longitudinally nor according to the length.
And be the incision wide and be your phlebotomy with the one that you phlebotomize that one on the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you repeat the hand in the warm water and leave the blood to run in the water until you achieve your necessity.
But if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the repetition of the hand in the warm water, and the mesh is placed the body of the blood in warm water in time of winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all the others, because it has no pulsating vein, nor nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein of the right hand is congruent to the diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that you tie the hand with a bandage or with your hand, because you have placed it in warm water, until the vein is inflamed and is well demonstrated to the sight; and then phlebotomize that transversely; and if you incised that of all no you will not see it in red.
And conserve that you do not finish your hand with the phlebotomy, because from there the nerves of the fingers are naked of flesh.
And then repeat the hand in the warm water and let the blood run in it, because if you do not repeat it in the warm water, the blood is coagulated in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited from flowing.
And as it is extracted the blood according to the quantity of necessity, then you place on the vein oil and salt, so that it not be coagulated tightly; and similarly cover that you do in all straight vein.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of that of the left hand, is that it is congruent to the diseases of the spleen.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of it as you have done in the other.
And the benefit of the saphenous vein of the phlebotomy is to the diseases that are in the part below the body, as are diseases of the womb, and to the retention of menstruation, and to the diseases of the lungs and ulcers of thighs and of old wounds, and to their likeness of the diseases.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient inserts their foot in warm water and makes friction on it until the veins appear well; and lie on the joint of the foot with a band; and the place of the vein the heel appears and from that it is branched in the surface of the foot many ramps.
And therefore phlebotomize the widest branch or below the heel as the addition of it, because it is better and safer.
And if you phlebotomize that one on the surface of the foot, then you guard yourself from the nerves that are below that on the surface of the foot, and place your phlebotomy with the one that you phlebotomize by the transverse, as if you wanted to incise it.
And be the phlebotomy vital.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited; then you repeat the foot of it in the warm water and let the blood run in it until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then repeat with the phlebotomy in a little, because the place is safe; and do not fear of it malice, but that you guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do of the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
And of the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is below the heel of the left side.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of it is to pain of the hip when it is by blood clot.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient enters in bath, and fastens and tightens the skin of it from the side of the wide below the heel under four fingers with a long thin bandage, so that it appears not by it.
And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize it according to each engine that is to you possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise it by incision or cut it by section, because the place of it is safe.
And it is in many men well-known; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then phlebotomize some branch of it, and it is that which appears in the back of the foot opposite the auricular and the annular.
And guard yourself of the nerves, and make run the quantity of blood that you want.
And then loosen the stricture and place over the area of the phlebotomy cut and tighten the area, slightly it is healed.
Of suction and of the qualities of using those.
Suctions are of horns, or of glass, or of wood.
And suction is made in two ways: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is suction without scarification.
And this suction that is without scarification is in two ways, whether it is with fire or without fire.
And to the suctions that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are fourteen places of the body, of which one in which suctions are placed is the occiput, and it is the back part of the head; and the middle place of the two parts of the neck together; and suction of the chin below the jaw below the mouth; and suction of the two shoulder blades; and suction of the hypochondrium, and it is above the end of the rib; and suction of the two armpits; and suction of the two groins.
And suction does not extract the blood but of the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not catch the virtue through those, as it is caught by phlebotomy; nor is it advisable that suction be made with fire or without fire in any illness caused by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity provokes suction for illness or for continuation, administer it at every hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and in any time it may be.
And therefore when it happens in any cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command suction to be made more than it has passed from the day two or three hours.
And the benefit of suction of the neck is that when it confers the gravity in the head and ad that which is poured into the eyes; but it is advisable that that be near evacuation of the whole body.
And this suction is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
And it is not light that use of it that one who is of cold complexion, or in which is catarrh, for it gives to that great harm.
And for that reason it is not advisable that use of it the old, and in the heads of which are cold illnesses.
But to that one who over that it is continuing over it is made oblivion; and for that reason it is advisable that you command the suction-maker that pause his hand a little with the suction to the parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But suction of the armpit is in the place of phlebotomy of the vena fusca and of the basilica: and for that reason it confers to asthma, and to the constriction of the ale and to the scissura of the sturment of ale, and to cough, and to repletion.
And it is advisable that the armpit suction be peeled a little, for if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the suction of the forehead confers to the pains accident in the head and to ophthalmia, and migraine, and pre-focus, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And it is advisable that you command the suction-maker that he not press his hand with scarification for that he not pierce the artery and that there occur fluxes of blood.
And suction below the chin confers to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gums, and semblance to those of the illnesses that are in the mouth, and stand in the place of phlebotomy of aliheric that is in the two lips.
But the suction that is made over the two shoulder blades confers to caphatan, which is made by repletion of heat.
And the suction of the two armpit parts confers benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, so it is of the basilica, fusca and cephalic, for that one attracts the blood of all those veins more numerous that are in the flesh, and those veins smaller of the other veins more gross as it may reach the attraction to the three veins.
And command the suction-maker that too much he does not proceed in scarification, for the place is denuded of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a suction with which is suctioned over the buttocks and confers to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the ulcers below.
And tell the ventilator to make a large ventilation, and that it be of fire, because the place needs a strong incision; and very light and subtle ventilations should be made and it should be scarified with a scarification.
But smaller ventilations on the legs are made with less manifestation, because they draw the blood of the whole body, and they are similar to old pains of the lungs and the womb, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and they are similar to bothor and ademil; and they are in place of fleubotomia of two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and of two cavilhas.
But many weaken the whole body and cause syncope in many men.
And of the ventilations alahorcoben the judgment is proper to the judgment to the ventilations of two legs.
And the quality of the position of the ventilations is that you pause the ventilation at the beginning and suck it with a temperate suction, and do not prolong the position of the ventilations, but pause them lightly, and move them carefully, and that the humors come to the place by equal arrival. And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the place already red and inflate and that the color of the blood appears.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and then consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who has tender flesh of rare pores, you should scarify him once and no more, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the ventilator to amplify the scarification and proceed a little, and temper the suction with facility.
And if in the blood there is thickness, then you should scarify twice, because in the first scarification the way of subtilization to the blood and its liquidity is opened. But in the second to the scrutiny acquired of the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then the third scarification should be made so that it can achieve the last.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little, one scarification is enough for us.
And if we want the extraction of much blood, we scarify with many scarifications; and if we knew that the blood is thick, then we should scarify with a pre-determined scarification.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the cut only.
And if that one whose cut is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, it is necessary that the places of the ventilations be anointed more gently, more open, more resolved; if it is in summer, as is oil of aloes or oil of violets, or oil of two almonds, or oil of quince; and if it is in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of sanc, and to those similar.
And if the superfluity is thick, fried, then the oil should be of amaranth, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloes, or oil of aneti, and to those similar.
But if the ventilator is of wide pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and it should be given to these the places of the ventilations of their vicinity the ventilation should be washed with waters or with cold water of solatrum, or with water of quince, or with water of bordolaguas, and similar to those.
And that one whose blood is of much humidity, washes his ventilations with strong wine, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar to those.
And of that one whose superfluities are thick, washes his ventilations with old wine, or with water of sansuc, which is majorana, or of decoction of aneti, or of chamomile, and to those similar.
And that the ventilation should be guarded before bathing; bathing should be administered near the bath for an hour or two, and that sleep near the ventilation.
What is necessary for the ventilator to be regulated before phlebotomy.
You should consider at the beginning: then if the ventilator or the one who is to be fleubotomized is choleric and windy, and has blood acute and inflammation, then it is necessary to precede with cooling causes, such as vinegar, endive, wine, lettuce, and secanabin, and julep, and similar to those.
And pause their foods as much as possible, and birds' meats, and foods seasoned with acids, and similar to them.
And of that one whose complexion is cold, it is necessary to precede with drinking syrup of almiva, or syrup of alsecanabin of seeds, and sumac, and wine very fragrant between old and new; and that he should be commanded to use little drinking and eating, and pause his foods as much as possible and canary and sparrow and small birds and doves.
And that on the day of ventilation and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the food.
And that on certain hours to some men, tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, that is muscada, or alcelita should be given before ventilation or phlebotomy or near, so that the principal members be comforted and the blood be subtiliated; and that they should not take that scalfatz.
But the wounds that are incisions should be incisions that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the part of the groin, because these members do not suffer incisions on themselves.
And it is not desired for those (wounds) but traction of blood from the limb, just as you place a suction cup on the nipple in the illness of blood flow from the nose; and use it so that the cold suction, hidden from the limb, is dissolved, just as you place it on the belly and the navel; because it thins the limb and warms it and removes the pain because it resolves the suction.
And it is already placed on the boils when they occur in their inflammation or pimple, because by virtue of the strong traction, the pus is drawn out and eradicates the pimple from its place.
And similarly it does when it is placed on the liver and spleen, suction is applied in those enclosed places.
And these incisions are administered with suction alone; and sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of tepid water in the illnesses of the spleen.
And this is because the incision should be filled and be larger, so it is tepid water alone or water in which herbs have been boiled to the appropriate water.
Form of incision administered with fire: its width is two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon is the majority of a palm; and it is in the middle of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the majority of it, the track is small according to the quantity that enters into it a needle.
It should be made of a  thick, round, lion-shaped, smooth and  polished piece so that it does not damage the limb with its position on it.
And in the middle of it, a transverse bar of iron or steel is placed, on which a candle is placed with the fire.
And already this incision is larger than the one we have recounted; and the few (incisions) are less than that according to the illnesses and the state of him who uses it.
And the incisions of the infants and emaciated are others than the incisions of the young and of strong bodies.
And the quality of placing this incision with fire on the limb is that it extends the fire with firewood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and place it on the middle of the transverse bar in the middle place of the incision, so that the fire is ignited around the part below so that it does not burn the body of the patient.
And then it is placed on the limb of the patient, and the finger is on the track that we have said, and when we have the incisions and we do not indicate that we show the finger and that it escapes the vapor on that track, then the incision is dissolved immediately.
And then prop the fire according to its manner, and repeat that if it is indicated by that.
But in the incision that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse bar nor track, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb alone.
And this is the form of it: And this incision as much as it is larger, it is better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in all members but in the members in which it is not possible to place incisions, because of the smallness of those, such as the ear and gums and similar to them; or in a member devoid of flesh, such as the finger and nose and their similar.
And the quality of using those that have been found leeches that are in the waters of the muddy pools.
And then they are laid the day and night in muddy water until they are famished, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then it is evacuated the body at the beginning with phlebotomy and with incisions; and then it is cooled the limb of the patient until it reddens; and then they are placed on it.
And as they are filled and case.
And if it is possible suction of the place with an incision, it is more helpful.
And if not, then wash the place with vinegar and then with a lot of water; and be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the flow of blood is prolonged after the placement of the leeches, and this is the result, then you put a cloth of linen in cold water, and place that on top until the bleeding is stopped.
And if the blood is multiplied, then pulverize on it vitriol trias, or  galls and similar to those of the causes stiptics, until the blood is stopped; or they are placed on the place the halves of boiled beans, and they are laid until the beans adhere to the place, and the blood is stopped.
And cover, if necessary, repetition of leeches, when it is possible to change those.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then the place is rubbed with recent blood or a needle is left in the places until blood escapes; and then they are placed, because those when they feel some blood immediately adhere.
And when you want them to relax, sprinkle a little crushed aloe, or salt, or ash, on those, and then cover them.
Thus begins the chapter of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and the restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in the bones.
Oh, son, know that these foolish doctors and the vulgar boast of this chapter, and those who never regard the books of the Ancients nor read even a letter from them.
And for this reason it has happened that this manner of the learned in our land is deprived; and you must not forget this at any time, well, and I have not adopted this that I teach, but for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study over the understanding of those, until I extracted the science from those.
And then I turned to experiment and study in the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my best experiment has been passed; because I have now abridged it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of elongation; and I have abridged it in the end of abridgment; and I have shown it in the end of declaration; and I have formed many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as it has been done by addition of declaration, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summaries and collections from the essence of bone fractures, from those whose preface is necessary before we begin the remembrance of broken and various members, each and every one. Therefore, I say that in the preface of this chapter, we should speak of the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters, whose understanding at the beginning is forced upon the artificers, and they stand upon the truth of those; so it is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art other than yourselves.
And therefore I say that when you happen upon a fracture or dislocation or sprain or wound, then you must, at the beginning, apply yourself to phlebotomy or to alleviate that, or one and the other, if no cause prohibits, as if due to lack of virtue, or the one to whom you attend is a child, or old in decrepitude, or the time is of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then let him be content in his food of fresh herbs and of birds' meat and of crabs; and forbid him thick meats and fill him with foods and all foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of a cauterized abscess, and if you fear effusion of matter to the limb.
And then return the patient to his first regimen, to which he is accustomed.
And therefore, as the broken bone begins to be restored, then the patient must be fed with nutritious foods of nourishment, thick and heavy in which there is viscosity, as such foods made of boiled wheat with water, and rice, and capons, and fish, and bellies of cows, and eggs, and fresh poultry, and thick meat and similar to those, and with this regimen is made coagulation of fracture more lightly and better.
And know that the bones that are broken in men who are in the first childhood and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their limbs.
However, nature adjusts and unites on the broken bone from every part any cause seeming to glut in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it until it is simultaneously conglutinated and tied together, until they come to the end of fortitude and firmness, as fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the patient's foods, foods in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I come with remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its distinct chapter from the other.
Many varieties of fracture within itself. And they are diversified the species of fracture of the bone in themselves; for there is an arched fracture, another that happens in stars; and sometimes it is made a fracture according to the length of the bone: and in the fractures of the saddle and stars and additions proceeding and not proceeding, as it is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plaque and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And to every species is engendered or torment proper in the restoration of it according to that which will come remembrance of it distinct in its places.
Many signs of fracture of the bone. And by this is known the fracture of the bone: it is the twisting of it, and from that prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and so of it when you compress it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no apparent twisting in the place, nor is it felt when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
However, it is possible that there is a small twisting or fissure, so that you must feel it with your hand and with compression of the whole; however, place upon it of the medicines of which recollection is made at this moment, the one that convenes to the place; and then apply a stricture subtly.
And know that the place when it is arched and not split in two or otherwise that does not happen in it, such as it is remaugued all of its part, then you must begin from your hour to the rectification of it, however, that it happens after a cautery abscess.
And if it happens abscess cautery, then leave it for some days until the abscess ceases; and then bandage it according to whichever manner that you can of lightness and of ingenuity.
And know that the restoration of it and the sharpening of it is less severe than of the bone in which such a sathagie has happened.
And then strengthen it according to that which will come the recollection of it.
But if in the bone there are satagias, then it is necessary extension of this broken limb of two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And be the position with which you pause the limb, the one that enguals according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended of the broken limb, then you must perforate that you make return those additions with ingenuity and according to whichever manner that you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your force that it does not happen upon the patient by your operation pain nor lesion; and perforate yourself according to your power that you apply one bone with the other its companion according to their best forms.
And you must in that hour profitably touch with your hand that, and if you see here any other cause, rectify that and bandage it for the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, as such as foolish doctors do who, with movements, often cause abscess cautery by their operation, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen by the operation of their movements.
And the quality of the stricture of the tranquil limb is that which I recommend; for that you know that the broken limbs are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small as the arm and the hand and the foot and similar to those, then you must the envelopment be of very fine cloth.
But those that are gross as the thigh or the leg, then you must in those be envelopment broad and hard, for the broad liament connects the great limb and strengthens that of all parts with equal stricture, in such a way that in it no macula enters.
And then, as you begin, your evacuation of equacio, pause liament convenient to this, upon the place of that fracture with three envelopment or four according to that the member merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the liament.
And then see to that at the part more sovereign of the place of the fracture, and strengthen less so that you do not focus your stricture with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture. And then lengthen yourself with envelopment of the place of the fracture a little, and mollify the stricture little by little, until you take of the place a great part.
And then take another bandage and envelop that other time over the broken place with envelopment, and then see to the envelopment at the part farther from the fracture; and be your operation in the stricture of the envelopment and in the mollification of that according to that we have said in the first envelopment below.
And then pause between the envelopment of stopa lion or cloth with which is equalized the twisting of the fracture, if in it is twisting; and if not, do not pause in it any cause.
And then pause over it another bandage, and then bandage over these envelopment stars decently made as soon as, if in the place there is no inflammation or abscess caut, and then pause over it that which seizes the abscess and that oste the inflammation; and leave that for some days; and then you strengthen over it the stars.
And the stakes should be of the majority of cane, well-formed; or of pine wood; or of palm branches; and the width of each stake should be according to this form and this figure:
However, it is necessary that the stake placed upon that fracture be thicker and a little larger than the others, and the length of the stake according to what is seen in the limb in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen over the stakes with another bandage according to your first stricture; and then tie it underneath decently according to what we have said of stricture, and it is that it be the stricture according to the place of the fracture more, and as much as the fracture is elongated, the less the stricture.
And it is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and subtlety, and be of silk; and if the threads are coarse, as I have seen in the operation of some fools placing their threads of cords of hemp, and it is a great error, when the stricture is outside equality.
And excessively fine threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to make a stricture with those that you want, and it is necessary that between stake and stake there be at least one finger's width.
And if the patient is said to be in pain at the extremities of the stakes near the stricture in those places, then place some wool or carded wool between them so that it does not cause him injury.
Sometimes a fracture is with a plague, and accidents happen in the bone, and I will come with a remedy in that in the chapter according to singularity.
And know that not all broken limbs are straightened with stakes on the first day; the reason is that the limb, when it is large, should not be placed upon them stakes but rather about five days or seven or more, according to your certainty of the advent of a boil caut.
And this is the manner of the plasters with which the Ancients restored, the ones which were placed upon fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manner of plastering as a bruised restoration of fracture, convenient to many complications and mostly to women and children, because it is of that upon which no heat nor cold comes: and it is that you take of flour powder, and it is the medulla of the flour that remains from the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
And mix that as it is, unless that you sift that with album of egg, and place the confection of it not thick nor subtle; and then use of that.
Another way to plaster a fracture, dislocation, and sprain: Take asafoetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the root of wild millet, of all ana drac. x; of myrrh and aloes ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; all be ground and sifted and mixed with alichil water or album of hen if the patient's complexion is pale; and then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and confers on many men.
Another way to plaster which comforts a fracture and sprain: Take migrach and powdered white althea ana drac. x; of myrrh and aloes ana drac v; of acacia drac. vi; of Armenian bol drac. .xx.
All should be triturated in a mortar with much contrition, and sifted, and be conficed with water or egg album and be administered.
Manner of plaster to joints and separated bones of those places, and if pain occurs in those and fissures and fractures: take wool suet and be submerged in strong wine and cooked oil and be placed upon the place.
More in this plaster there is not virtue of restoration, of boil caut and expelling pains properly.
Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and poppy leaves wild; contereys all and make a plaster of them.
Manner of plaster abbreviated administered deserves the restoration of fracture of bones and when you want resolution of the remaining boil: recipe roots of altea, of chamomile and violet flowers, of ers flour, of all ana part .i.; Be all triturated and conficed with wine, if the limb is not scalded.
But if it is scalded, then mix that with moist coriander water or water and use of it.
Another manner of plaster more strong in resolution than this first, when accidents happen hard boil deserves the restoration of the limb: recipe of roots of altea and of seed of lily, and of balast, and melilot, majorana, violet flowers, of chamomile, of all ana part i engual; all should be triturated and conficed with water of sause or with sweet water or with wine, all that according to the quality of the limb and the repose of the color of it.
But Ipocras does not dissect in his book that it be placed upon the broken limb for the restoration of it unless cerot made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommends that it be medium between thickness and subtlety.
It has been seen in Gaul that when a broken limb is placed upon it during its restoration, and the causes are in which there is dryness with a little heat, such as myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
A manner of plaster that comforts lesions and pain: take flour, of sesames, of human hair cut or feathers of birds, and of alum, and salt, all divided equally; be ground and sifted and be cooked, and make a plaster.
But the quantity according to which the wound remains and it is untied, is that you consider if it does not happen pain nor swelling nor the bone is broken it is not bad of its place, then you do not untie for many days. And if there happens to the place violent pain or swelling or inflammation, then you tie or untie that at the hour, and remove the plaster from it.
And take cloth of linen and sea sponge, damp, and submerge it in tepid water, and with that wash the place until that swelling and pain is calmed; and then allow the limb to rest for an hour; and then place upon it wool cloth submerged in vinegar and oil or olive oil, and tie it over it for a night until you are sure of a cautery abscess, and that it rests the inflammation of the limb, and that the pain of it is removed.
And then repeat that constriction subtle and small plaster and do not strengthen it by your first constriction, and more subtle with that until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and the boil and the pain and the swelling and all the accidents are already removed from all, and indigested of plaster and constriction, then you repeat that as you have done at the beginning equally.
And if there happens to the limb none of the causes that we have said, then you do not untie that but rather three days or four or five or seven. And some times all that is left for twenty days according to how it appears to you by the unbinding of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh upon it.
And then adjust in the constriction more than in your first constriction all, and adjust in the thickening of the food of the patient, according to how it is preceded the remembrance of it.
But if you see the place of the fracture already dry and extend more than it should, then you know that the nourishment is prohibited to arrive to that; and therefore immerse that with tepid water every time that you untie it; and that it is in all three days; and alleviate the constriction a little, and for this operation, it runs to the limb the nourishment, and it is healed lightly.
But that which do the foolish restorers of the fracture of the limb another time when it is not restored at the beginning, according to how it should, and it is restored according to tortuosity, is error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if it were straighter that which enlarged the Ancients in their books and they were armed with that done.
And I have not seen to any of theirs that do that, for it is more reasonable that it does not do that.
Second Chapter: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for of fractures some is made by percussion of a blow, and the percussion obstructs all the bone within the skull, the which is left the bone, as if it were done in the shaft, and for that reason this species is called ascial; or the blow incides some part of the bone, and incides the flesh of it and does not pass the incision within the rear of it; and this species of fracture is called levitation absolute.
And the plague of these two fractures or is great or little, and of fracture that is contortion or attrition; and cause of it is percussion with a pole or a fall upon a stone, and their similar things.
And this fracture or is penetrating that already approaches the panniculus which is left the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures or is great or little.
And of fracture it is that it is woven in the bone, in the subtlety of the hair small, and for that reason this species is called capillary fracture.
And it is fracture that is made either by a fall or by percussion of a stone and its similar things, that makes enter some lamina of the bone to the parts within, and it is made in the place concavity as it happens to the payroles of eram when it happens to their percussion and it is a part of their entrance to the parts within.
And most of all it is done that in the bodies of bones humid, as if it were heads of infants.
And to all these species fractures sagacious, they are heavy as if stars separated. And I will come with remembrance of all that in its place.
And we shall know all these species of fracture by detection upon those and by inquiry of them with tentacles and ostentation of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary species is known because it is discovered upon the bone, and it is absolved, and lined upon it with a tentacle, for the fracture appears black.
In the cure of fractures, consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest signification over pain, as vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and swelling of the joints and roar of those, and resemblances to their accidents in the major dispositions, adopt not the cure.
And if you see accidents non-current, you hope for health, then you begin the cure of it.
The reason is that if it has come to you the afflicted at the beginning as it is afflicted and this is in the days of winter, then you must study in the position of the bone before the fourteenth day according to every disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you must set the bone before the seventh day,  because that which is left of the bone be corrupted by the pannicol, and that the accidents that we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the pannicol covering the brain, and it is in small pieces and attrition, then you must insert the fractured part and rub it, according to that I will tell you.
And it is that you raise the head of the afflicted patient, and uncover over the bone according to custom and manner as much as possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be light on the patient.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, blood flows or abscess caut, then you oppose it with what you have, and it is that you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and oil rubbed, and make the patient rest until the abscess is settled, and you are sure of blood flow; and then you begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
And the one way is that you insert the bone with a straight incisor, and this is the shape of it: And then administer another incisor this, a little wider than that; and this is the shape of it:
And then administer more the incisor wider than the second.
And you must have you a number of various incisors, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are at the end of the sharpness of their extremities, and they are of Indian iron or lead.
And use them with facility in percussion on the incisor so that it does not break the head and damage it.
And if the bone is strong, hard, then you must pierce in the circuit of it before you administer the incisors with the drills, which are called non-profund drills.
And they are not called thus but because those do not pause the term of the bone of the test to that which is near it, because the drill has a round extremity or margin on that which is left the head of it acute seeming to margin or to small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these drills a great number of which as many as convenient to the thickness of each bone,  so that it be to you present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which is acute, the quantity in length and brevity be according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of drills: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the drill on the bone and revolve that with your hands until you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then change the drill to another location, and pause that which is between all trace the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around that.
And then insert with incisors that which is between each tract of the bone, and make that as subtle as you can on that in the end of lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for some instruments which you will have prepared for that, as such as tongs and subtle forceps.
And you must guard with all caution that the incisor does not touch any cause of the ciph.
And therefore, as you will have circuited the bone perforating, and if it is continued with it, and you will have extracted that, you must raise and smooth that in the roughness of it of that which is in the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but however, you must have it thinner and more subtle than the others incisors.
And if there remain any pieces of the small bones and splinters, then take that with facility with that which you must of the instruments; and then take care of the wound with liniments and ointments of which we have said.
And the other way of operation is lighter, farther from pain, which says Gualia and the lauzec for great lausor; and this is the sermon of it: Necessary is to you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone of the place in which is the fracture most vehement and most manifest, until when you will have discovered that part and you will have placed below it the extremity of this incisor lent and agile of which this is the form:
And it is that the lenticular part is leon and you do not insert any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides forward in length, as you see; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the ciph with the face of it incident acute in the bone.
And then strike with a small mallet on the incision of one side, while cutting all the bones with ease, as it is revolved, and if you are sure that the panniculus does not occur in it, any accident that you fear in any way, and if the physician were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
Now if there is any cause annexed to the bone of the panniculus in some places of the bone, cut it from it with the tip of the lenticular incision, and deliver it with ease, because it is delivered from its damage and its pain.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is separated or taken from the bone is the fascia of it, and remains in it roughness and subtle satagias, then when you remove that roughness and eradicate those satagias with subtle razors, of which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it is possible for you to administer in every place the most convenient of them and the most right of them according to what in which you are engaged in your operation that broken bone and its figure.
And when you administer in your ratio with which razor you cut the bone at the beginning the most blunt of those razors, and then use it closer to the most subtle of it, and do not cease doing so according to continuity until you arrive at administering the most fine and the most subtle of all of them.
But in each of the other fractures, petited capillaries and subtle fractures, when you administer care according to what you perceive for the rectification of it.
And it is the cause that it is not to be trusted on all those who have studied in that art. And stand on what we have written has shown in great fractures.
And if the panniculus is cut when you eradicate the bones, then when you take a cloth of it according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first cloth and do this as lightly as you can, so that you do not weigh the cicatrix; and then administer over that ligament late, and do not strain it except for the quantity that the wound has alone.
And leave it with this care for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess caut; and then untie it and then administer medicines with which is superfluous dryness, as well as roots of linen and flour of herbs, and powder of incense and of aristolochia, and similar to those.
And it is that you make of these medicines powder that be pulverized over the wound, as well as they are dried; and universally, administer in it all medicine of property of which it is that it abstergesca and not bite.
And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and be not in it the dirt of rinsing nor other; nor let you add virulence in it; for when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts it and you may it, and it accides upon the patient, then that evil malice.
And it accides in the cicatrix of the head, as from it is modified the bone and most when it is lessened the cure of it, and it is blackness on the surface of it; and therefore consider then if it accides to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious its whole adopted.
And if it does not accides blackness but from the medicine that is placed upon it, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then when you take of honey one part and of rose oil parts .iii., and in those liniments a cloth, and then place it upon the cicatrix; and then cure it with the species of cure that convenes until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken but two parts together, or one of those some times, for in it you have two bones, for the part left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and it does not accides to it but attrition and tortuosity and sinuosity.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then when you introduce the said small one into its nose, and that you equalize that fracture from within with your said finger, and with the said push outside, until the nose returns according to its natural figure. And be done that by you with ease, and guard yourself that no cause by that your operation upon the patient pain.
And if the fracture is in the most sovereign part of the nose, and the said one does not reach to it, then when it is equalized with the extremity of the ray in which it is little thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the semblance of that.
And take care of you in the restoration of it in the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; and if not, then about the seventh or tenth of the repose of the abscess caut.
And then introduce into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth of it, if the fracture is in one part, or put two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and be in the splint thickness of such quantity that it fills the track of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the bandages should be soaked in water, and changed every day, but I have not seen it; rather, it is better that the wound be covered with a dressing of fresh egg white with powder of ginger; and then let the bandage remain until the bone is set and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes, in place of a bandage, it is inserted into the nose, a piece of cloth wrapped in the skin of a lion; and this is done when the fracture of the nose is very severe and the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
And for this cause it is not necessary for you; and if you want, do this, and if you want, do bandages.
And if another time, after the cauterization, an abscess occurs, plaster the nose with cerot or with a piece of cloth soaked in strong wine and rose oil, or with diachylon.
But if no abscess occurs after cauterization, then it is necessary to plaster it externally with sesame flour and powdered cinnamon mixed with egg white; and then place a piece of lion's skin over it, and do not touch the nose with any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then it is necessary to cut over them, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for them; and then close the incision, and cure it with what hardens and consolidates, and with suitable plasters.
And if a plague occurs in the nose, then it is necessary to cure it with bandages and administer lead pipes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not accompanied by a plague, it is necessary to observe if the fracture is only on the outside, and not broken in two and curved at the parts inside, then its recognition is lighter.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then you introduce your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then introduce the right index finger; and by pushing with that, you bring the inward curvature of the fracture with ease to the outside parts, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; and in this way, you bring them together.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer extension of two parts according to rectitude until it is possible the equation of it.
And if there occurs a concussion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those of which you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or lead; and then place a piece of cerot over the broken jaw, and place a double cloth over it, and place a large splint over the cloth, or a piece of sole equal in length to the jaw; and then tie that bandage according to how the ligation of it is prepared and how you deem the application is suitable, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place the food of him soft and lion's broth.
And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in any way, then you take it off and untie it on the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered of it and plaster it with powdered ginger, egg white, or sesame flour, because you will have removed the cerot from it, and place wool over the plaster.
And therefore, as it stands annexed and adjusted that plaster over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, that you do not untie it until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; for many times this fracture is straightened in three weeks.
And if another time an abscess occurs after cauterization, then administer what we have said many times in the sedation of it until it is healed, and that abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a plague, then consider if it is a piece of bone separated or splinters, then you must subtilize that you remove those splinters with what you deem suitable for the removal of them from the instruments.
And if the orifice of the plague is strait, then you enlarge it with the fleubotomist according to the quantity of your need.
And then, when you will have removed those splinters, and of those there is no more to be removed, then you close the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and if not, place over it one of the plasters that you deem suitable for it and harden it, until it is healed.
Chapter V.
Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Many times the clavicle is broken at the part in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
For it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts, one of which does not occur splinters; and it is easy to restore it; or it is so that it occurs splinters in it, and it is difficult to restore it; or it is so that the fracture is with a plague.
And the operation in that, when the fracture is with a plague, is that you make two ministers present, so that one holds the adjutori and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck with that part.
And then, with your hands, you must gently mold the fracture into the shape it should be according to the bone, so that there is little eminence or concavity in it.
And if you need more extension, then you must place a pad of cloth or wool under the patient's buttocks, and its size should be according to your need; and extend and elevate the shoulder and bind the pad with your hand while you mold the fracture according to the bone.
And if you cannot pull the shoulder extremity outwards, because it has reached the chest, then you must have the patient lie on their neck, and place a cushion of medium size on the muscle of their chest.
And the minister presses the muscle of their chest towards the buttocks while the bone of the shoulder is elevated as it is in its place, and then you correct the fracture and mold it with your hands.
But if you feel pains in the shoulder and they are bad, then you must press on it and extract those pains with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you must make an incision of it with one of the scissors which you have prepared for this purpose, because you had placed under the shoulder the instrument that serves for the chisels; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the shape:
And it is similar to a chisel of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to your need of it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible for you in the operation; that it have two extremities as if it were twice, and one extremity be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the plaque which you have incised when you have extracted the pain from the bone is wide, and there is certainty of a pus abscess, then you must adjust the two lips of the plaque with suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear a pus abscess, then you must cover the plaque with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the fissure of the plaque.
And if an abscess occurs, then you must put a cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it on top of it.
And all, that the tablet is not harmful above the broken bone; and so that you see the patient every day, that when the ligament is softened or you see the tablet already being remade, then you correct that and strengthen the bandage.
And then place the sleep of the patient on their neck, and place under their buttocks a small cushion at night; so that with this, the supporter of him is raised from the side of him, and therefore the fracture of the shoulder is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm of him is tied to the neck of him.
And do not untie the bandage unless you see in the place pus or an abscess, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to that, and adjust in the stricture and restore that and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the shoulder is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in less time than that.
Chapter VI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula tart is broken in the side of it and not broken from it but its edges.
And therefore when it is broken the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and it is not known except by touch, then according to what is the figure of the fracture forces you the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every manner of ingenuity which is to you possible.
And then place on the place powder of wheat with egg white and linen cloth; and then place a doubled powder of cloth; and then place on it a tablet of fine wood according to the quantity of the spatula whole or at most a little.
But if below the tablet is concave in some of the places of the spatula, then you must mold that concavity with linen cloth, and then raise the tablet according to equality.
And then strengthen above with a long humemate with decent constriction and firmness of the tablet so that it is not remade from its place.
And consider the ligament every day; and every time it is softened, tie it another time and tighten it, and put the splint back if it is displaced from its place.
And lay the patient on his back.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And therefore when this number is complete, then you dissolve the ligament, and that you know for sure that that is of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone pes and put behind the codena, then you split it over it, and take it out, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio of apostema caut if it happens here.
Chapter VII.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle part of it and that is worse; but the extremities of it must be that they are cicaturized and comminuted.
And of the accidents of it when it is broken in the middle of it is that it declines to the parts of it and happens to it great pain, and difficulty in the hale, and cough, and fort leu and vomits blood; and it is declared in it cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that it be supinated the patient on his back, and place between the spaces of it a cushion; and then press to the muscles of it, and adjust the bones of it with the hands of two sides, and subtilia te in the operation of it and in the equation according to all manner that is to this possible and that convenes to this, until that returns the figure of the bone according to that cove.
And then place on it plaster and lint and place above the splint of table subtle of gauze or of caligi and of their resemblances in levitat, because that you envelopes that in cloth; and then subtilia te in lian that over the broken bone that no be maugut; and vay am liadura according to retonditat to the back sometimes, and tighten that with strictura decent; and then consider the liadura in every hour, and when it is softened tighten that.
And if necessity provokes the desliament of that you must corrosivity or pruziment, or pain, or apostema that happens in the place, then you coyta and untie that and eradicate the plaster and rectify that which happens by that with manner of curacio of it; and then reduceys the plaster, if times to that the face; and adjust to it strictura until that it be sanat.
Chapter VIII.
Of the restoration of the back when it is broken.
Know that fracture of the back does not catch but in places gross that siegon the back; and of the extremities of them of the part front does not happen to those contricio but because that they are cartilaginous. And cognicio of it is not hidden to the feeling ofves the inquiry of it am les ditz.
And the restoration sia as that enguales the fracture am les ditz according to the manner possible, until that it be engulhat according to that cove, and then plaster and tighten the broken bone am stela, si indigeys of that.
And if the fracture of the back is declining to the parts of it, then happens to the patient pain vehement and punctura, as punctura that happens to that one that has pleureci, and because that the bones put the velament; and happens to it difficulty of hanelit, and cough, and vomit of mot sanc; and this is of difficult curacio.
And already the Antixs so engeniatz in that with motz engientz.
And of lor so that diso: cove that pauses viandas del malaute that engendro imflacio and ventositat, for that the belly sia imflat and sia extendut, and the fracture sia impellida to the parts offora.
But nos avoreyssem aquo for that it no sia causa leugiera to generate apostema caut, si no accideys; and if already accideys, then helps ad aquo.
And diyssero alcus of lor that it sia pausada desus ventoza and then that sucque am fortitut; and es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut that the ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.
And diyssero alcus of lor: cove that the loc sia cubert am lana that ja es submersa in oli caut, and sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro that sia umplida, that sia the liadura engual when envolopas that segon retonditat; and aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi of vianda and of medicina.
And if cause vehement constrenh the malaute the qual no sufferta, and the bones punh the velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre the malaute, then cove that fendam sobre the loc, descubram de la costa trencada, and aprop pausem desobre that instrument that conserve the ciphac, the rememoracio of the qual es precedida, and that inscidam the os am facilitat, and extraguam that.
And aprop that we adjust the doas labias of the plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, and curem that am emplastres entro that it sia sanada.
And if an abscess occurs, then cover it and put powder in rose oil and place it on the area, and let the patient be cured with what covers the abscess.
And let him be laid back on the mat on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the vertebra of the back and neck.
Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and just as much in their articulation, and similarly in the vertebrae of the back. And if this happens to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, consider this: if sometimes his hands are already softened and stunned and dead and cannot move them or extend them or tighten them, and when you constrict them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, he feels no pain, then you know that it is not healing, and in the worst of dispositions it is mortal.
And if he moves them and feels pain from constriction with the fingers and puncture, then you know that the marrow of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with healing.
And if you see in the vertebrae of the neck the appearance of this and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider his feet.
Then if you see that they are already softened, it happens to those who are affected in the hands, and when you put your hand on his back, there is a feeling of wind and expulsion of his will, and sometimes he is laid back on his back and wants to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not work on his cure.
But if you do not see any cause of this, the cause is better and less severe.
And the cure of him is that you perforate the seat of the abscess with a cautery and place rose oil on the fractured vertebra, or with poultices of herbs. Place that on it several times a day until the abscess is cauterized.
And then place one of the comforting and existing poultices, and strengthen it on that with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and that he does not sleep on the part with which he feels pain until he is healed.
And if it happens that the articulation of the bone is shattered or some cause that is already separated from it, then cover that with a bandage and that you keep that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then treat that with some flesh of the intestines, until it is healed.
But if the back of the bone is broken, and it is the end of the spine, then cover that with a bandage and that you keep that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then treat that with some flesh of the intestines, until it is healed.
And if you feel shattered fragments in it, then cover that, and keep that, and cure the wound with the cure that has preceded until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the restoration of the shoulder.
The bones of the shoulders are often broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is nothing but a communication at the extremities of them and they are incised in the length and incline to the parts around them; and it happens to the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the shoulder is stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it so that it is over the fracture as is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of it, only then do you adjust it as it is apparent to you by equation, adjusting until it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long or that which already inclines to the parts below, then have the patient lie on his belly until it is prepared to you the restoration of that fracture. And then when you have adjusted it, place on it a poultice, and then place on that a bandage of fus or of bandage, and strengthen by constriction over which you do not fear puncture of fracture nor removal of the bandage.
And adjust the concavity with what fills that until that presses the constriction according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
But if an abscess occurs, then you cease from extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is cauterized, and place on it what sits that according to what has preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it as you cover.
And if there happen to be bone fragments or they are comminuted, then you treat them.
Chapter XI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the humerus.
Humerus is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a stick of medium thickness according to this form:
And there are bands at two extremities, and then it is suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a chair; and then throw out his broken arm onto the stick until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place of which is annexed the curvature of the stick.
And then, gently suspend something heavy above it, or extend the minister to the sides; and then, the physician, with his own hands, sets the fracture together, while the fracture returns according to its place.
And the other way is that the patient be laid on his neck and suspend the hand of his neck with a ligament; and then command two ministers that one of them hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the pus below him; and each of them extend to his side.
And if you want the extension to be more strong, then you strengthen over the fracture with a ligament and over that with another ligament, and each of the two ministers extend to his two sides.
And therefore, if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then it should be placed half of the ligament on the  citillic and the other behind the fracture of the joint.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then it should be placed the ligament on that location and on that joint.
Bind that with ease and work, and as soon as it is bound according to its place and applied for good application, then strengthen that if it does not accidentally cause an abscess caut.
But if an abscess caut occurs, then loosen the stricture within the seventh day, and place upon it wool cloth soaked in wine vinegar and rose oil until it rests the abscess, and then you strengthen that.
And the way of strengthening that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm upon that support, and place your hand open upon his muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the support the arm so that the arm be in place of stars, if it does not prohibit anything from the broken bone.
And then use of stars.
And it is that you place upon the fracture that star that is more wide and more strong of the other stars; and place between each star the width of the finger, and let the length of the stars be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers of all part.
And then strengthen over the stars with the stricture which I have said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your stricture over the place of the fracture be more straight. And as much as the fracture is longer, the stricture is smaller.
And therefore, if you see the situation of the stars and the stricture as we have said in the hour in which you restore the limb to its situation, then you do.
And if you fear an abscess caut, then you loosen the stricture and the stars within the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that nothing happens in the place, proximity or inflammation; or it is prohibited the food to arrive at the limb by disposition of superfluity of stricture; and therefore rectify everything according to what we have said.
But if you are over confidence that nothing will happen from that, then do not untie the ligature until after three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on his back, and his hands be on his stomach.
And place upon the support a full cushion of wool binding, and consider in all hours of the night or of the day that the figure of the broken limb be not loosened nor dissolved, or that the ligament be softened, therefore rectify that all with your virtue.
And place the patient's food according to the order which we have previously said, in such a way that the food be subtle at the beginning until it is begun to strengthen; and then it should be thickened for him.
Because of custom of the support and the bed of him is that they be strengthened in forty days; and then it should be loosened and be administered a bath and be medicated with poultices those which rectify that.
And if the fracture is laid raw, then you do not untie from that the ligament and the stars within a day or within two months.
Chapter .xii.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearms; of which one is small, and that is the one that  touches the little finger, and the other is large and is that which is placed below the small finger, from the part further down.
And often the major forearm is broken alone, or the small one, and often they are broken together.
And when the small forearm is broken above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and the healing of it is lighter.
And when the forearm of it below the fracture of it is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse of that is when the two bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone which is broken is the small forearm above, then it is convenient to the physician, it behoves the restoration of it, that place small extension with ease until that be bound.
But if the large forearm is that which is broken, then it should place extension more vehement.
And if the two forearms are together broken, then it should you place the extensure more strong.
And how you support the figure of the hand, you must restore it and the extension of it extended over a cushion, and the wrist of the hand to the upper parts, more than all the others said, and the said auricular more low of the others said, and the patient be centered on a fallen chair.
And there be a cushion in front of him in the height or upright of him, so that the patient does not bend work.
And then the minister extends the arm of the farther part with his hand or ligament, and another minister extends upwards seemingly.
And then the doctor aligns the bones as he reduces that according to the best figure that he can.
And if in the facture of the bones so splints, then you perforate to reduce all pieces in their place with your virtue.
And if there appears in him a separated splint that punishes the bone and is not at your hope in the restoration of him, then you end upon him and hold that according to the manner which we have said above.
But if the fracture is with a plague, you have already made to this chapter singular, and therefore take the cure of that.
And if it happens abscess caut at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with cerot made of rose oil and white wax, and be medium between specificity and subtlety, and strengthen cloth upon that with subtle structure until the abscess is ceded; and then remove the cerot and place plaster prepared of powder of flour with clayre of egg, and then place stars; and be the star which is placed upon that fracture more wide and more strong.
And know that the number of the stars of the arm so six in the major dispositons, or be the fracture in one focus or in two foci together.
And then place your structure upon the place of the fracture most strong and most vehement, and when more it is the stricture to the upper parts of the fracture or to the lower parts of it, place the stricture a little more soft according to that it is preceded the remembrance of it in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are enveloped upon the fracture be soft cloths humid, and not be hard nor rough, and the thread with which it is strengthened be of its proper medium between subtle and gross, as we have recounted.
And consider the limb and the ligament about some days. And if there happens any cause of which rectification is necessary, as you prudently the one which happens to the limb, and then cover that you embroil the limb with warm water until that prudency ceases.
And let the limb not constrained until it rests, and then return the structure.
And if the structure already is softened and the bone already is remaugut and seems to those, then rectify all that with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited to arrive to the limb by superfluity of structure, for then cover that you soften that a little and let it for some days until it runs to that the nourishment, and then strengthen that.
But if to the patient there happens no cause of those that we have said, then cover that it not be dislocated within about xx days or around those.
And then be suspended the hand of the patient by its virtue of movement agitatius, and make that sleep upon its two.
And know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or fort less it is restored in xxviii days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter .xiii.
Of the restoration of fracture of the pinkie of the hand and of the fingers.
Know that to the pinkie of the hand and to the knuckles of the fingers tart it ought fracture, and there happens to them not attrition many times.
And when there happens to the hand fracture or attrition, then cover that the patient follow sitting and before him lies centered according to equality, and then place the hand of him upon that extended.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor aligns those until they are conjoined with good conjunction.
And then cover that you place plaster and estopa, if there happens abscess caut; and then place stars above according to the quantity of the place, and you already have enveloped that in cloth of it.
But if the fracture is in the parts of the fingers of the palm, and then make semblance of sphere of cloth, and command to the patient that strengthens that with his palm fractured; then be strengthened with long cloth.
And be the star of leather with cloth in which it is levitated, so that the leather be applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to that cover.
But if the fracture is to the parts outside, then cover that you place above star and another star of the farther part in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight; and then place the structure, as it is revolved the hand to the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
And if there happens fracture to some of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the finger placed, be aligned according to that cover and then be strengthened with the palm and if it wants, place to it little star straight so that it be elevated the fracture and not be mauguda.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or in the index, or in the ear, or in the ring finger, then it should be bandaged and tied with the same finger that it is; or all should be tied according to continuity, and this is better; or rest on that small splint, as we have said in the hand.
And consider, in your restoration, and about that, the disposition of cautery abscess and oppose — in your operation — with that which covers when it happens any cause of those, according to that is iterated the narration of it.
Chapter XIV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the bone of the thigh.
The bone of the thigh, when it is broken, is felt according to how it is converted to the front and the most sovereign part.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament is left below the fracture, and the patient is prone on their belly and face.
And then the minister extends all the ligament to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is towards the root of the thigh, then the ligament is pulled down to the part of the pelvis, so that the extension comes in its, and the other ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is towards the pelvis, then the ligament is made towards the pelvis, and the extension is to the parts below.
And then the physician joins the bone with both its hands until it is reduced according to the natural likeness and the bone is joined by good connection; then it is covered with plaster and strapping, if it does not happen to the limb abscess. But if it happens to it abscess, then you leave it for some days until the abscess caut is yielded, and then return to your cure.
The strapping of it is done in such a way: that a hard bandage is wrapped over the fracture, and doubled two or three times, and the superfluity of it is removed; and then the leg is wrapped until it reaches the thigh and the root of the thigh.
And introduce a long splint between the thigh and the leg, from the part of the pelvis to the lower parts, and the extremities of the splint come from the most sovereign part of both parts, and then roll over the leg and thigh what superfluity of the bandage.
And then place on the thigh in the place of that fracture splints, and place from those one splint on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the strapping is coagulated.
And then begin with strong strapping of the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as much as you go away with the ligament from the place of the fracture, your strapping is less and lighter and softer.
And then extend the two extremities of the splint to the lower parts until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both extremities of the splints on the other part so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
And then leave the strapping on it, so that it does not happen to the limb corrosion or abscess caut or inflammation and similar to those; and if it happens any cause of those, then count you yourself from it, and rectify what happens all again, according to that we have said many times.
But if in the bone is heavy of the bone that you put, then cover that according to what is possible to you; and if not, then place on it and remove that, and care with that of which is preceded the remembrance until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is tightened with another thing that is adjusted to it splints, as we have said in the adjutori and in the arm.
But however in the restoration of it in such a manner made, do not happen to the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, other than that which is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he limp from the one of which it is always.
And know that the thigh is tightened in 40 days or a few months or a few less, and all that is according to the diversity of the complexities and of the other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the hip bone.
Know that fracture of the hip bone is hard to endure, but it happens to it many times attrition.
But if it happens to it fracture, then it is not but fissure or crack in its parts, and that is with a plague or a few plagues, and over that all is state with the feeling.
And the restoration of it is in such a way that what is broken of its parts is joined with the fingers until it is aggregated and joined according to what is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
And then place plaster and place on it a round splint, if you need it; and tighten above with strapping to what is convenient.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in the other fractures, as abscess caut and similar to those in such a way that it opposes to all accidents to what is convenient until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick, and it is named by the name of the leg; and the other is thin, and it is named fibula.
And it happens to some of the kinds of fractures that happen to both bones of the arm, and for that reason the restoration of it is done as well as the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
And if two bones are broken together, the leg is converted to all parts.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg is converted to the parts in front.
And if the thicker bone is broken, it bends that one, and it is of those causes that are not to your liking.
And then administer extension and reduction and ligation of the splints according to that same manner.
However, more over, if the fracture of the leg is large having many stages, that the extension be less and lighter, and alleviate with your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you align the splints and that completes all your operation, then you will take pieces of wood of the pine which is placed below the causes which are placed in their sockets, and they are made from branches of palm; some of those to which is small thickness, and no be of the branches, and be the length of them according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the furthest.
And then envelope on each one a cloth in two envelopes according to the length of it, and place one on the part of the leg from one side and the other from the other side, and be from the knee to the lowest place of the foot.
And then tie the two splints in three places of two extremities and to the middle place, because with this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left part, and it stands for good station.
And already is administered a splint of wood according to the length of the leg; and be placed in it the leg so that it conserve that of movement.
And most importantly that you do this in fracture, and when with that is properly plague.
And then consider in each day the leg and study with that by posterior study, and you guard it from abscess and from inflammation or other causes similar; and when it happens any cause of those, then oppose yourself to it with what you must within that it be healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the heel bone and of the bones of the foot and of the toes.
To the heel bone no happens fracture of all; but to the bones of the foot happens fracture some times; and to the toes of the foot few happens fracture, and does not happen to them but attrition in the middle of disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot happens fracture and times those bones be elevated above themselves among them, then the patient pause his foot on the earth prepared as if going.
And then pause one foot on that which is elevated of those bones, and then step on those, and press, and align those within that they return to the places.
And then pause plaster and stopper above, and pause below the belly of the foot a small table to which are two caps placed.
And then strengthen that with the foot with structure descent, because you have enveloped that with cloths and with other causes of which you have indigested.
And as it passes three days or four, then you untie the ligament, because you will find the bones aligned, or be broken or be dislocated, and the operation in those is as you have known.
But if some toes are broken, then restore those, and align them as I and recounted to you in the restoration of the toes of the hand. And then pause to the broken toe splint according to the length of the toe, and be wider of it a little; and below the foot this table which and to you recounted, and strengthen that with structure decent.
But if that which is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you pause on each toe a splint of its quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table in the lowest part of the foot, and be standing on one of the caps of the table hole the belly of the foot so that it have with good retention.
And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which you have been told to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and oppose yourself to every accident with what you must.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the hip bone of the woman and of the bone of the pubis and of the groin of the man.
When the hip bone of the woman is broken, then make that cease in a well-placed fall, and then incline that to the side of the back a little, and it be held behind.
And then the matron impales the hip bone of the cloth, and be made in the hip bone of it as it hopes; and then the woman be concussed, and elevate the back of her little by little, because all that is thrown out within that it be before the part of the hip as it hopes and the broken bone returns.
And then place pillows on their back, and when he wants to urinate, move the buttocks with ease and then urine, and reduce and return that according to the manner in which you placed it at the beginning, and then return to his first pillow.
And do so for seven days or thereabouts, for that is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and stretch over the wound a tube of cane; and introduce the whole bladder into the wound, and then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the wound, for the fracture returns.
And then it is filled with buttocks and stays for several days according to what we have recounted, until it is healed.
And when the bones of the thigh of a man or a woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and stitching of it what we have recounted in the bone of the hip.
And what is straight is not hidden in these proper fractures and which few understand, especially to him who has some study and use and understands this my book well; for that fracture signifies to you in the greatest dispositions the straight way in the restoration and in the stricture of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the thigh of a man when it is broken, take a splint of wood, and put the thigh in it; and then place over it a wrapping of cloth, and have it wrapped, and then let it be left for three days or thereabouts, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the restoration of fractures of bones when it is with a plague.
It is convenient for him to whom happens a fracture with plague, and especially if the bone is large as is the bone of the hip or of the shoulder, or similar to that, that you take care and flebotomize it as soon as the conditions of flebotomy to you or testify as we have said above.
And if the plague flows blood, then you must take care to the retention of it as much as you pulverize over it three times, if to you other cause is not present.
And then begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong that, if you do not happen abscess.
But if you happen abscess caut, then you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is yielded, and do not approach to it on the third day and the fourth of all, for you will cause to happen bad accidents.
But if the broken bone is eminent over the uncovered hip, then you must take care to perforate reduce it and to equalize it with your hands as easily as possible and with little extension.
But if extension is not to you prepared and the equation of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands with this instrument; and it is the instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is of seven digits or of eight and the width of which is according to the quantity of the plague; and for that it is necessary to the physician that he prepare of those three or four according to the quantity that indicates to it in the cure in all species of fracture.
And be round, and be in it little thickness so that it not be bent of necessity the comprehension over it in the hour of the operation.
And be of acute extremity at which be margin in its extremities; and be the underside of it to thickness tending, and of the majority of it inside to the parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek “labre volentz atelarem”, so it is the palette little.
Because it must be placed the extremity of it to ascend over the extremity of the bone eminent.
And impel it in one movement until the bone returns, and be equalized with some equation.
And therefore strive to equalize the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of it broken is subtle, and does not take that the instrument for good acceptance, then you must insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power of it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone of all with that we have recounted, then incise it with that which convenes to it of the incisors the which we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner it be to you possible.
And then cut that which remains in the bone of asperities and of small scales.
And as the bone is reduced, and upon the reduction the patient feels vehement pain leading, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do that which you confer to the patient great help.
As is completed your restoration which you make to the bone, and then submerge cloth in vi stiptic black, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place upon the plague cerot nor other cause in which there be oil, so that it not cause in it to happen poyredura and corruption.
And then administer stelas in the hour of your compliment of the restoration of the bone, and leave the plague uncovered as much as you incise the wound with forceps and uses of wrappings according to the quantity of the plague.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not stretch the plague with the fracture, for many times have done this the foolish physicians, and have caused to happen over their patients death or malady corrupting or badly, so it is healed. And if your stricture is lighter, softer, different from the stricture of other fractures.
And if the plague is large or is a bad plague, and you fear about that certain accident evils which we have recounted, and you feel pain in the place, then you must not place anything on that place, but make a wrapping of hard cloths on that place instead of the plates, and strengthen it with those.
And when, after a day or two, the plague begins to come, that it is generated in it, then you remove from above the cloth which you had placed on that, and then administer poultices, with which of our custom it is that we medicate the plagues, such as tetrapharmacon and similar to that.
And it is convenient for you to untie the bandage and consider the plague every day morning and evening while it is consolidated and fixed, and that the member be prepared in such a manner that the pus runs from it to the parts below with facilitated.
If to the plague pass many days, and it is not consolidated nor is the brac separated from it, then you know that here are satagias of the small ones for which you must inquire the plague with tenta. And of those satagias those that are separated remove and extract, those that from them are not separated and put the member and make happen pain, pierce you to inscidir those according to you that this is possible.
And if it happens to the plague zuchem or eluchen, it is stiomenios, or other species of corruption and putrefaction, then you must place on each of those with what is convenient to you from the cure of which is preceded narration in its chapter.
And of this in which you must know the best sermon and you make present your pesse: when the bone is broken, emineys on the member as well as the bone of the thigh and the auxiliary and similar to those of the large members, and that you do not presume traction of it, nor the extraction of it, for many times it happens by this death; have left that within until you can, for very soon it will fall by itself after twenty days or thirty. And then cure the plague if to you is seen, and if not leave that.
Chapter .xx.
Of the cure of nodacio that happens in the vestiges of some fracture.
Many times happens this nodacio in the vestiges of the healing of fracture, and mostly that is near the joints, and is marred by it the figure of the member; and very soon prohibits the member of its natural operation.
Therefore consider if the nodacio is recent and administer in that medicinas that have stipticated as well as aloen, and incense, and mira, and sercacollo, and acrassia, and similar to those; in this way that you take of that some or all, and comfesiys those with wine stiptic, or with album of hen, or with wine agre, and place that on the nodacio in estopa, and constrict those upon it for good constriction.
And leave constriction that you do not untie that for many days; and then untie that and iterate another, until that is remauguda the nodacio; or strengthen upon that lamina of lead descentment, for lead has proprietat of remauguda all that is inflated in the members.
But if nodacio already is in worse converted and strait is and necessity provokes to oust that coytadament, and then scindeys that by the partition pus sobirana of it, and inscideys the superfluitat and eminent, or ratz that with some rezoris until that is remauguda; and cure that within until that is sanat.
Chapter .xxi.
Of restoration of fracture when it is restored and then that which remains the member subtle and frail not according to its nature.
When fracture of bone is restored, and then that which remains the member subtle and frail, then that is not done sino for many causes: of which the one is multitude of solution of the ligament and of the liguacio of it made not according to that which cove; or for superfluity of stricture of the ligaments within that the nourishment be prohibited to run to the member; or for multitude of embrocaccio superflua; or for movement superfluent not in its hour; or for pauquesa of sanc in the body of the patient and for debelitat of it.
And cure of that is to give to diminish to the patient and to make the heart of it tender within that the sanc be multiplied in it; and administer bath; and intermet gaug and leticia upon it.
And then place poultice upon the member, so that the poultice attire to it much nourishment, or continue embrocacio of it with aygua tebeza, within that the nourishment runs and returns to its figure natural.
Chapter .xxii.
Of cure of the bones broken when they are restored tortuously and prohibits the operation of them of that which cove.
When it happens to the member already restored at the healing of it of tortuosity and eminence in the broken bone and nodacio, and it is for that fededa of form of the member, but however the member is not prohibited of its natural operation, then you must not receive the word of that one who exsistima that member be of novel broken.
But already so statz many foolish metges and restoradors the ones which have done that in our land; and this operation is mot vituperable perduzent at great temor the senhal of which is mortal.
But if lameness and stiffness are recent, then they should be soaked in lukewarm water in which are placed softening herbs, such as those of the alder and roots of the same, and melilot, and similar to those; and make a poultice with a softening poultice, such as well-made diaplaquilon; or take a crushed root of alder and beat it with guanine or olive oil, and apply a poultice with it; or take plump figs and beat them with pigeon's droppings, and similar to those of the medicines that are called consolidations.
And sometimes it is dissolved with assiduous gentle friction with the moist hands, and administer movement of the limb in every part at all hours.
But if the twisting has already been added and is made strong and converted into a bone and necessity is caused for its cure with iron, then it should be the most below the joint and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and it should be incised that which superfluously of the swelling of that half with the bone with subtle scissors, and be administered ease in that with solicitude and study.
Chapter XXIII.
Of the speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints from its place, so that movement is prohibited, and the figure of the limb is distorted, and it brings upon the patient pains and great injuries.
Therefore, when an accident happens to some dislocation, then it should be immediately reduced, and not delay that reduction, for if it is delayed, the place is inflamed and very much swollen with water, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason, it should not be bad or stretched in the hour of the inflammation, for many times it brings spasms and terrible pains.
But when this happens, then you should take care of the patient's inflammation, and let it rest until the inflammation subsides; and then the limb should be soaked in lukewarm water and oil, and then it should be reduced with ease.
And every limb should be cured with water of which the remembrance will come to its place.
And you have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body most sovereign to the part most below.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocated the two mandibles if not tarried; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: that or they are remaugged from their places by little movement, and are softened a little; or they are dislocated by entire dislocation and complicated, until they are softened at the junction, until the saliva of the patient flows and that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and the tongue of it be enveloped in its word.
But when the dislocation of it is little, then in the greatest dispositions it returns by itself with little cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and complicated, then it should be administered reduction of it gently, and not be delayed at all.
And that the minister has the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts the tip of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw from the inside of his mouth, if the dislocation is of one part; or that he inserts both of his hands together, if the dislocation is of both parts, and the others of his hands are outside with which he grasps; and commands the patient to cease his jaws and allow those to go from any part; and the doctor grasps the mandible and pushes the mandible until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, and most especially if both mandibles are dislocated at the same time, then administer vaporization with lukewarm water and oil, until a gentle reduction of both is made and the reduction of both is not delayed at all, as we have said.
And therefore, as they return and are grasped, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place over them powders of cloth with cerot, and it be made of wax and olive oil rubbed; and then be tied with ease with soft linens.
And let the patient's sleep on his back, and his head be standing between two pillows, so that it does not lean to the right or to the left; and do not allow him to chew for any cause; having his food be forbidden lean, until when the pains are remaugged and the jaws are well-knit, then allow him to chew as much as he wants.
And that water be administered with ease, and do not work over the opening of the mouth of the patient for eating and drinking and spitting, until the mandible is well-knit and healed.
And if it is difficult the reduction of two mandibles when they are dislocated at any hour and are not converted to their places, then many times accidents happen fevers and assiduous soda, and very much is alarmed the belly of the patient, and very much and vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is pernicious; and many times dies he to whom this happens in 10 days.
Chapter XXV.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The collarbone is not dislocated from the shoulder by its continuation to the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outward part, and this is declared by the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his two and extends his arms. And then grasp the place with the palm of your hand with great force, so that it will return.
And then place over that a plaster and powders and strengthen that.
May the extremity of that which seizes the groin and is continued to it, not be dislocated in any day; therefore, when it is reduced and set as we have said and as it is fitted to you.
And then place over that a plaster, and powders, and a bandage, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And in this same cure the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three manners, of which one is that it is dislocated at the part of the thigh to the part below.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the part above the muscle, and that is done quickly; and it is not dislocated at the parts behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the parts in front by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and outside, at the parts below the thigh, and mostly in those in which the flesh is little, it is easily dislocated; but in those in which there is much flesh, it is brought outside with difficulty.
And often accidents happen to some men by blow or fall, and the muscle of them is suppurated by a boil, and it is cured by that which has already been dislocated.
Therefore, when you see that, while you are over-seeing it, and then proceed in its cure.
And it is known the dislocation of it when it is at the parts below the thigh; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound muscle, for you find between those a manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and below the thigh, the touch of the head of the muscle as if it were a hollow, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move that by all movements.
If it is dislocated below the feet or above, and you then find a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation is made a light reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister elevates the hand of him to the parts above; and then places his thumbs below the thigh of him, and elevates the joint with strength upwards to its place, and the minister elevates the hand of him, and extends that upwards; and then places that below as it returns slightly.
But if for what we have said it does not return, and it is from the beginning that the dislocation happened, many days, then when the patient is bathed in lukewarm water and administered a poultice that softens and liniments as if it were cooked roots of elder, fennel, and melilot in water, and it is administered.
And then the patient is supine on his back and placed below the thigh of him, waiting for that which is set between elevation and constriction, and the physician places his heel on the sphere, and elevates the head of the muscle upwards, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it is not moved to the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not moved to the parts below, for that instantly returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stands on the part of that leg, and interweaves his muscle below the thigh of the patient and elevates the thigh of him to the parts above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below his belly. But if the patient is light, then when with him that other cause is suspended, so that the grave one, for the dislocation returns instantly.
And it is reduced easily in another manner: and that a long pole is placed on the ground, the head of which is rounded in figure, as if it were a mortar, that it is not thick nor fine, and then it is placed below the patient; because, having been placed on the head of the pole, a cloth is placed on the patient, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then the hand of him is extended to the parts below the other part; and the body of him is extended from the other part with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if it is a difficult reduction of it for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and that you take a pole the quantity of which is in the length of two arms, and the width of it is four digits, and the thickness of it is raised in the front of the thigh according to this form:
And then on the rounded head, there are placed cloths so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
And then place the patient's little finger, and extend the hand or arm over the stick between the parts below, and tie the stick over the helper and arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm on a step of a ladder according to the latitude, and the hand extended to the parts below, and the other body be suspended from the other side, so that the joint may be joined.
And when the insertion of it is completed according to whichever manner is possible to you, then cover the patient's little finger with a layer of wool of equal quantity; and then place a prepared plaster of powdered meal mixed with eggs and albumen over the entire muscle, so that it is rolled upwards, and then strengthen the little finger with a decent constriction; and the ligament be rolled over the plaster, and the hand of it be attached to the neck of it, and let it be left, and do not move the hand of it for seven days.
And cover that the food of the patient be little, until the member is comforted, for it is lighter to the healing of it.
And then the food be given greater after seven or five, and be exercised a movement; and therefore if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times by humidity that happens to it or by another cause, then cover that in that one be administered cautery with three strokes, according to that it is said before in the chapter of cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament is loosened and the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and constriction are reduced over it several times, and it is not fixed and catz and cannot elevate that arm to the parts above, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint at no time will be fixed in its place.
Of the dislocation of that one which is made you must the foot and the thigh or the parts behind, the reduction is made with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And be administered in that one the other constriction, and cure that until it is healed.
And if it happens that the healing gravitates in the member and tardiness in the movement of it, then the patient uses baths many times until that gravity is alleviated and that it returns to the nature of it first.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and seemingly returns with difficulty; and that is dislocated to all parts, and mostly to the part in front to the part behind, and the dislocation of it is not avoided to you because it is caught below the vein or below the touch according to whichever figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip with the its, that is to you declared manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that the muscle.
And cover that you set, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to you abscess caut, because if it comes to it abscess caut, it is difficult the reduction of it, and for a long time it is not healed of all; and mostly when it is in the parts behind, because it is worse of all the other species of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many times they leave to it death.
And the restoration of it, when that one that is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it be extended with two hands, and the arm of it be expanded, and the hands of the physician be over the hip and below it, and he pushes the joint with the knuckles of his hands at once, or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the parts in front, then it returns so that it bends the hand with its hand, until it strikes the hip with the root of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that raising of the two ministers so that it not be remaugut below the extension.
And then be rolled the arm below the whole part, because it is enveloped cloth folded long over the hand of it, or ligament.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint that one with some oil so that that be those causes which help in lubrication of the joint with facility; and then pushes the joint with impulse vehement until it returns.
And after the reduction of it cover that it be placed upon that plaster in which there is stypticity and excretion with album of egg, and be extended with constriction decent, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and be left for some days.
And then if the joint is formed in its place, then you untie the ligament of it and leave that one.
And if sometimes the joint does not be strengthened, then you repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave that one for some days until it be extended; and then untie that one.
But if it happens to it gravity after the reduction of the joint, and the disposition of it is in movement, then administer moisture in baths and subtle friction, and compression, until it be alleviated; or place upon the joint alleviated, so it is cause of movement greasy; and then be tied, and leave that one over the bones the day and the night. And then you remove that, and put that in a bath; and when it is finished, then you rub the joint with a tempered friction, and then repeat over that, so is it, once, and the second, and the third. Corruption has already arrived on the inside of the tooth while it is being rinsed.
And if you want, place on that split of wet and scraped cowhide and strain over that; and do this several times, because that is wet and returns to its disposition.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Shoulder dislocation some times is dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is lighter, and the contrary is of the other joints, however, as long as it is speed in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place is festered or that happens in it fester.
And the reduction of the dislocation of it is that you place the shoulder joint of the patient on a table and the minister extends the arm of that, and the physician places his hand or his palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes that until it returns to its place.
However, it is necessary to consider if the palm is already placed in the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand on a table, despite the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous to the back of the hand, then the position of the hand of that intrinsically on the table, so that the hand of the physician lays on that prominence of the joint.
And therefore if it returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then strain that with a poultice, softening the festering and leave that; and do not repeat this, because if not, do not suffer nor can you over the reduction of it more than passing days.
However, the joint remains according to its tortuosity; and do not give the patient any cause, unless the hand is softened and cannot strain any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then it is not good in it unless it is strained with a cautery near the place of it and strongly do that confer any cause.
Therefore, when the shoulder is returned, then place on it the poultice which have been recommended, and let it be left and strained for five days; and then let it be removed and let it be left and the hand of it be exercised.
However, if the movement of it is stayed and happens in it any gravity, then gently that with hot water and friction several times, until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the said.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated in every part.
And when a finger is dislocated from those to the back of the palm or to the belly of it, then strain the finger and push the dislocation of it with your fingers, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that and extend that until straight it is straightened in that day.
And when it will be night, tie that according to that narration, and do not cease to untie that in the day and exercise with movement, and tie that in the night; and do this for some days until it is straight.
And do the same with this, if it is dislocated to the belly of the hand, and tie that to that part and do with this your first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do with this when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When there happens to any of the vertebrae of the back or of the neck a dislocation complicated, and so remauguts motz vertebrae from their places, then in that there is no cure, because death takes hold of the patient.
And sign of this is that the digestion of the patient is out-ridden of its will, and cannot retain that; and many times are softened some members of it or both legs of it or both arms of it, or one of those; or is remaugut a vertebra from its place, because many times is remaugut and many times is made the removal of those to four parts.
Therefore that is already remaugut to the parts behind and is called gelbozitat.
However, the cure of it is that then consider if the gelbozitat happens of puerissia, because then in that there is no cure nor of that there is no healing of all.
However, in that which happens by accident or by percussion or similar to those, already said the Ancients the ways of cure with sermons prolixs, of which the most returns with prophecy; but I already and shortened of that of which the little excuse of the too much of it, for the my better proximity to the better understanding exposition, with which I have this explained and formed ex instrument divers of that with which I will show this and expose that.
And of these, only that one is cured which happens in the back properly with what I recommend.
And that the patient be extended on their back, with their legs raised close to the wall, and their lower limbs be moistened so that the feet of the patient are not lifted.
And then a straight stick be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the leg near the head of it, and another stick in the opposite direction of the feet at the other end of the leg.
And the minister holds the stick, and it is not fixed in the ground; and another minister holds the other one according to that form.
And then wrap a cloth around the head of the patient and below the shoulders, firmly; and extend the limb to the stick which is above the head, and tie it there; and then tighten the other ligament on the thighs of the patient, and below the knees, and then adjust all the ligaments and tie them to the other stick which is below the feet.
And then the minister carefully extends the ligament to the part of the stick, and do not be removed the two sticks and the ligaments from their places in which they are fixed, but however do not be fixed as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength while returning, or that which is placed on that a table, and then that he adjusts on the table his feet while returning.
But if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the width or length is opposite of three spans, and carve in the wall of which we have said that it is near the patient a place in which enters the end of the table. And then place the majority of the table on the spine, the doctor places his feet on the other end, and tightens well until the spine is shortened and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open with a turn which is revolved with the hand; and it is that you fix in the ground above the head of the patient in the rear of the leg two sticks, the length of which is of one arm, and above the head of it in the rear of the leg two sticks as well; and let the length that is between each stick be a palm, and already is made in each stick a trough in which runs the turn, and each one be firmly fixed in the ground so that it is not moved.
And let there be also a round stick in which is the turn, and it is revolved in the two troughs of the two sticks.
And in the extremity of it there is a trough in which is formed the stick, the length of which is a palm with that which is revolved; and in the two other sticks is similar to that.
And then tighten the ligaments that you have straightened in the feet of the patient in the trough which is above the head of it, and the ligaments that you have straightened in the thighs of the patient in the turn which is below the feet.
And then above each turn and there be a minister that twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor straightens the spine according to what we have said.
And as soon as the spine is returned, and the place is straightened, then cover with a paste made of dried albumen of egg, and then with cotton wool; and then place on the paste a board of the table of which the width is of three fingers or around those, and the length of it is as much as it stretches the place of the swelling, and on the part of the spine it lays.
And then tie it with the ligament which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment while it is healing.
And if there remain any swelling in the place at the end of the healing, then it is necessary that medicines be administered which soften and cleanse with the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already is administered in that place a plate of lead.
And some times there happens swelling in the rear of the vertebrae of the two, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already swells for which it is not necessary that it be done recklessly to it with this medicine, because very strong it will make you happen death.
Chapter XXXI.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle ought not to be dislocated only, and it does not happen to those that happen to the other joints of small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated to the front parts, or to the back parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the front parts, and few to the front parts or to the back parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it to the front parts is that, when you adjust the thigh of the healthy leg with the leg, it is longer and the knee is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his leg above the knee, and it is the place that the knee is swollen with pus, so that the head of the thigh has already arrived here.
The sign of the one to whom a dislocation occurs is that the parts of him are contrary to this accident.
The sign of the one to whom a dislocation occurs in the front parts is that he expands his leg according to the fulfillment, but however, he does not double that pain that is in the thigh, and if he tries to go and cannot do so above, the front parts; and the urine of him is retained and the groin of him is inflamed, and he must walk of him on the crutch.
The sign of the one to whom a dislocation occurs in the rear parts is that he does not expand the thigh, nor can he bend that front which he bends the groin, and the leg of him is shorter than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is that place.
But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, therefore, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it is already fixed with that having, then you administer reduction of it and it remains according to its disposition, then it is not in that cure of all; and therefore no cove that in that be made presumption.
But in the one whose dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you take hold of that which you want to return the joint and extend that to the front and rear parts, and move that to the right and left, because it strongly returns and does not need other cure.
But, if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong minister and extend the leg from the farthest part, or with his hands, or with a bandage which is tied above the thigh; and another minister extends the hand of that below so that he puts his hands below the thighs of him; and then tighten with a bandage on the root of the thigh, and hold another minister the extremity of the bandage.
And that extension of him or from the front part to the groin to the fork, or from the rear part to the part of the loin.
And that extension of all those in one go while the patient is elevated with his body from the ground and remains hanging.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to all species that we will say of the proper cure.
In the reduction of it proper, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the front parts, it is necessary that the patient be laid on his side; and then place the bandages on the root of the thigh in that place which is between the head of the thigh and the place that is below the groin; and then extend the bandage from the part of the groin to the highest part of the fork.
And then another minister strongly presses the arms of him, and grasps the thick part of the thigh of the patient and extends to the front parts by vehement extension, so that it returns to its place.
And this species is of lighter cure with which this limb is reduced than the others.
But if it is excused on you and you do not obey the entrance with this species of cure of all, then it must be tied both feet of the patient together with a strong, light bandage, on both the legs and both thighs.
And the length of each of its parts is the quantity of four digits, and the leg of the patient extended more than the other by the quantity of two digits.
And then the patient be suspended on the top of the pole, and that it be in the middle; and the length of him from the ground is the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong young man to pull on the head of the thigh, and let another young man suspend with the patient, and the other young man pull the thigh with strength, so that the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in the proper reduction, when the dislocation is in the front part, it is necessary that the patient lie on his stomach as we have recommended in the having gelbosity; and be tightened the bandage on the leg of the patient properly and on his feet.
And then two poles be placed, one to the feet of him, and the other to the head; and then be placed poles adjusted in the middle of the groin placed on which wet cloths be enveloped, so that the patient be not damaged for that the pole be between the thighs of him, for that the extension to the rear parts be not pulled.
And then each minister extends to his part, and the physician with his hand engulates the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary that the leg be extended slightly, and it is according to this same narration about groin; and the physician places the palm of his right hand on the groin of the patient, and then he pulls that with the other hand, and with that pulling, he pauses that extended to the rear parts to the part of the thigh.
And if the dislocation is in the rear parts, then it is necessary that the patient be not extended to the rear parts, and it is elevated above the ground; it is necessary that it be placed on a hard cause, as it is necessary that the eyssament if the width of him is dislocated in the front parts, according to what we have said of the jasement of him on two widths; and it is on his face and the bandages are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And a compress should be administered with a table over the area where the joint is.
Therefore, as the reduction is complicated according to what is needed — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend the patient's two legs, and when you see them equal and the patient extends his leg and expands that space, then you know that the limb according to what is needed is returned — and then you adjust two cushions and place a poultice and extend with a bandage so that the width is not bad in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or for four.
And then untie the ligament and the poultice, and compare one leg to the other.
Then, if you see them equal in appearance, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and plaster that, and extend that according to your first structure, and let that be for three days.
And then untie that, and make that person delay walking for a while, until it is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways, which is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inside parts, and to the parts in front to the parts behind; and to the front parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply his leg to the thigh; then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the ways of it is that you make the patient straight, so that he already extends his leg, if he can above that; adhere your two to the face of him, and place his foot between your feet; and then make adhere the knee of him to your palms, and keep those between your fingers on the knee of him with strength, and another minister extends his leg while the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction of it is that his leg adheres to the thigh with lightness without labor.
And then plaster that and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then tie those together with a bandage for three days or for four, and then untie those.
And do not use the patient for walking for some days, until it is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension with ligaments of which in the cure of the hernia preceding narration.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle some times is sprained by slight movement, and some times is dislocated according to complement, and the dislocation of it is made either to the inside parts or to the outside parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the ankle inflated proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of the sprain of it is of slight reduction, and is that it be extended with ease with the hands and be equalized while it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to complement, you should make the patient straight, and have that one minister strong and valiant from the back of the two in the middle place of him.
And then you with your right hand the foot of the most sovereign part, and with your left hand from the part most below of the foot in the place of the ankle.
And then you pull the foot to you with your right hand, and with the left for two times, and then extend with the left; and push the foot of the foot with the right towards the leg so that the leg works.
And do this two times according to what we have counted.
And then push the foot of the foot to the leg the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Therefore if it returns in one time or in two according to this manner, and if you see the foot equalized, it is good; and if not, then on it iterate the operation, for that it returns.
But if to you is forbidden the reduction of it with that which we have recounted, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and stretch a piece of wood on the ground firm, and that it lies between the thighs of him, and you already have enveloped over him cloth so that it does not scratch the patient.
And then the minister of him holds his thighs, and another minister extends the leg with his hands or with the ligament that lies on the collar of the foot; and then extend that each minister against extension of his part, and the piece of wood be extant between the thighs of the patient retaining that, so that the body of him not be pulled to the parts below towards his extension.
And then the physician equalizes the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh to the parts below, for the dislocation returns with ease.
And therefore as the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then place plaster and extend that with ligaments strongly, and tie the foot with ligaments to the leg.
And be careful that you avoid the nerves which are behind the heel, so that the ligament on that side is not too strong and does not damage it strongly.
Then leave it for two or three days; and if the ligament is softened, withdraw it.
And on the third or fourth day, untie it, and forbid the patient from moving for 40 days. But if he is forced to go before that time, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted on him, and therefore that it will not receive healing.
And if an abscess occurs to him, then you must administer in the treatment of it the water which we described earlier in another place of healing and ointment, until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
Of the cure of dislocations of the toes.
Be careful that the one who is dislocated be wrapped with little extension of his work; and that which is not difficult, raise it lightly.
But if the dislocation is in some joints of the foot, then you must make the patient place his foot on a level surface of the earth or on a table, and standing thus as if he were walking.
And then you stand on his feet, and place your foot on what you feel from the joints, and then press that with your foot with virtue until it returns, and that you see it already healed and does not appear in the place eminence.
And then place under the foot of him a table that supports the whole foot, which has two ends, and then strengthen it with a decent and firm structure for three days; and then untie it and make him rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its return is assured.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the kinds of dislocations that are made with plague or with fracture or with any of both.
When any of those causes occur, and you engage in the cure of it and in its restoration, many times death occurs.
And for this reason, you must not presume over the cure of it, but only he who is wise in the art, of long usage, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not hasty nor presumptuous; and that he uses in the beginning of medicines that cause abscesses cauteously only, and leaves the patient to the divine judgment, but to him whom you hope for salvation from destruction, with the alleviation of the illness, and in which you appear any hope. And therefore, strive as soon as possible to make the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a cauterized abscess.
And therefore, if the limb returns as we want, then administer the regimen which causes a cauterized abscess and cures the plague with the water that convenes to it of the dried herbs.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and the broken bone fragments are separated, then you must pierce the stem of them, and do in that what we have said in the simple illnesses of this, which is preceded in those places.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the treatment in the ways of fear according to what has preceded me in your preaching; for this is better to you, you owe your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true body in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly, of which God be the benefit. Amen.
