O, sons, because I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by the fulfillment of it, the end is achieved in it, and by the expositions of it, and by the declarations of it, it is my view that you complete it for you with this treatise, which is a part of the operation with my, so it is surgery.
Because the operation with my is prostrate in our region and in our time of all deprived, while many risk the science of it, and the vestiges of it are held hostage; and there remain of it only some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered and become filled with errors and falsehoods, because their clauses are understood and the force of it and the art are elongated.
And it is seen to me that you vivify it with the order of this treatise in that according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for that it may come with the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work, as it is for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the cause for which no one has been found a good artificer with his hand in this our time, is that the art of medicine is long, and that the one who acts it must before that be exercised in the science of anatomy, which reconciles Gualia, because he knows the movements of the members and the forms of them, and the conjunction and separation of them; and he should have the knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the cartilages, and the number of them, and the growth of them; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of the exit of them.
And for that reason, Hippocrates says that with a name is nothing, but in the work little, and most of all in the art of the hand.
But we have already said of that in the introduction of this book; because whoever is not learned in what we have said of anatomy, is not evacuated that he will not fall into error by which many men die, so as I have seen too many of those, who some are formed in this science and throw themselves from that science and their experiments.
Because I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who had incised an abscess scrophilos in the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed while the woman died among the hands of him.
And I saw another doctor who prescribed that the stomach of a man who had suffered in his state should be treated with a stone, and the stone was large, and it came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man on the third day died.
And I had already called to extract that, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient, I knew about him that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was taking a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came to a black peasant who was broken in his hip; and prepared the doctor with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with splints and splints with strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And he soon let him go according to his desires, and he healed him, and he left him for a few days and commanded that we untie the ligament; and it was so that the hip and the leg were festering, and it came to ruin.
And I was called to him, and I prepared to untie the ligament, and obtained tranquility and then eased his pains.
But however, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so that I could not restrain it, and it did not cease to wander the corruption in the limb until the patient perished.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it was ulcerated after a few days, until the malice of it was magnified to its lord.
The cause is that the cauterized cancer is pure of melancholic humor, so that it does not come to it with iron of all, but that it be in a member which suffers that it be totally held hostage.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with my hand be devised in two divisions: that is, in the operation that is associated with health, and in the work with which there is peril in the major dispositions.
And I have already expressed this in all places of this book in which I present an operation that is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard this and leave that, so that the foolish ones do not have a way to speak and to dishonor you.
And therefore, take your arms with diligence and with the protection of God, and your patients with facility and with firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God, seeking health and praiseworthy success, and leave the terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and keep your arms from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: because more is left to your glory, and more so in the world and in the end to your sanctities.
Gualia already says in some of his admonitions: “Do not treat a bad illness, so that bad doctors are not named.”
And now I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and the first of the first part. The first chapter ordered of the head within feet, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cauteries, and of that which is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of suction and perforation, and of leeches, and of poultices, and of the extraction of arrows and of things similar to those, all chaptered and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of the cure of sprains and of things similar to those; chapter ordered of the head within feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
Know that you should say the quality of the judgments of that cautery and of its consequences, and in what completion it should be prohibited cautery.
Therefore I say that the sermon of the quality of the judgment of cautery and of its consequences is a long and prolix sermon, and subtle by science, and secret hidden; and already many wise men have spoken of it, and they have disagreed, and to me a little of their sermons suffices, fearing prolongation.
And therefore I say that cautery agrees to every universal completion, which is in matter or its matter, except for two completions, which are completions caused by its matter.
In the completion caused and dry by matter they disagreed; for some said that cautery is beneficial to that, and others said the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that illness caused and dry by that which is cauter and dry be healed.
And say that one who says the contrary of that, that by cautery is made benefit in all illness caused and dry which comes in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its humidities to the completion of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I say for the sermon of that, that experience has already to me some times discovered it.
But however, it does not behoove that it comes upon this that which is already exploited and exercised in the chapter of cautery by previous exercise, and has known the diversity of the completions of men and the disposition of the illnesses in their very selves, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the extent of time of those.
But in the other completions, there is no fear upon you, and more especially in the illnesses cold and humid, for already all the physicians have agreed upon those, and do not disagree in the judgment with cautery in those.
And know, children, that of the secret of healing by cautery with fire and of its goodness, it is because the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member which is cauterized and does not reach the other member attached to it except with little consequence.
But the action of comburent medicine reaches that in the members which are far from it, and greatly makes them come in the member illness of difficult healing and greatly causes them to be bad.
But fire, by its sublimity and of its substance goodness, does not do that except that it be superfluous. And it is already to us known by experiment and by the length of service of study in the art about the truth of the causes; and for that I am excused from the length of the sermon, and if it were not that it is not read in my book in this pause to you secret hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and of its expulsion by which it expels the illnesses, with a philosophical sermon demonstrative, which would be acute in your minds.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to do cautery and pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because so that the consequence for the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of that which with the cautery is thrown, and more especially if the cautery is for pains or of necessary pains, strong and fistulas, which do not suffer tardiness because it is feared of those that come malice, which is greater than little consequence entering by time.
And so do not catch in your minds, o, children, that this is not esteemed by the vulgar people and the foolish physicians, so it is that to that illness which is healed by cautery is not reduced at all times, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not at all so as they care for that, because cautery is nothing but in place of medicine which alters the completion and dries the humidities which are the cause for which the pains come.
But however, cautery superflous upon medicine by the will of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that its illness returns at any hour of time, according to the completion of the patient and the location of its illness, and the virtue of it, and that which is prepared in the body of it of the aggregation of the superfluities in it, and that which is reached to it in its acquisition in foods and things similar to those causes; unless that the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and humidities, as well as cautery of a tooth for pain and things similar to that, it is possible that in it it does not return that pain, but rather that it is made in small.
And most commonly it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a truer saying, for I do not understand those who use it, because I believe that there is no cure that will benefit with medicine or with any other cause better than cautery.
And the cause is the opposite; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when they administer the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause man administers cautery, and it benefits at that. And therefore, it is not according to the understanding which the vulgar and most foolish of the doctors understand that cautery is the last remedy of medicine.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen that and have found that it does not do so except in some bodies and others, and cautery with that is good and better than with iron as they said; but however when you do cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the roar of gold, and because it prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust on it a fire it melts the gold with the fire, and in the fire some plates so that the artificer catches for the occupation of that.
And for this reason, cautery with iron must be done more lightly and more precisely in the rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter in the cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that later the one who asks for it will know what they want from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers on the humidity and cold over the nerve affected by the accident of which there are two causes, so it is the cause of soda and multitude of rheumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the ears and of the ears flow, and multitude of sleep, and pain of teeth and of the throat, and universally of all illness that comes from cold, as well as paralytically, soda and apoplexy, and similar in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is this, that first you command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine the head modifying, for three or for four nights, according to what requires the virtue of the patient and the age of him and his custom.
And then command him to shave his head, and then do that sitting between your hands on a raised bench and that he place his hands on his feet.
And then place the razor of your palm near the nose between his heels. But however, as the tie your said of the middle place has arrived, sign that place with a tent, and then ignite the cautery olive of which this is the form:
And then place that on the place marked with a tent, in the manner that it descends, with which your hand be constricted little by little, and you revolve that.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see already of the bone being discovered some quantity of the head, as well as the quantity of a grain of ears, then raise your hand, and if not turn your hand with that iron, with another of that, if it is cooled, until it is seen of the bone what I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve that over the place and leave that for three days.
And then place on it a cloth soaked in butter and leave that on it until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with anguent tetrafarmacon until it is healed.
And they already said that when the plague remains open, so much better gets the scar, because it is better and more beneficial.
And they said some of them that it should be cauterized the bone inside the bone, and it should be held the cautery until some part of the surface of the bone is burned.
And then it is scraped that which is burned from the bone, and then it is cured.
And they said others that with the cautery it should reach the end, until it presses in the bone strongly, until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati small: And they estimate that from that place the vapors of the head expire.
And it should be kept the wound open for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
But to me, these two species of cautery have not been seen at all, except in some men according to their fear; and leaving that, I, for my part, better is with health, when it is; because the head is devitalized by the solution of continuity of it as we have testified in the other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of a cold nature.
And the species of cautery first is more safe and better, I think; and of that use and with that work with health.
Second Chapter.
Of the cautery of the head.
When throughout the head occurs chronic and long pain and this is prolonged in the patient, and use of herbs and potions and capipurgations and plasters and guats and cadels and gualinas and semblances, and mostly if it is already cauterized with a cautery which is recounted and does not profit him of any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frail and finds a very great heat, then that cauterizes with another cautery besides that one a little. And then cauterizes that one on the horn of his head with a cautery while the codena is parted. Incise the codena and uncover it from the bone the quantity which we have recounted and cauterizes that one with a cautery in the rear part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and is that place in which is placed a ventouse. And alleviate your hand in this, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient by this finds a great pain diverse from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And you say this cautery in its place, because whoever cauterizes with the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occiput are cauterized is more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
Of cauterization of  non-ancient migraine.
When it happens in the part of the head a sudden pain, or is extended pain within the eye, be evacuated with medicines the head modifying, and be administered the other cure, which I have said in the divisions of the diseases; and if nothing profits, then cauterization in it is in two ways: or cauterization with acute medicine comburent, or with iron.
But cauterizing with comburent medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and scour that one and abcise the extremities of it from both the heads. And then incise the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet laid while it is in it made a place besides the codena, while it is hidden.
And then strengthen over it with a stopped by descent constriction, and leave that for the spaces of three hours; and then untie the and tear the alum, and leave the plague for two or for three days, and then place over it a cloth submerged in water while the place makes a scab.
And then cure that with an enguent while it is healed.
And if you want, do this with some comburent medicines the ones which I have written in the two treatises of comburent medicines.
But the cauterization with iron according to this manner: ignite with cautery of which this is the form:
And it is called claus clavilhs, because the head of it is as if in the form of a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it is a small eminence.
And then place over the place of the pain, and retain your hand — so that not be burned the artery which is besides — and revolve the iron little by little with velocity.
And if the quantity of it that is burned by the proximity of the codena as much as the majority of it, and elevate your hand so that the artery which is besides is not burned, so that no come flux of blood.
And then imbibe cloth in salt water and place that over the place, and leave that for three days; and then place cloth mulled with water, and then cure with an enguent while it is healed.
And if you want, cauterize with the extremity of the cutler according to cautery, and guard yourself from incision of artery in this migraine properly non-ancient.
Chapter Four.
Of cauterization of ancient migraine.
When you cure migraine with that which we have said of the previous cure, and that which we have said in the divisions of the diseases, and if nothing profits the cure, and sometimes because of the malady that does not reach to it that which we have said of the first cauterization with medicine or of the cauterization with fire, then you must ignite the cautery cutler while it is whitened, because it signifies over the place of the pain with a line of length of which it is the majority of it, or where it is; and pause your hand for a while and strengthen that while you incise the artery and it reaches to the bone.
However, it is necessary to you that you guard against the continuation of the mandible, which is bad for chewing, and that the lacert not be burned and the nerve which feels that, and that it does not become a spasm.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flux of blood from the artery that is abcised, because in the abcizion of it there is fear, and mostly to him who ignores what it does and is not studious and experienced; and leave the operation in it at the beginning.
And you will come with remembrance of the regiment of flux of blood accidental of the artery according to its manner, in its place of this book.
And if you see of this malady that does not suffice this cauterization and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle place of the head as we have recounted, and cure the plague while it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the cauterization of arteries, with a cautery having two handles, and this is a better cauterization and more convenient.
Chapter V.
Of the cauterization of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain due to inflammation and it is cured with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has a point, of which this is the form:
And when you point it to the ignition, and it is moved around the entire ear like a wheel is rolled, or in the circuit of whichever part if the pain is in whichever part. Lengthen yourself with the cautery from the root of the ear little by little as if you were sensing the place with a probe.
And if the cautery of ten points in the entire ear, and that one, and then cure the places while they are healing.
Chapter VI.
Of the cauterization of tumors.
Tumors which are cured and by cauterization are nothing but of the kinds which come by phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the species that should be due to dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that species of tumor with herbs and purgatives and gargles, and if you do not find comfort in your cure, then you must cauterize the ailment with three cauteries: the first you must at the root of the ear, the second a little below its temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery for the opposite of the diseased part, for softening does not come except in the part that is healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with the cautery in the right of the extremity of the ear, more sovereign a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which be according to the length of the finger, and pause your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the species of the code is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the cutlery, the form of which is shown in the drawing. But however, more subtle is that one a little thus as you see; and so that the handle in it of superfluous thickness a little.
And then cure the place with what is shown before until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of the cauterization of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you cure that with what we have said and if you do not find comfort in your medication and the ailment has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: over all the horns of its head; and with the cautery and the middle of the head, as we have said; and with the cautery in the nape of the neck. And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said before.
And it is already cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and then it should be cured with what you proceed.
Chapter VIII.
Of the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by flame.
So that in the beginning the patient is given large draughts and pills of the serving, modifying.
And then scrape the head of the patient completely and place on the nape of the neck a plaster of the kind described in the treatise on plasters.
And pause that several times, for that is the manner of cauterizing. And do what according to that same order which I have already said.
And therefore if by those he is healed, well; and if not, then make three cauteries to him in the rear part of his head, which should descend from the most sovereign part of the head into the part further down the neck. And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cautery with what is proceeded.
But if you add and the ailment is that tolerant, then make a cautery to him in the middle location; and if you want more addition, then cauterize that above the two horns.
Then cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive according to the form given before.
Chapter IX.
Of the cauterization of paralysis and the softening of the whole body.
So that you process in the softening of the head with draughts and with what we have said; and then scrape the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle location of the head, and with a cautery above all the horns of the head, and with a cautery above the rear part of it, and with three cauteries above the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the ailment of softening of the body of too much of that and the ailments tolerant and the ailment is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries above the vertebrae of the lower back, and carefully with the cautery until it is burned from the code of it, and raise your hand. And then take care of that one who is being healed, and this one be olive oil cautery.
Chapter X.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, whoever modifies the brain of him at the beginning with years and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is great and tolerates the excess of the medicines.
And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer safeguards and masticators to the brain, before that for many days, with the blessing of the foods.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery in the nape of his neck, and over each horn of his head cauterize. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize him with cauteries as I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And be olive cautery according to what is preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then pause a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter XI.
Of cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidities and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink water that purifies the brain of him according to what has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a decent tourniquet of him over the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
And the patient be feeling cauterized, and be held from all parts.
And then apply liniment; and it is more worthy of border ointment of sheep. And warm that over the fire for moderate calefaction by measure, which the said one suffers when it is most in him. And then put that in the middle of the head of him in the circle, and let him inside that it be chilled.
And do this water with the patient every week once, with the other regimen of him well inside that it be healed; or if you will, cauterize this making small points according to the most of him, unless you have the hand with a cautery so arranged: this is a species of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
And then put that coated in ointment or in grease of guanine.
Chapter XII.
Of cauterization of water descending in the heel.
When to you is declared the beginning of water in the heel by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that purifies the head of him, and guard that from all humidities.
And make that suffer in bath in degue for some days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize him with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of the symptom of water in two heels, or of one side if it is the beginning of the water in one heel.
Incise with cautery all the veins and arteries which are left in the codena; and be the cauteries in that length in the latitude of the temples.
And guard yourself from fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see of him fluxes of blood, stop him with some medicine, which is to you possible.
And you will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the abscess of those and caution of fluxes of blood.
And some times it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries deliberately produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of cauterization of old tears.
When tears of the heels are old and by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluous, cold phlegmatic, then cauterize him with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water causing in the heels, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below two bones. And if you need of addition, then cauterize him in all the side of the heel on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of cauterization of nose odor.
When you medicate him with the water which we have said in the division and it does not profit your medication, then you equip yourself and give to drink to the patient the cochies for three nights; and then shave the head of him, and cauterize him with a middle cautery with olive cautery. And then cauterize that with a clove cautery with two cauteries on the two eyebrows above the hairs a little.
And guard yourself from the arc that you do not burn that.
And of the clove cautery this is the form.
Chapter XV.
Of cautery of softening of eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or by humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in all part, and be elongated from the temples. And be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too much your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid be cauterized.
Chapter XVI.
Of cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs are converted to the parts of the eyelids and pierce the eye.
When the hairs of the eye are converted to the parts of the eyelids so that they pierce the eye, cauterize in those in two manners, whether cauterize or is with burning medicine.
If with cautery of it with fire, command the patient before that he seize his hairs as those which they cleanse, until they are prolonged and equal; and if you pierce that you must their naisment, then you strengthen the eyes of him with a bandage so that it be not bad until the hairs be born.
Therefore as they are born and equal, then place the head of the patient in your seat, and then send upon the eyelid of the eyes of him with a tenta, with a sign which be according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the sign near the hairs.
And then place a poultice steeped in the album of egg or in a mucilage of ptilli upon the eye.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it.
And then cauterize upon the figure which you have signed, little by little, in many times, until it be burned the surface of the codena which is as a leaf of myrtle, all apparently.
And sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already be contracted and the hairs of it be elevated from the puncture of the eye.
And therefore elevate your hand and leave that for three days, and then place upon it a poultice with border until it be eradicated the scabra. And then cure that with an enguent until it be healed.
But if returns for the hairs any cause to their naisment and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery upon that all as you had done first.
But if the hairs so in the eyelid below, then cauterize that until it be elevated to its natural place and be equal and that the hairs do not pierce the eye.
But the cautery with burning medicine this is that you command the patient that he seize the hairs until they are prolonged and equal, and then be made of cloth the form of a myrtle leaf.
And then take of sabon known and of live cause one unc. i.e., or that, and then mix those causes well, and make that with a festinacio so that it not be frozen; and then expand of that upon the cloth which is made as the form of a myrtle leaf, and place that upon one eye or both; and place below the eye a poultice steeped in album of egg, and the head of the patient be in your seat.
And place the said upon the medicine and press that a little and do not the bad until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for bite is in it as of fire.
And therefore as perseveres that the atrobo bite, then leave the medicine and wash that with your hand; therefore as ceases the bite, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if times the eyelid already is lifted as it is washed from the constriction with fire or with incision, for then it is well; and if not return upon that of the medicine upon the place in which it has not put the medicine and do not degrade until it be equal your operation and be contracted the eye.
And then place upon it a poultice with border until it be eradicated the scabra of the adhesion, and then cure that with an enguent of defaicon or with another until it be healed.
And it is necessary to you, from your operation that you guard with pervigil diligence that in the eye not fall re of the medicine, and if the eyelid after some days is softened and any cause of the hairs pierce the eye, then iterate your medicine upon that place the which of the eyelid is softened, and properly as you have done at the beginning, and then enaviro him until it be healed.
And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to the magnitude and the smallness, and therefore according to that is made your constriction.
And the way of rectification should not be hidden from him who studies this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal of the hand.
When you cure a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confer your cure, then you must cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head on your lap, and hold his head some minister between your hands in such a manner that it is not disturbed nor agitated with his head.
And then place a cloth soaked in oil or in a poultice of ptilli on the hand of him.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
Which is concave, as is the form of a reed or a vulture's feather, at one extremity of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should be penetrating into the other extremity. And if you wish, it should be shaped as a tent.
But however, that which is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw from it blood and dry it out. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and take with that your hand a little from the cautery of the hand to the part of the nose, so that it does not burn your hand or the patient be agitated, and then place the cautery in the grain of the hand and corrupt it.
And therefore if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then iterate the cautery once or twice, if it is necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and then place on it a cloth with border and enclose it with an exsiccative enema until it is healed.
But if ten days had passed and it is not healed, then place on it an acute corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and be scraped according to what you convene in your chapter.
And there is another manner of cauterizing a fistula which some first-dayers say:  enter at the place of the fistula and cut it open, and then place in that fissure a fine camel hair of which this is the form: And put in that the quantity of one ounce of molten lead; and take your hand with camel hair with good retention, and do not disturb the patient so that the molten lead does not reach the hand of him; and when you place on the hand of the patient a cloth soaked in oil or in water, because lead burns the place of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said of the cauterization and the cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a traction of the nose and reduce the fistula to the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
Of cauterization of the fissure of the anus.
Many times fissures occur in the lips, and most often in the lips of children.
Therefore, as you cure those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and do not profit from your cure, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form that is shown:
And let its concavity be according to the fineness of a needle.
Then place that init carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then cure it with cerot until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there must be an abscess and then it breaks, and then it is antiquated, and pus flows and a fistula is made, and then you cure it and the cure does not profit, then you must ignite the cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then put that ignited into the tract of the fistula, and take your hand so that the iron ignited reaches the bottom of it, and at the back of it do so once or twice; and then cure it with the water that we have said of the cure until it is healed.
And therefore if the wound is abscised and is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and host the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
Of cauterization of the teeth and of softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are bad, and you cure those with medicines and do not confer, then place the head of the patient on your lap, and then ignite the cautery the form of which will come soon, so that you place the cautery on the tooth and introduce into it the ignited cautery quickly, and take your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being reached.
And then take your hand, and then iterate the cautery several times according to what you wish.
And then the patient rinses their mouth with salt water and keeps it there for an hour, then spits it out, because the bad tooth is stopped, the gum is softened and strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Chapter XXI.
Of cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to cold, or there is a worm in it, or it does not respond to treatment with medicine, then cauterization is done in that case in two ways: cauterization with a cow's horn, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with horn is that you take a piece of cow horn and boil it in iron, then take a stick and wrap it around the tip of the tentacle, and then immerse that in the boiling horn, and place it on the painful tooth gently until it is scorched.
And then repeat that several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or a stick in the above-mentioned horn and place it on the painful tooth, and place a red-hot iron on top of it until the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
But however, cauterization with fire is that you attend to the tip of the iron or of the tool, and that it has some thickness in its center and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cauterizer, the shape of which will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cauterizer is scorched; and do this several times because the pain will be reduced either on that day or the next day.
And so that by the impression of that cauterizer, the patient rinses their mouth with good broth and keeps it there for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the shape of the cauterizer.
And cauterize with whichever extremity you wish according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
Of cauterization of tumors.
When tumors are of phlegm and humors cold and do not respond to digestion by medicines and you wish the digestion of those slightly, then you ignite the cauterizer whose shape is this following, having two open extremities so that the smoke of the cauterizer escapes through the other extremity, and place it on that abscess once, and another if you need it, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cauterizer according to the size of the abscess, and then leave it for three days and place a stick soaked in broth on top of it until that which the fire has burned is reduced.
And then cure it with gargles and poultices and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
Of cauterization of a sore throat and constriction of the windpipe.
When the humors come upon the throat of the lung, and most when that is of cold complexion, then the patient should be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that deep in the root of the goiter in the depressed area.
And guard yourself that you do not reach with the cauterizer to the goiter nor burn more than a little of its coating.
And cauterize that with another cauterizer deep in the junction of the neck at the back of the spine of it. And the cauterizer of it be a chisel according to the preceding manner.
And then cure that with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
Of cauterization of lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are of cold humors and the patient has no fever nor phlegm and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauterizers on the clavicle in the depressed areas of the left and right; and with another cauterizer in the middle location of the foot between two toes; and let the cauterizer be a chisel according to the preceding form.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cauterizer that is called a point, the shape of which you have seen in the cauterization of ear pain.
And make points within those; and then cure that with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
And now let the cauterizer have three ramps because cauterization is done with this: in one time you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
Of cauterization of the  little bump that is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricous humors and it is not fixed at the hour of its return to its place, and by a little movement it is dislocated as it should, as we have witnessed, then first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient be reversed upon his back or upon his side; and then elevate the skin which is in the front part of the bump to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the junction is dislocated to the front parts.
And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the groin so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will then be of four cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries.
And then place on the cautery porous cuyts with salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb not be harmed for any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the parts above and it is done thus, then cauterize on the muscle with a cautery chisel or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of cauterization of the stomach.
When there comes in the stomach a burning and many humidities so that that extraction of its composition and so multiplies rashes to it, and if you continue the ways of cure and do not confirm it, then when the patient is on his two supports, and extends his hands and his thighs, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one cautery left the foot for the quantity of a finger with a chisel cautery, and with two cauteries left the two sides of the cautery, so that the triangular figure of cauterization comes; and elongate between those that are not adjusted that they will make a poyredura.
And if the depth of the cautery the quantity of the two-thirds of the thickness of the groin.
And be the figure of the cautery according to this form its addition, And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And be cauterized the stomach punctan to that one who of this cautery is frightened: and it is that you senses on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want with tenta, and then cauterize it with cautery in the points; and then cure it with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of cauterization of the liver fret.
When there comes in the liver pain by coldness or by humidity or by gross windiness so that of its normal composition is cast by superfluous egress, and it is cured the patient with that which we have said and do not confirm it, then when the patient is on his two supports, and senses with tenta three cauteries according to this form and this quantity placed on the liver below the hypochondria, the honor  perve the decubit of man.
And be the space which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and be the cautery according to the length of the straight body.
And do not compress your with the cautery mot.
And if the quantity of that which is adhered the quantity of the majority of the breadth of the groin, and there be no more adjusted; and if the patient standing on the feet of him; and if it is not standing, then be lying, the one which already has extended his thighs, and elevate his arms.
And to you it is possible that cauterize these cauteries with a cautery chisel, when it is with your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself that too much you process in the cauterization, and be adhered the breadth of the whole groin so that it be adhered the whole body and reach into the bowels, for the groin here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of perforation of abscess of the liver with cautery.
When there comes an abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in the tunic of it, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient atrobo gravity and pain its acuteness.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with the pain is acuteness great and times that already fatigued the doctors the cure of it.
Therefore, when the patient is on his two supports; and then senses the location of the abscess with tenta; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled to rag, the form of which precedes in the other page. And cauterize with that i cautery until the whole groin be combusted, until it reaches the ciphasc, until in yesca heals.
And then cure it by the cure of the other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not cove that of this form of cautery use sino that of which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the most of which many diseases have been known; but this with experiment some times be dared on this operation, but however less that deves us, and it is miels.
Chapter .xxix.
Of cauterization of pleurisy.
They said the ancients cauteries of the roots of aristology to pleurisy burning according to this manner esser fazedor, and it is that you take of the roots of aristology long dry a root pun long that is found, and be of the thickness of the finger.
And then immerse that in oil and heat it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries, place one slightly sloping towards the side that is below the beard, and with two cauteries in that which is sloping between the fifth rib and the shoulder blade, sloping slightly towards the rear; and another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries on the back; and one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulder blades, and two cauteries on the two sides of the foot, besides the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
And do not cover the place where you put your hand on the cautery, but let it be in the manifest of the code in work.
And some ancients said that some men use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite it, and put it in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and it be healed and purged, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, because it dies instantly in the place of the fistula to which there is no healing.
Chapter .xxx.
Of the cauterization of the spleen.
When you cure the illness of the spleen with what we have said of the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize in it is according to three manners, all of which are straight, of which one is that you make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, the figure of which has preceded.
And be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the liver likewise.
And do not cover your hand on the cautery; and the patient be raised on his two.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, so it is that you ignite the cautery having two verticals, the cause of which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the code which is in the straight line of the spleen the honor to reach the lying of the left patient.
And be your elevation with which you elevate the code according to the length of the body, so that cauteries be made according to the latitude of the body.
And then, enter the two verticals, ignite it, in that which you enter with those the code from the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus are made four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three verticals.
And then you cure the cautery as if it had been laid aside for too many days, because it is more confertable than the other causes preceding in the cure.
Chapter .xxx i.
Of cauterization of hydropic.
Cauterize not in hydropic but in alcinte properly.
When you cure the hydropic with the manners of cure which we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then cover that cauterize with four cauteries in the circuit of the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the right foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the spirit of the code.
And then leave the cautery open so that it gets laid aside for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient of cure after the cautery with what cover so that two understandings be added to it, and it be fed with the help of healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized be clave as according to the shape of that which is used before, and that with which the back is cauterized be olive as according to what is precedent to its shape.
Chapter .xxx ii.
Of cauterization of feet and of the things.
When the feet are apostematized in hydropic and are filled with  serum, cover that you cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in nocrati that is between the auricular and the annular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist that; and then elevate your hand, and do not return that of all, because the serum recedes.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on the two things two cauteries, and in each thing be made cauteries with the extremity of the cautery cutter. And be the cautery according to the length of the thing: and one below and the other below the middle of the thing; and on each thing two cauteries.
And leave the plaque open for cure for a long time so that no water recedes from it.
And then cure it with those causes which we have said.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cauterization of the body of the belly.
When the body of the belly is due to cold and humidity that enters the body, so is the digestive and retentive virtue, the ones that are in the stomach and intestines, and this is cured by the ways of healing and not confer, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization to exhibit virtue, then cauterize this with a large cautery on their stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries in the circuit of the navel subtle, with a subtle cautery clavilh; and with cautery on the skin over alozis large, or with two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humidities abound and the patient tolerates this, then cauterize this on the intestines and on the intestines, and firmly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, which is a perfect cure for the benefit of which you will not err.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors cold or of corrupted humidities, and are cured by what we have said in the division and not confer your cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus left spondilh of the small and small triangular, and with cautery above the navel falls by two digits.
And if you suspect that the stomach of him be cold and his food not digested, and the face of him sometimes pale, then cauterize this on the stomach with a large cautery according to what is preceded; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the spleen with a cautery clavilh, and leave the cautery for some time open, and then cure him while he is healing.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the cauterization of a boil near the abscess of them.
When you excise a boil, then you ignite the cautery that is assembled to a ray. Then introduce that ignited one into that excised boil, and last your hand until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if the boils are too many, then cauterize each one of them according to what we have recounted, and then cure those with what you confer to them of the ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more beneficial in healing.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of the cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature of the parts of him.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, be healed with cautery.
Therefore, when anyone has a fistula in the nature of the parts, and it is ancient, corrupted by pus and humidities, and therefore that which is most worthy of cove is that you probe it with a subtle one, and then know the quantity of the depth of it with the previously mentioned probe.
Then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. And then introduce that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you introduce the probe.
And iterate over that the cautery within those corrupted bodies are burned once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself from the burning of nerves and of veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.
And then cure the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the materials are excised from it, and remain so for a long time, then you know that it is healed entirely.
And if the materials are not of it stayed, then you know that it is penetrating or in the preon of it the corrupted, or comes this from those causes of which will come remembrance in its place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of the cauterization of the boils.
When in the boils it should be pain by cold or by gross windiness, and for this the body of the patient is inflamed, then it is necessary that you cauterize that on the boils with a cautery on each boil with a cautery clavilh of which I will give the remembrance.
And firmly you cauterize with the second one a little, so that there will come three cauteries linear, and therefore they are more beneficial in healing.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of the cauterization of the bladder.
When accidents in the bladder weakness and softening by cold and humidities so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize that in the part pus below the bladder, the one that begins the hairs of the intestines, and cauterize with one cautery in the right part, and with another in the left of him.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the knots of the foot; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And cauterize the clavicle according to what is processed.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of the cauterization of the thigh.
When moisture and humidity come in the thigh, and therefore pregnancy is forbidden, and the menstrual flow of her is corrupted, and the onset of it is delayed, and pain occurs in the area of her menstruation, then the area should be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the area below the back, or with two cauteries, and the cautery should be long.
Chapter XL.
Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip.
When mucous humidities are poured into the area of the hip, and are caused by the swelling of its place, and the sign of it is that the thigh is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is felt in it where it is tight.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient over the area of the hip of him with a cautery in a circle shape, as you will have felt with your finger in the circuit of the area as it is turned, and so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
And be the cautery of which preceded the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize that with three cauteries with a large olive cautery.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the whole thigh; and take care of that while it is healing.
Chapter XLI.
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the area of the hip, and it is caused by cold and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said and do not confer, and this is ancient, then when you cut the patient of thick humors with foul pills or with artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: the cautery with burning medicines, or the cautery with fire.
It is according to two scientific manners, of which one is that you cauterize that over the area of the hip of him with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make with those a good depth. And be the spaces the which is between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the olive cautery or large.
Sometimes, however, the cautery is on the middle part above the head of the hip so that there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which the form is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, the one that be a containing circle and burn the thickness of the whole thigh.
And this is the manner of cauterizing in sciatica when pain is adherent to the hip and does not extend into the thigh.
But if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh over the area where you feel the pain of the patient; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers a little below the bony part.
And if the cautery is a knife, and be the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the thigh.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends into the area near the toes of the feet, then cauterize there where you feel it with a cautery for three points or four or more if you judge it necessary.
And if the patient feels pain below the hip, then cauterize there with a knife cautery.
And guard yourself in all cauterizations that you do not end with the cautery as much as you burn nerves or large arteries, and that for that reason to you is upon the patient no harm or contraction.
And I have already seen one and another of those who cauterized on the hip and ended in the cauterization, and the leg burned inflated until the tumor reached the foot, and burning and corrupted all the foot. And then comes a strong acid solution of the belly, and then death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise ones said in the cauterization of the hip, a cautery of which this is the manner: make a circle of iron, of which the circuit is the majority of a palm; and be the depth of it according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
And from that circle, make another third; and be the spaces which are between them the quantity of the knot of the foot; and those circles be open on two parts; and be the length of those cays a finger or two fingers, and make in those marks of iron decently fitted in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then it is set on fire in the fire until it glows red and throws sparks, and then it is placed on the patient's back, the patient lying on their side. And therefore cauterize that with three red-hot cauteries at once.
And then leave that for three days; then plaster that with a poultice and leave the ulcer open for many days; and then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
Says Albucasis: Oh, children, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the fear of looking at it, and because of that we have found few who guard over it.
May the cauteries be on those who suffer them, and may they be found in that place.
May cauteries with medicinal ointments be that you make two circles having a perforated arm in which they put the handle of the iron gate; let the length of the sides in the breadth of them be two nuts or whatever those are.
And if the spaces which are between each one be of the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and they be open below and above, and they contain themselves between them according to this form:
And then place upon the patient's back, the patient lying on their side, and compress your hand upon the area of the back; and then take some hot water and pour it between the two circles, and the quality of that be with the small fire little by little, and keep that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the bite and the burning of it — for that biting is like that of fire — until the biting ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from the whole back with cool water.
And then leave that for three days and place upon that a poultice until the blackness of the burning is removed, and leave that for some days, and there will run from it a discharge; this is called in healing.
And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or the leg, make a poultice for it which contains water as it is made for the back equally.
And this is the manner of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise of the rectification of medicines. Take of alkali and of caustic, of each one part, and grind them and place them in a new bowl of which the bottom part be perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
And place below the bottom of the bowl another bowl, and pour over that alkali and caustic, hot water which covers them by a finger, and as soon as you compress those with your hand by a good compression, and leave the bowl which descends from it water acute in the bottom of the bowl in the bowl.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over other caustic and other renewed alkali, for that which is now is of very strong sharpness, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for that operation does of fire.
And so of the medicines some with which is cauterized much, as tezixic and honey anacrat and caustic in sabao, in such a way that they be mixed.
And Gualia recounts of an ancient man the operation and the cure with which is cured the pain of the back and of sciatica, and magnifies very well to be of that, and says that there is no need of other cure, and that it is healed by one time as it is recounted, for very strong that it is this intertwining in bath and already sees of that.
And it is that it be taken of certain green fig, and if it is not found green, it be taken recent fig; and much be ground with a little of gray and it be placed upon the back in which is the pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and it be bound.
And it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels cessation of the burning.
And then put that in bath and then when the body of him be red, introduce that in the sun, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
And know that no one should use cauteries with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
But already Escorides says that when with the wound of goat the sciatica vein is cauterized, it profits him very well; and let the cautery be with it according to this manner: take wool and be it dipped in old oil, and be it placed between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
And then take dry goat's wound and inflame that with fire until it be made charcoal; and place it upon the wool and leave it until it be extended. And then repeat that, and do not cease to do that until the feeling of the burning reaches into the back and relieves the pain.
And this manner of cautery is called cautery of the cow.
Chapter XLII.
Of cauterization of pain of the two.
Sometimes pain is in the two by many causes, such as by striking or by percussion or by superfluous evacuation, and by causes to those similar, by infusion of matter cold and humid.
And cauterize only this single species which is made by the effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the patient with pills and similar substances, which are made on the two sides where the pain is, three lines according to the width of the patient, because you have with a tenth in each line, cauterize or more, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of him.
And make cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a medial cautery, according to this form:
Chapter XLIII.
Of cauterization at the beginning of yellowing.
Often this disease happens to small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that they accidentially stumble over their structure in the leg, and elevation and movement.
And atrophy in the last spinal bone of the back and its joints, which already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore, when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize it with a cautery that is circular according to this form: which presses the cautery over the whole part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you want, cauterize on the circuit of the vertebra with the pointed cautery two or three lines. And let the points be close together.
And after curing the place until it is healed with what we have said.
But beware that cauterization is not administered in yellowing that is made by a spasm of a nerve.
Chapter XLIV.
Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, as gout caused by cold is cured by the method of cure and the pains are not removed, then cauterize them.
And it is that you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And let it be an olive cautery of which this is the form of it:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the thighs or to other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize that on each thigh with three or four cauteries of the whole part with this olive cautery.
And if many cauteries that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard your hand with the cautery before, be only around the circumference of the bone.
And if the pains reach into the thigh and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the arms only, and it is called  suagra, then puncture in the circuit of the  foci as they revolve, puncture in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture in the circuit of the foci on each joint and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pains reach  to some joints in the elbows or to the muscles, then cauterize those of the whole part of the armpits.
And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done with good regimen and flame is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healed, God help.
Chapter XLV.
Of cauterization of ruptures.
When a rupture happens in the groin and the intestine protrudes before the hernia, and this begins to protrude, then, as we command the patient to leave their food on that day and use of lenitive causes so that the wound descends from their belly.
And after, hold the patient between your hands on their back, and command him to keep his leg inside until the hernia is thrown out or the intestine appears.
And after, return that with your hands and feel with your fingers the rupture on the bone of the pelvis, with the sign that the extremity of which is similar to the majority of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it:
Until it is hot and throws sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out again.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery on that sign with your hand, with the cautery straight, and hold it until you can feel the bones of the pelvis within the middle of the groin; and repeat with that another time if you have not achieved it in the first attempt within the bone.
And observe carefully the position of the intestine during the cauterization, so that you do not burn that intestine so that it does not come to death or other great evil on the patient.
And know that when you have the cautery, do not touch the bones, do not spoil your operation.
And know that the cautery of children should be subtle according to their size and measure.
And then care for the cauterized area for three days with a border until the scar of the fire is healed.
And then care for that with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient shall lie on their back for 40 days until the area and the plague are sealed.
And know that you shall pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time of his healing, which makes the belly of him, and that the intestine does not come out, because of the effort of healing.
And then when he wants to rise, after 40 days, then administer him a decent amount of food, and keep that for another 40 days.
And be careful of work and repletion of food and drink, and of voice vehemently, for when he uses this regimen of healing entirely, he will be healed.
And you shall say the cure of ruptures in the other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want them not to pull, then cauterize the rupture of that with a round cautery according to the quantity of it, and it is that which is exhumed from the codena as the third part of it; and then care for that with what we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And already some first ones say that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with a tent:
And it is placed a line that goes through the latitude in the broadest part of the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter .xlvi.
Of cauterization of torsion.
When in some members by accident or by percussion pain and that pain persists for a long time and does not confer to the cure with medicines, then know that you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And be the cautery of every member according to its magnitude and smallness, and its virtue and weakness, and location of torsion and pain of it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, well is; and if not, then repeat over it the cautery; for by custom of those pains is that they be pointed of member to that member which approaches to it, so that know that you can seize those with cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter .xlvii.
Of cauterization of leprosy.
Leprosy sometimes with cautery by great help, and more so if the kind of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And therefore, as you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and has that cured with what we have said in the division and no it is, and fears over the patient that the corruption comprehends the whole body of him and the whole complexion of him, then cauterize that over the head with 5 cauteries: with one in the middle location of the head, and with the second further from it, and the front to the end of the hairs; and both over two horns; and with one behind, over the nape or service.
And lastly place your hand with the cautery a little while until it impresses in the bone a small impression, and from it the scabs be displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors be relieved from it; and cauterize over the flesh according to that it is needed.
And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then know that you should cauterize that with those cauteries the ones we have said in the head; and with a cautery over the extremity of the nose, and with two cauteries over the two cheekbones, and with two cauteries over two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries over the vertebrae of the back, and one great one over the vertebrae near the hip, and one over the ribs, and with two over the knees, and one over each knee, and with two over the elbows, and with two over the muscles, and with two on the tendons of their feet; and cauterize that over all the joints of the fingers of the hands and of the feet, and over each heel of their feet, and over the hollows of their hands.
And guard yourself from the nerves which are over the talus that you do not burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery over the bone of the palate and with another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the liver.
And know that as much as you adjust cauteries, so much is more helpful and more conferent; and know that the patient does not have in the cautery pain, as much as they have the ones, because for that the body of him already is stupefied.
And know that the cauteries should be great or few according to the members and the joints according to that it is preceded of the species of the tools.
And then carefully apply the cautery with a mixture of flour of earth, honey, and the other cure while it is healing.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of the cauterization of stupor.
When any member is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that numbed member with cauteries according to what merits the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the depth of the bone a little. And then carefully apply that with an enema while it is healing.
And sometimes a stupor is cauterized which should be in the arms and feet, and in the vertebrae of the lower back and where the nerves emerge that move that member, and the stupor is removed.
May no presume about this, but only he who is wise in the anatomy of the members and the egress of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the cauterization of warts that are mortified.
When warts are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize upon that with a cautery prion a little according to the quantity of the depth of the bone until it is removed the whiteness and color of it, and the color of it is changed.
And then carefully apply that with a mixture of flour of earth and lentils with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a dove or the blood of a roundworm, of each one a part and all are mixed, and then let a linen cloth be laid and placed on the spot until it is healed.
Chapter L.
Of the cauterization of crabs.
When a cancer begins and you want to destroy that, then cauterize that with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is rolled.
And some wise men say that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle place; but to me it is not seen, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is more right that it be cauterized in its circumference with a circle as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Chapter LI.
Of the cauterization of abscesses.
When some abscess is delayed in maturation, and thus it is because of the superfluity of doing so, or because of the state of the patient, who is old or decrepit, of little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around it with many small pointed cauteries; and then let it be left to hasten in maturation.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it: and pause that in the middle place of the abscess until it penetrates the bone.
And if the cautery in that place that is furthest, so that the body of the arm be relieved; and then carefully apply that until it is healed.
Chapter LII.
Of the cauterization of corrodents.
Corrodent is a corruption that walks in the member, which corrodes that as if fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corrodent in a place that suffers cauterization by fire, then you ignite many small pointed cauteries, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrodent is.
And then cauterize that from every part until you eradicate all the corrosion and there remains no cause of it.
And then leave it for three days, and place on the cauterized places a cloth soaked in oil mixed until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption.
And then carefully apply that with an ointment that generates flesh.
But if after three days you see that flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on that which is raw in the corrupted places.
And corrodent is medicated some times with sharp medicine, which that is placed in place of cautery. But however, cauterization by fire is of more light help.
And I have already said the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have need of it.
Chapter LIII.
Of the cauterization of claws and of other similar things.
Many times there is a disease in the parts of the foot called a claw, and it is a thick, deep cause, which twists the foot; and cauterize in those two ways, so it is cauterization by fire and cauterization by boiling water.
But cauterization by fire is that you ignite the cautery concave resembling a vulture's beak, which should be made of iron according to the quantity which contains the claw from every part, and be of subtle margins.
And then place that ignited on the claw, and then revolve your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the claw until the cautery reaches the depth of the claw. And let him rest for three days before he begins to move his arm. And apply a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on it for a night, for it will be eradicated from its roots.
And treat the area with a wash of generative flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not converted, and many times it happens on the surface of the body, mostly in the arms and feet, then you must administer cauterization with water in those cases. And take a small piece of iron or lead or a vulture's bone, and place it on the boil; and pour a little water into the piece, and hold your hand, and you revolve it with the compression of your hand, and press the edge of the piece into the root of the boil, and the water will flow down into the root of the boil. And wait for the patient a little while for the bite of the water for an hour, and then remove it, for the boil with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do with those and the other until you come upon all of them in the body.
And treat those pus that the roots of the boils are eradicated with this wash which the flesh generates.
Chapter .liiii.
Of cauterization of tremor.
When someone has a tremor due to a fire in the nerve or due to fever of a fiery cause, or due to another similar cause, then you must cauterize that with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with a cautery; and with a cautery on the feet of him, and on his stomach, with an olive cautery.
And the tremor of him will be rested and hasten the health of the fiery illness.
Chapter .lv.
Of cauterization of white accidents in the body.
When in the body there are white spots, and they are pustules that are made of thick corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning when it appears, it must be cauterized above all the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with myrtle twigs, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of erestologia long; or with a lens cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized additionally at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and if they are not believed, and the superfluity is broken, they do those, and heal from those.
But however, this must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter lvi.
Of cauterization of blood flow accident by incision of artery.
Many times there is a flow of artery that is incised, the plague which must be defiled, or due to the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and then similar, and it is difficult to remove that.
Therefore, when it happens to you with this, then you tie with your hand to the orifice of the artery, and place over it your finger, and press that many times until it stops the flow of blood from your finger, and that it does not come out.
And apply in the fire the olive cauteries few and large, by number few, and exhale over them while they are ignited.
And take of those one small or one large according to the place and the plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein, quickly pus that you have removed your finger, and put the cautery until it is abcised and restricted that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery well heated from the cauteries which in the fire are prepared, and therefore do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is restricted.
And guard yourself that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it comes upon the patient another malice.
And know that when from the artery flows blood, then it is not possible in those to restrict the blood, and mostly when the artery is large, if not by one of four ways: or with cauterization as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities of him are well burned and the blood is restricted, or that it be tied with a rope or with a ligature for strong structure, or that there be placed upon it medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the blood; and be tightened with a cushion with decent constriction.
But he who administers decent restriction of him with ligature and with constriction with cloths or by position of fiery causes and similar things, do not confer otherwise than shortly.
But if this happens to someone and the physician is not present nor medicine, then open with the placement of the finger on the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of him until the blood is stopped from the sovereign part of the plague, and over the artery the finger is not removed; and over the artery be sprinkled with cold water of much great coldness until the blood is coagulated and thickened; and more sew in which he has to cauterize or of medicine necessity.
Of incision and perforation and ventoses and of phlebotomy and of poultices and of their likenesses.
We have already said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which the use of a cautery with fire is convenient and with medicinal comburents, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary in those with the forms of the cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters of the subordination of the head within the feet.
And I proceed in this chapter in that same manner, so that the one who desires it may be helped with what he has asked for.
And before that I begin this, know, children, that in this chapter it is for terror that which is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for that which you must have great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many times catz evacuation is made, which is with blood, with which the life of man is, the sprinkling of the vein or incision upon the abscess or opening of fistula or purification of the poultice or extraction of the arrow or incision of the bite and their likenesses. And of all those, fear and trembling accompany, and in the midst of their catz, death.
And I admonish you that upon you may not fall that which is in this state, because sometimes it behooves you to handle men with many manners of illnesses. And of them, some will go away with their illness and it behooves them lightly death, and thus by the vehemence of that which he finds of his illness, and by the length of his illness, and with the illness is fear which signifies death.
And of those is the one who gives to you his trust and said, you expecting with that health, and his illness is pernicious.
And therefore, you must not consent to that one who comes to you of whom is this manner; and your caution be greater than covetousness, and your greed; and do not presume any cause upon that except with certain knowledge which verifies that to you, and to which by the succession praiseworthy.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses of prognosis and indication of them to which is health converted, because in that is to you helper over acquisition of fame and of memory, of praise and of glory.
O, children, God in you breathe his understanding and no oste to you direction and protection, because that is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to that which preceded in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head within the feet, so that it may be to you alleviated that which you demand of it and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of the children.
Know that this illness many times behooves to the children of the birth and when the midwife tightens the head of the child, his vitality.
And sometimes it behooves for hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this illness except in the children; and to all those whom I have seen, the death was joined, and so it is to me seen laid work in those.
And I have seen that a child whose head was of water filled, the head of him was always so magnified that he could not rise over himself for the greatness of his head, and more than the humidity increased within that fire died.
And this humidity, or is added between the bone and the bone, or is added after the bone upon the skull.
Because the operation in that, if the humidity is between the bone and the bone and the abscess is few, then you must do in the middle place of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and be the length of the fissure two nights within that the humidity runs, and this is the form of the spatum:
And therefore if the humidity is more augmented and the abscess is major, then are here two fissures according to this manner:
And if the humidity is after the bone, sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open from all parts and the water is squeezed when you compress that with your hand to the parts of it and it is not that to you hidden. So that you do in the middle place of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
And then the incision extracts all the humidity; and then strengthen the fissures with cloths and cotton; and then embroca that above with wine and oil within the fifth day, and then unbind the bandage and cure the wound with tents and unguents, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member be comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, which you consider to honor the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, because sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or in the right, or in the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess and the repletion of the water appear, and do it according to what to you is best possible.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and endanger it flows of blood and dies the patient for that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter second.
When a catarrh or wound occurs in the foot or toes, and it is ancient and does not respond to the cure of medicines, then the last cure in this is the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those that the patient raises their head, and then press the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and then consider where the vein is; and the places of each on the places that are near the ears depress, and so they are hidden unless in some men.
And then press on the artery with a tent, and then incise each one with the spatula of each sharp part with incision reaching into the bone, and so it is for the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and break it at the incisions to the upper parts.
And so the length of the incision is two fingers adjusted, for when any vein is incised the blood is emitted with a pulsatile egress, which jumps forth by frequent jumps.
But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then you must measure from the ear the quantity of the space of three fingers, and then press with a tent, and end into the bone.
And this that you must get out of the blood is the quantity of a cup. And no more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and the repletion of the artery of him.
And then consider the plague, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the cephalic, then incise this so that it does not become a cautery abscess.
And then strengthen the plague with feathers and with bandages of cloth of it, and then cure that with poultices until it is healed.
Chapter .iii.
Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When a certain old or acute catarrh occurs, by humidity of the ailments and by quality in the lacerations of the temples, or an old vehement and similar to those, and it is medicated with the ways of cure of medicine and this does not respond, then we have resorted to these ailments the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises the hairs that are in the temples; and understand the artery appearing in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden unless in few men by vehemence of grease.
And if to you it is hidden, then the neck of the patient be tightened with some cloth; and then press the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears to you manifestly. And then you take the spatula of which this is the form: And then you scrape the bone with that with facility until you reach the artery; and then put in it on the point and extract that to the superior parts until you extract that from the bone and discover that of the tunics which are below that, of all parts.
But if the artery is subtle, then wrap that with the extremity of the oncii, and then incise of that one part according to the quantity for which they are elongated the extremities of it and are contracted, and it will not become a flow of blood, because if they are not incised it will not raise the blood of all.
And then evacuate of the blood of a cup. within three.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie that in two places with a double strong thread of each or with long cords, and do not cut it before the consolidation of the plague and it becomes a flow of blood.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do this in that hour or another hour.
And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery into the bone with a cautery cutellar until the extremities of it are incised, and stay in the place of that same work.
And it is better work if the patient had fever or is of hot complexion; because cauterization is of those causes that help the finishing humors, and therefore it is better in judgment.
And cover the extraction of the arteries that you have placed the place of the cauterized, and they be placed on it poultices decently made, and then be cured with dry medicines make to rise the flesh and with poultices until it is healed.
And if while you work another time becomes a flow of blood from the artery, then you take to restrain that blood, or with cauterization, or that you place the place of the cauterized, and tighten your hand until it is restrained the blood. And if any cause of those is not to you present, then pause your finger on the place until the blood is coagulated, and embroca the place with water of vehement coldness until the acuity rests, and be tightened according to that you must.
And that which is lighter in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, because you have marked the two places with a probe, and then pause for a while, not igniting, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that it is elongated that which is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated altogether with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two handles is the same. But however, if they are less sharp, two handles are better, because if they are sharp like two handles, it comes close to each burn, and it does not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, as in those there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in those and the flesh is slightly cut.
And this work is better in all works and lighter.
And the spaces which are between the two handles are the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Chapter Four.
Of the cure of the bodies of acute and sour humors of the heels.
When the humors are sour, and the body of those veins which are on the test of the head of the forefoot, and it does not comfort in that any cause of the cure of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already reddens and feels on his forehead a walk as if it were a walk of ants, and the heels of that are exhausted, humid so that already the hairs of them are known, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient agro mixed in the cure of those of this operation, and numbered that cure with space.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hairs which are on his forehead, and then incise three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure should be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little of the movement of the lachrymal muscles, and the third on the other side.
And guard yourself from the incision of the arteries which are in two places, and elongate your hand from the continuation of both mandibles. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
And if you a piece of sponge dressed or dried cloths with which you dry the blood.
And then introduce the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: which is from the temple to the second incision. Excoriate with that all the flesh which is between the two incisions with the ciphac which is on the bone, and then make that of the middle incision into the second incision. And then straz in this spatula and introduce into the first incision another time an instrument which is called a cutellar, sharp on one part and on the other not sharp.
And pause the side of that sharp, the flesh annexed from the flesh, and the side of it leans between the bone, and impel that until it reaches the middle fissure, and incise with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But that the incision be continued to that which appears of the flesh, and then make that in the middle fissure into the other fissure.
And because the blood runs in an equal quantity, squeeze the places of the pieces of congealed blood.
And then pause in each fissure a calgua of old cloth, and pause on those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, and watch that it does not become an abscess caut.
And on the third day untie the bandage and administer a large infusion of boiled water or tea, and then cure that with an enguent of basilicon with rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of lagremas by catartz and in the heels descending from the parts between the head.
When there comes a sharp and continuous catartz, and sometimes the heels of the patient are exhausted, small, and already the regard of them is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and from their case the hairs, and in the front of the head is a sharp pain leading and consequent exhaustion, then you know by these accidents that the matters and catartz do not come but from a few veins of the parts between the head.
And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to shave his forehead, and then incise in that one fissure in the middle of the forehead, a little by the width (and begins with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and the incision is into the bone; and elongate your hand from the lachrymal muscles which are bad from the mastication), until the bone is uncovered.
Exsiccate all the blood with a sponge or with a dry cloth and then refill between the two lips of the fissure with old cloth or with linen rags. And then strengthen from above with powders mixed in wine and oil so that it does not become an abscess caut.
And when you untie it and see that the abscess has already diminished, then cover the wound where the bone begins to grow flesh, and then care for it with a drying regimen that causes the flesh to grow, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix it, and of it make a poultice and administer it in these wounds at the birth of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
Of the cure of that which catz in the ears.
Every cause that catz in the ears is one of four species, whether it is mineral stone or a similar cause, such as iron and lead, or it is from a plant such as celery or bean, or it is a fluid cause such as water and sour wine and their like, or some beast.
And therefore when stone catz in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust or grow in the ear, and place the ear in the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill in it some cause of violet oil or sesame, and then administer the extract of it, and make the patient snort with a condiment, and plug the nostrils to prevent the event of snorting. And then place in the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, because many times it is thrown-out with these causes.
And if it is not thrown-out, then administer the extract of it with the instrument called the gesti epicicarios subtle, of which this is the form:
And if it is thrown-out with the gesti, well is it; and if not, then administer the extract of it with a subtle onci of little duplication.
And therefore if it is not thrown-out by this, then make a canula of brass and introduce the extremity of the canula into the tract of the ear and close around the canula with wax and softened oil so that it be not open except the canula. And then extract with your own wind with strong attraction, as many times as with water that we have recounted.
But if it is not thrown-out in this manner, then take of hawk's light or of beechwood prepared with which the birds are taken a little quantity, and place that in the extremity of the ray, and then envelop over that well-placed cot. And then introduce that into the tract of the ear with facility, and then dry the ear of humidity.
And therefore if it is not thrown-out with all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut to such an extent that it becomes an abscess caut or spasm.
And the manner of cutting that is that you at the beginning lances the patient from the cephalic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make that cezer between your hands and convert the ear to the upper parts, and finish with a small fissure in the root of the ear above the gray of it in the place well pressed of it. And let the fissure be of lunar figure until it reaches the stone, and, the stone reached, hold it with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure at that hour with velocity, and care for it while it is healing.
And if the cause catz in the ear is one of the fats that grows and inflates, then administer the cure and the extract of it; but if it does not obey your advice and thus, then you take a subtle spatula according to this form: and administer with that the abscess of that fat which is catz in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place that in many pieces, and prop extract it with the onces or with a subtle gesti, or with an incision as we have said, because the extract of it is alleviated.
But in the water which is entered into the ear, cover that the patient uses of snorting with a condiment at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cot, and pour over that ear in which is the water, and if by this it is thrown-out, well is it; and if not, then take many small stones and leons according to the length of the finger, and calfa those in the fire a little, and the patient introduces one of those into the tract of his ear and jumps on one foot of that part and percusses with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear. Therefore do not cease this with stone until all the water is thrown-out.
Therefore do not cease this with stone until all the water is thrown-out. And already the water is thrown-out in such a way that you take paper or of gonc., i.e., and put one extremity of it in the ear and extend the other extremity with fire until it is burned most of it.
And then put another gonc and do this as many times until all the water is thrown-out, and strach that with a canula as we have said of the stone extractor.
But in the extraction of beasts entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, as it is, and similar to it, cure that as we have said in the division; but if it is of a large thing which causes the appearance of the root of the vessel, then administer the extract of it with gesti and onces, and the cause of it is lighter of all the other causes which catz in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not compare your cure, then you should watch the ear in the sun.
And therefore if here appears any cause of the worms, then extract them with tweezers or with subtle instruments, but if there appears no cause, then take a tube that is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, which is the shape of it: And introduce the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can suffer; and then suck with that by strong suction, and do this many times, until all the worms are expelled.
But if you do not obey this, then you seal and close the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been described in the treatment of worms, and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
And so is your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the shape of it: And make it of silver or of brass, narrow at the bottom, and with a flat top.
And therefore, as it is necessary, it is like that it is in the concavity of the tube. And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it at the end of it decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the concavity of the ear, or juice of some herb, or water that you want of these medicines into the tube — and that is in the ear — and then introduce the reed with cotton underneath and press with your hand that with moderate compression of it until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is put into the ear should already be scalded with fire a little. And guard yourself that the cause which you will distill into the ear is not too cold, because the ear medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter .vii.
Of the cure of ear opacities.
Sometimes some children are born from the wombs of their mothers unperforated, and this happens to some men, opacity in the flesh of the ear due to plague or to flesh nothing in that; and this opacity sometimes is made in the preon of the canal of the ear which does not allow the sight, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the preon of it, which does not allow sight, is in the greatest dispositions of difficult healing.
And in that one in which you achieve sight, then you should place the ear of the patient in the sun and watch it. And therefore if you see opacity appearing, open it with a subtle spatula of which this is the shape of it:
If the extremity of it in which the latitude is small, of which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula is of two lengths long so that it does not make a hole in the ear.
And therefore if the opacity is due to flesh born in the ear or in the flesh of it, then take that with subtle instruments and cut it vehemently with facility until all the flesh is removed.
And if the opacity is in the preon of the ear, then take a subtle reed long and scalding that with fire a little, and then put that into the flesh of the ear.
And therefore if you have felt opacity with what the patient feels with facility, due to the gravity of the ear, exert the oppression of it with facility; and guard yourself that you do not plague the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a cloth of it according to the quantity of the width of the tube which you have wrapped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or that you take some and put it in water and pulverize it over it, being thrice crushed, and use it; and if you see the ear already being suppurated, then you should extract what is there and replace it with another one which you wrap in cerot that is made with rose oil, until the suppurating abscess yields; and then cure it until it is healed.
But if there happens a flow of blood, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure which you restrain the flow of blood, which is said in the treatment of distillations.
Chapter .viii.
Of the cure of athezil which happens to the eyelids.
Athezil which happens to the eyelids of the eyes sometimes is humid, sometimes dry.
Therefore, you should have those with tweezers or with instruments, and cut them with a spatula of their roots, and then place on the spots, being thrice crushed.
But if there is pain with a flow of blood, then you cauterize those with a subtle lancet cautery.
And the best cauterization is after the incisions and many times return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment of a swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Many ailments happen in the eyelids of the eyes, some cause a swelling that is assembled to a hardness and firmness, and for its size it is called.
And it is the accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid below and above.
Therefore the operation on them is that you consider it when the swelling is proceeding in it, in that which appears from the eyelid and is bad to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, make a cut on it with a fissure along the width, and then drain it from all parts with ease while it is being emptied, and then suspend it with a bandage and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and cure it while it is healing.
And if it is small, to you it will not bring harm for that because the ointment of it restores it and heals it.
And if the swelling is declining to the inner parts of the eyelid, then you scrape the surface of the inner parts, then you cut the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage, other than which you have indicated from the incision, and press it from all parts, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, then you do not notice it in any cause.
And after the incision, wash the eyes with salt water; and cure the place with water that heals while it is being healed.
Chapter X.
Of the cure of the axcirnah in the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath is a gray which is generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and mostly happens to children, it aggravates the eyes of those and accidentially causes their cataract the most; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because of that because tears stick to them.
And because of that they make those rub their faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; and on the eyelids of their below the eyebrows are humid, the ones which have already covered inflammation, and imminent appearance of a cataract is in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the cataract within them.
And some manner of operation is in that one who the patient puts their head in your lap, and then you put a cloth on them and make a poultice, and make a circle of it according to the quantity which contains arthernach from all parts, and then you put that on it and press with your fingers from all sides so that it is aggregated arcernach in the middle of the circle, and then make in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incision with a fissure along the width, and the fissure not be greater than the fissure that is made in a flegma cut.
But in the pressing cover that you make the incision all while you reach to arcernach, because in the most convenient processes arcernach is processed by fissure according to the form of white gray.
Therefore extract it with cloths the ones which you have enveloped between your fingers to the parts before and roll between your right and left hand while it is being dispersed.
And guard yourself that you do not adjust in the fissure so that with the spatula you do not reach the eye and scratch it.
But if it does not appear to you arternach at the beginning of the fissure, but that you adjust in the fissure a little with ease while it is being processed arternach; and then extract it as we have said; and then submerge cloths of it in water and honey and put them on the place and strengthen them with poultices.
And so those who crush salt and put it in the concavity of the fissure so that that which is remade of that humidity.
And then cure it while it is healing.
But if it happens in the place an abscess, then cure it with poultices of cedar until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
Of manners of touching the eye.
When in the eyelids of the eyes there are hairs that are natural and are ancient, then those annoy the eye and cause manners of illnesses as such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelids and film while that is a cause of destruction of the eye that is called touching of the eye, and cure is done in four manners: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine according to that which was said before in the chapter of cauterization; or it is done touching by incision and suture; or by canes according to that I will say.
And therefore cover that you put the head of the patient in your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, it is good; and if not, insert a needle into it in the part which is further down from the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread downwards, and that be— near the margin of the eyelid in which grow the hairs— near the hairs, and pull the thread to the lower parts with the eyelid, and turn it with the ray.
And then make in the inner part of the lower eyelid the hairs adjusted with a spatula incision from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and then extract the thread and put below the eyelid small powders of cotton or of cloth, and then press on the eyelid with a tent, and let it be as such as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
But however the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because this is already diversified in men, because some of those who are indigenous that it should be incised of the eyelid a large quantity according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then bring the spatula on the two lines which you have cut, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor. And if your fissure is near the natural hairs as well as the thickness of the king.
And then put the ounce in one of the two angles of the tendon, and then scrape that whole, and then adjust with the incision the two lips with wool or a fine thread of wool, and cleanse the blood, and make adhere that which superflues of the threads on two eyebrows with some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and otherwise, do not care.
And then remove the suture of the threads within three days or four, and then care for that.
And if you want, leave the plaque its suture, and care for that with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated, it deserves the sealing of the plaque and the adhesion of it; but suture is better. And therefore, I say so as the ancients used to taxanir.
But however in it there should be solicitude over the patient, and it is of good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And it is another manner in taxmir, and it is that senses over the eyelid figure as a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three uncis separated and congregated according to this form:
But if it is not possible, have the uncis, and that is not equal, then take a needle in which there is thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and introduce the other thread near the lacrimal major, and the other thread near the lacrimal minor, and adjust between those two the threads with equality, and then with those elevate your hand with equal elevation, elevate the whole tendon on which it is marked as we have recounted.
And then adjust the two lips of the plaque with suture, and care for that until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs, it deserves the incision or the fissure, sew that abscess with cerot and to it semblance, and with enguentz.
And some times it is necessary to the eyelid that its hairs be converted, then it is necessary that you use in that of what we have said of incision; but suture in some is more artificial.
To taxinir with canes is according to this form: And it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure which is dedent as I have recounted; and then by art make two canes or two subtle splints of which length be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them be less than the width of the spatula. And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
Then add each one with subtlety over what superflues of the eyelid of the hull, and constrict the canes of each part with strong stricture, and leave that for some days, because the tendon by the stricture will die and be denied and will be able to enter until by itself it falls.
But if it is late, then break it with the toroyras, and then care for the plaque until it is healed.
Therefore, as it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not puncture.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this form: And have the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
Of elevation of piercing hairs in the hull with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and rough and piercing the hulls, then the operation in it is that you take a subtle needle and put in it a thread of cedar subtle and lion, and then that you adjust the extremities of it and nuts in a way very subtle. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of a palm.
And then you compose another subtle thread below it in brief, and use the extremities of that if you want.
And then place the patient his head in your lap, and be near the sun so that your work be declared, because it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the hair adjusted which has needed of engen, and make that penetrate into the eyelid festinantly until you extract that from the natural hair.
And then pull the hair until under and introduce that into alixati, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand with that until the hair be outside-placed with alixolati in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if it is thrown alixalati and it is not thrown the hair, you will throw alixati to the parts below with the thread which you have composed with that, until in it be thrown alixalati of the trau sobira.
And see that with the vision of the hull, because then you will throw alixati and the thread, and grotan some and close the hull, and leave the closures for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place and is born upon that good flesh.
And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a longer skin from the natural hairs, and it is raised with that, or that you let it enter so that it be lengthened a little space, and then you raise that.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cure of the cataract that comes in the eyelid above.
When it appears in the eye, and is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted above, or on the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of a plaque or section or cautery, and it is called leporina, and this cataract is either natural or accidental, and is made by consolidation of a plaque or sections or cautery, or by something similar to their malcuratz.
The manner of the operation in it is that you make that consolidation and that you separate the lips of it, and place in it in that which is between those a piece of cloth of linen, and tie those together so that they are healed.
And beware that you use of cure of it of the causes which dry it, constrict; because if you do that, return cataract worse than at no time you have had.
Use in that of causes that moisten as is fenugreek, and embroiled with the water in which they are cooked the root and seed of it, or enguent dyaquilon, which be liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge in that the cloth, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all engine that is not consolidated according to the form that you had at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is nothing but any rectification of cataract that does not return the form of the place according to that you had before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of cataract that is made in the lower eyelid.
This cataract that is made in the lower eyelid, which is truly called cataract; and it is of it some natural, other accidental.
More accidental is made by plaque or by section or cautery or by other similar things.
And the way of the operation of it is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and place that in the flesh, and that you make it pass from the lacrimal of the left into the lacrimal right, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the parts above with the needle and sew that with the needle, and inscribe with a wide spatula. And therefore if it returns the figure of the eyelid as it should, well is; and if not, take the ray and place that in the broken figure, and with that converts the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the edge of the lower eyelid.
And be the extremities of the two fissures of two angles of the incision, which you have made until they converge, and be of their made angle so that when they converge be made figure of them.
And this figure is Greek letter: the lambda.
And then oppose the flesh that by the amount that is the edge of it acute below of it, that which secures the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew those with the thread of wool; and then cure those with that which we have said of the softening medicines and of the poultices until it be healed.
And if cataract must be by fissure or suture or cautery, then it is that you make with fissure plain on the hairs of the eyelid according to that it is preceded. And then separate with the poultice between two lips according to that we have said.
In the sum of the sermon of the cure of cataract when it is above or below, that run in it operation, according to that it is prepared of the form of cataract, and that is in form of motas diversity.
And the artificers wise all times prepare engine in any manner that is possible to it so that it make return the figure to the natural form, or near that, and that patient according to that it convenes of the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many men so that it be solidified the eyelid more above with the album of the eye, and be prohibited of the facility of movement and of its natural works, therefore it is that you enter the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and elevate in that, or extend that with the unci.
And then you inscribe the adhesion with a spatula subtle, which be not with the sharpness of the incisions, have obtuse a little so that the patient not be troubled during the operation, and remove the spatula that it does not damage the eye with its sharpness.
And be your incision that excoriate that adhesion with facility so that it be returned the eyelid according to its natural form and that be healed all the adhesion.
And then you put in the eye salted water with which you wash it; or distill in it of zunia dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of it, and place on the eye wool infused in album of hen, and then the third day use of solidifying causes until it be healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the incision of the nail and the prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Know that the nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous, and it is similar to a hard, fine cypress; or it is non-nervous, resembling white congealed moisture, which when touched, it is forced to take on a lump, it is cut off and the lump is not put back in.
And both kinds do not begin until the lacrimal major, within which it goes little by little that it covers the sight and prohibits the light and the movement of the eye.
But the way of acting in the incision of it is that the patient puts his head in the low place, and then opens his eyes, and elevates the eyelid with his hand, and then collects the nail with a lump of little duplication and extends that to the upper parts. And then takes a needle and introduces into it a thread of horse, or bull, or water, or something similar, or makes the needle's tip double little by little and places it in the middle of the nail, and penetrates it with the needle, and ties the nail with thread; and extends that to the upper parts, and excoriates with the thread the side of the nail which covers the pupil. And thus you follow that with the thread into the back of it.
And then you incise the remaining part in the root of the lacrimal with a subtle spatula or with small scissors, and let the flesh of the lacrimal be natural so that by incision of it, there does not become a continuous flow of tears.
And some times the nail with the sole lump extended or tied, as we have said, and then it is excoriated with a lion's spatula, of which this is the shape of it:
And guard yourself that with the spatula you do not touch the cornea and that there comes a rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then the incision is put in the eye a little salt trice or a di of cef made of china, and let it remain there for another day; and then care for it with water that covers it until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle, nor is it put into it the lump, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as I and recount in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a subtle lion's spatula, sharpened according to this form: with subtlety. And if you see that it is rarified and confused and put into that root, then distill from your hour into the eye of china made of china or with china rog or with salt trice, and open the eye for another day.
And then repeat over that operation until it is removed all that is of it, otherwise that the contrary abscess comes to be in the eye, for then you let it, and cure at the beginning the abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation over it with reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it is noticed in the eye for great nuisance, be suspended with thread; and incise it from that one part, and do not end the incision so that it does not incise the flow of tears.
And then distill into the lacrimal china rog and made of china until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the incision of the algodon and of the water that is born of flesh adjusted in the eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some, flesh red is born, and it is over-placed so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches over the eyelids and forcefully compresses the eyelids at the sides and is assembled like a rose of balustrade.
But the operation in it is that the patient puts his head in the low place; and then opens the eyes of that and collects all that flesh with convenient threads to water, and you water with a forceps or with a basket; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until all is finished with the scissors, and guard yourself from the eye that you do not damage it with the thread of your operation.
And let your incision be with which you incise those or with the spatula which we have recounted in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which is collected as it will come the form of it as will come to this chapter.
Therefore, as the incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the eye with salt trice, or distill into it china powder and similar to it of the corrosive medicines, and place over the eye a cloth with album of egg until it is assured of an abscess not coming.
And if there remain any cause of algodon and it is a dangerous abscess, and you fear an abscess not coming, then let the eye and cure that abscess with water that it yields that abscess, and then repeat over it with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted that happens in the eye of this kind.
But however, you cover that all cure of the eye from the free way by natural or accidental way, operate with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is suffering that operation.
Chapter xviii.
Of the collection of blood in the groin.
Blood veins are called varicose veins, which are swollen above the groin and forbid the clothing their operation, and they extend the groin in length for days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the groin in which the varicose veins are strong and in it there is no other illness besides varicose veins, then you collect that blood.
And it is that you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a bandage or with two, according to your prudence; and let that bandage be of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two bandages gradually in one, according to this form:
And then those veins are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and remove the blood hour by hour, while those veins are being remade from the groin and are being rolled up.
And guard yourself that you do not lead the groin with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the afternoon facing the sun, and be firm in your operation that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have finished, then you distill in the groin chief green or red so that with its sharpness it corrodes that which is remade from the varicose veins.
But if that is not possible for you, collect everything in that hour, and then you plaster everything with what gives relief to the pain, and leave it for a few days until the pain is subsided and it is secured from a cauterized abscess.
And then repeat over it according to the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter xix.
Of the reduction of arizati to the nose.
When you cure arizati with cautery or with sharp, burning medicine according to how it is preceded by the narration of it and it is not healed, then it does not occur in it unless you make over the abscess, you observe the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the pus until the bone is uncovered.
And therefore, when the bone is uncovered and there is corruption or blackness in it, then you remove it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named a sharp cap, and it is made of iron, and its head is rounded as if it were to grasp it, and it is made pointed by the point of a file or by a sharp knife (as it is in the following form).
And place that upon the corrupted place of the bone, and then revolve that between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped.
And this is done several times, and then restore the place with drying and sticking causes.
Therefore, if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh growing in it and the body of the wound is separated and remains for 40 days, and it is not renewed and it is not abscessing and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then it does not occur in it unless you reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and in this manner: and it is that you uncover the second bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and as soon as the bone is uncovered, then you take a tribe according to this form:
Let the extramitat of the iron be triangular, and the shaft of it be primely attenuated at the extremity as often as it is so.
And then place that upon the bone, and it is near the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the groin, and then revolve your hand with the tribe until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient as soon as he feels wind coming out from him when he feels your hand.
Therefore, then restore the place with sticking, drying medicines as you have been taught.
Therefore, as soon as the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter which flowed to the foreparts returns to the nose, therefore it is lighter on the patient.
Chapter xx.
Of the reduction of the prominence of the groin.
When the groin eminates with its entirety and does not occur in the clothing or harmful diminution, then you must relax the patient, and then you follow it, and then you place windy scarification in the neck and suck for good suction; and then place upon the groin liniment which is made of acatra and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster upon the groin with soft powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of soft lions, and each cloth be duplicated in four folds; and make of those soft.
And then place those one upon the other according to the quantity of which the groin needs. And then strengthen upon those with a hard cloth with a strong structure; and repeat the ventosa with suction and scarification; and then remove the ventosa and leave the groin straight during the day and night.
But if meanwhile the ligament is softened, then it must be made very tight.
And then remove the ligament during the day and night as we have said.
And if you see the hernia already be reduced, well, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the stricture and the leeches until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of the incision of the eminence of the tunic uvea.
When there is a rupture in the tunic uvea, and it is prominent and proceeds outside the eyelids as if a grain of rasim, and the shape of man is seen through it, and you want to cut it, then the operation in it is as we have recounted, that you introduce the needle into the root of the uvea from the side below to the side above, and then put the other needle, which has a double thread, in the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then cut the place of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and tighten that knot.
And then extract the needle and place it over the wool soaked in egg white and leave it until the thread falls into the uvea.
And then cure the wound with water that comforts it until the plague is healed.
And sometimes, gather all the parts together in a circle of cloth around the wound, and then perforate it with a fine spatula that comes to the bottom of the wound, and run the albuminous moisture, and let the wound descend and enter quickly.
And then tighten until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of alconati.
This disease that is called alconati is nothing else but the one that is adjusted in the wound similar to a descending stream and is not that.
But the manner of working on it is that you make the patient lie on the prepared and straight saddle, and then take his head in your two hands and hold it so that you see the healing coming to the lower parts, and then let it dry and not descend, and let the light stay, and the patient sees the causes as he sees.
And if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
But if the descent to the healing with water that we have said is not prepared, then make the patient lie between your hands and then take a fine spatula and  fen it on that over the panniculus, removing a little of the continuity of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown (within the empty place), until the healing is exuded.
Therefore, as it is exuded, then you distill into the wound water boiled in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey.
And then cure it with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of the descending water from the wound.
We have already said the species of water in the division and which ones it is convenient to perforate with a sermo, declaring, then that one according to the health.
Then, you must make the patient lie between your hands on a cushion and tie his wound tightly.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his wound if the wound where the water is is the left; or with your right hand, if the wound is the right.
And then with your right hand take an almond, if the wound is left; or with your left hand, if the wound is right.
And then place the tip of the almond near the crown for the thickness of the ray in the album of the wound from the side of the lacrimal gland, and then gently press the almond with virtue and turn your hand with it.
And then penetrate into the album of the wound and feel that the almond has already reached the void cause.
And it should be the measure of the path of the almond to the bottom the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the crown of the wound; for you will see with that pupil the vision of the eye through the clarity of the cornea.
And then place the almond into the place where the water is, and then you throw it down once, then another, and therefore if the water descends quickly, then immediately wet the patient's wound with water over which he sees his own vision, and the almond in his wound.
And then rest for a little; therefore if the water has descended, then you remove that other time until the almond is not thrown.
And therefore when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the almond with ease, and turn it with your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a little clear salt of gemma and with that wash the wound inside; and then place outside the wound a cloth or stopper or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white and lick the wound with water.
But in those who are of our time, place on that commi trissat with egg white.
And if you do not obey your almond to the entrance of the wound because of its hardness — for it is some of the men whose wound is hard very much — then you must take the spatula which is called alberid of which this is the form:
And therefore, perforate with that that conjunction, and do not end your hand in the tract, and do not be unless you make a way for the almond to the subtle place.
And then introduce the almond according to what we have said.
And you must complete the work, having the patient lie down in a quiet, dark room, sleeping on their back, and prohibiting all movement.
And keep him in nature so that his nature be cleansed, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
And bind him according to his disposition on the third day.
And after, in that dark room, remove the bandage and expose the foot to view, and have him see some things, and then return the bandage on the seventh day.
And do not let him do this at the time of healing or soon after the infusion. You must, however, let him do this when the water flows lightly and with great and vehement regard.
But if an abscess occurs, then you must unbind the bandage before the seventh day, and rectify it with water that brings the abscess to a head.
Then you cover his eyes and place a cloth on his face through which his breathing is regulated, leaving him in the dark room for some days.
And then withdraw him gradually from that room and converse with him about his ailments.
And know that in alchemy, the disciple is not excused from vision some times, and then you should be bold about the operation.
And we have now come to some of those who are in the Artach, and some said that they made a fire in the Ayrac almond, perforated with the one through which water is drawn.
But however, I have not seen any in our land who had perfected the water, nor have I read about it in some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of almond so that it may be above those who ignore them:
And they are made of brass or iron properly, and their extremities are with this triangular subtlety, the acute extremity as such is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose there are born various growths, of which some are a cause that is assembled like a scorpion's tail, or a polyp; and this ailment is called a polyp because it resembles that tail represented. And of this, the flesh is cancerous, pale, of a dark color; and of this, the flesh is leonine not of a dark color.
Therefore, in that which is in these leonine flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must have the ailment be seen between your hands and placed in the sun, and smear the nostrils of him, and prick your own finger on those flesh. And then extract that to the foreparts, and then incise that which you have comprehended of those with a sharp, subtle spatula from one part, as long as you know that all the flesh has been removed; if any cause of it remains, of which the abscission is possible, then you root that with one of the subtle instruments with ease, so that nothing of it remains. But if it bleeds or an abscess occurs, then you pause to him what you must; or if it is of malignant abscesses, then you cut and cauterize it so that it is abscised, and the cavities are all removed.
And then put in the nose after the incision, a mixture of wine and water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is flesh in the pus, the leftover bones of the nostrils to which the abscission has not reached.
Therefore, then you must introduce a needle into him, to which there is some thickness, and sew in it wool thread, and place between each thread the quantity of a finger or less, and engage the patient and introduce one extremity of the needle into the nostril with the ray or with another cause which is possible to him.
And after that this has been done, that he may smell the odor of it until it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and be spit out on his throat, because many times the children in the schools do this action, and it is easier for him who wants to do it.
And then place the two extremities of the needle, one extremity that goes out over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a lock of flesh with the threads that are in the needle, and do this as long as you know that the flesh is already among the threads of the needle.
And then extract the needle, and place in the nose after the abstraction of the blood a poultice, and do this for three days or more until the engorged corrodes all that is left of the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead pipe for some days until it is healed.
But if you are in need of a cure that requires this, use of it.
And this is the form of the instrument to capipurge maker with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:
And make a pouch of silver or of copper, which is similar to a small open lamp, so like a small container, and the meat apparently.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of the instrument to be a suction-maker and flat, uncovered; to which handle at the back of him, with which you have that when you heat it in oil or water that you want of the suckable causes.
Chapter XXV.
Of the nails in the extremities of the nose.
Many times the nail is seen in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and observed in certain days within which it is not possible to see its regard.
And for this, you must inscribe that at the beginning of its appearance, and you must inherit all that. And then put over the place the cautery or the medicine comburent the which was in the place of it.
But if its incision is late until it is magnified, then consider if it is calcified, hard, of brown color and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron for it is a dangerous abscess; for many times to him who incides this abscess, evil comes to him who had it.
And if the abscess is of a lion's touch and is not of a dark color, and times that incision is possible in all of that, then evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and cure the place with water that is needed and constrict within which it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of the suture of the nose and of the lips and of the auricle when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by resemblances.
Know that when accidents happen dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer in that operation unless in some men.
Therefore, when it happens to someone because of those, consider if it is fresh plague with its blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with suture, and then cure that until it is healed.
And if the lips of the dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then you must excise each part of its apparent edge until blood comes out. And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and over those pulverize blood of dragon and incense, and put over the powder a piece of diaphaniacon plaster, or of some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave that tied for two days or three, and then untie that and change that plaster and leave it until the threads are by themselves separated, and then cure with an enguent until it is healed.
But the manner of the suture is that you add the dissolution of continuity or with needles as we have recounted in the suture of the belly, or add the dissolution of continuity with thread as to you and it has been said.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts between them.
Many times it happens to many men in the parts between their lips some abscesses hard resembling fat of worms, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you must convert the lips and open each of those hardnesses completely, and then the abscess you must fill the place with incense and until the blood is restrained, and then it must be washed with vinegar and the place must be cured with water that is astringent, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Greatly of times there is on the gum flesh adjusted the one which the ancients called albulus, therefore, you must suspend that with an onion or that which you have with the forceps and incise that you must see its root, and let the sania run or the blood.
And then put over the place incense or other astringent or excicative powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise that secondarily, and cauterize that, for then the cautery will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the reason of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the parts between them and of the front and between the gums are adjusted rough, jagged, and some times are of black and are made citrine or green until the gum sees through it corruption and are made the teeth jagged.
And therefore, you must make the patient lie between your hands and put the head of him in your lap, and grate the teeth in which appear those roughnesses and causes resembling sand until from them there remains no cause, and that do of the blackness and of the citrinity and of the others until they are modified.
Therefore, if this is what is at the beginning of the reason, it is good; and if not, then you repeat the reason on those on the other day and the second and the third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have need of various forms and figures of tools according to how it is prepared for your operation. And for that the razors which the tooth is scraped from the root are different from the razors which are used between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you must prepare as you will see shortly:
Chapter .xxx.
Of Tooth Extraction.
Consider that you cure the tooth of its pain with all care and take your time in its entire extraction, because there is no reason to supply the void of it when it is extracted, because its substance sublimates while it is excused in its extraction.
But consider when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, that you must firmly certify which tooth is the painful one, because often the pain deceives the patient and makes them think it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, because we have already seen this by the operation of the jaws.
Therefore, as you must certify which tooth is the painful one, and that you know well, then when you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gums of all parts, and then you may with your fingers, or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that concaves.
And when you see that it is strong, take hold of it with great force for good speech or strong stupor, and place the head of the patient between your teeth that you well hold it so that it does not harm, and then pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and put that below it from all parts with facility and exert the removal of it as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must compress with cloth that break and tighten it with the extremity of a fine ray so that it is not broken in the hour of your constriction upon it with your grasp.
And you must work carefully with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gums and guard much your strength that you do not break it and remain a part of it, and return to the patient for the malice that may be greater than the first pain of it.
And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their fisting and audacity over the extraction of theirs, because they do not administer what we have recommended; because often they make come upon men illnesses greater than those that are more difficult to be broken, and the roots of them remaugulated all, or some of those, or what you extract that with some bones of the jaw as many times as we have testified.
And after the extraction of it, the mouth should be washed with wine caut or wine with salt.
And if it is necessary to flow blood for this, as many times it is necessary, then sprinkle some quantity of zegi and sprinkle it over the wound, and if you do not confer this zegi, cauterize it.
The form of the forceps and subtle grasps with which the tooth is bad at the beginning be of long extremity, of short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when with those you must work.
And be as times of thick handle so that when you tighten with those they are not bent, be short extremities.
And be made of Indian iron, descentment made of straight extremities, and in the extremities of those be teeth of which some are inturned in the others and tightened by strong constriction, and some times the extremities of those be the form of the beak of a bird which has the name of ciconia, so it is called, and are of strong constriction.
Chapter .xxx i.
Of Extraction of Teeth and Extraction of the Bones of the Jaw Broken.
When you must extract the tooth which is broken and there remains some cause, then you must place upon the place a poultice with border for a day or two until the place is softened; and then with some pliers or grasps the extremities of which are assembled to the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
The extremities of those be made from the inside as a file or rasp.
And if you do not obey to your easement with these forceps or grasps, then you must dig upon the root and scrape all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has the name atali, so it is a small lever of which the form is this:
And be of short extremity thick a little, and not be embedded so that it is not broken.
Therefore, if by this the root is forced out, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is of triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it is triangular and of a very fine extremity.
And now you have helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the shape approaching the following: And with other instruments which I will describe in the shape of teeth; for help is made with this instrument which is assembled like a large onion, and this is the shape:
Of the triangular, twisted or short extremity, which is some thickness, and not buried so that it is not twisted.
And other know that the instruments of the teeth move so and similarly the other instruments.
But the skillful and subtle artificer in the art, finds for himself according to what to him signifies the operation and the diverse maladies; for there are maladies to which the ancients did not say nor posed proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is fractured, or if it may, then it should be cured upon that in its place with what is convenient to it of the instruments and the forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help thee with the gesture of which this is the shape:
And let it be in it some thickness little by little, and be strung or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is set; and then restore the place with medicines convenient to it.
But if in the bone is a small puncture, then rat that from that puncture and its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of the teeth eminent above the others.
When the teeth are eminent not according to their natural course, for those the shape is jagged, and more so when it befalls to women, and more so to the venerable old; therefore, as you consider: if a tooth is nothing near another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or liniment it, then root that; but that it not be annexed to another tooth, then you incise that with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to a pig's snout, and be made of Indian iron of a sharp extremity.
And let your incision be with which you incise that in several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it not be gnawed by other of the teeth.
And if the eminent tooth is exposed to filing, then file that with a file of Indian iron of which this is the shape:
And let it be all of Indian iron and the margin well-made; and be of very small points as a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth be filed little by little in several days with facility, so that it not be gnawed by other teeth and caga. And then line that at the end, and root that with some razors.
And if the tooth of which one part is fractured and it pricks the tongue, then as you file that until the expectation of that fracture be stayed and leveled, and be filled so that the tongue does not prick it nor the word be corrupted.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of restoration of teeth marred with wire of gold or of silver.
When accidents befall the teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot strengthen upon what he manages, and you have cured that with stiptic medicines, and it has not been of value your cure, then for so that it not be gnawed, it is engendered in those that are strengthened with wire of gold and not of silver, for silver becomes green and as soon as possible, but gold at no time is changed.
And let the wire be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that it can enter between the teeth; and the form of the direction is that you take the wire and take the double of it between two healthy teeth, and as you increase with two tortuosities of the wire between two marred ones, or if one or many, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And then iterate the tressing into the part of which you commenced, and strengthen your hand with facility and saviness so that it not be marred.
And let your tightening with which you strengthen the wire be the roots of the teeth that it does not escape.
And then incise the extremities of the superfluous wire with the forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place with gesture, and convert those and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the marred tooth, so that it not do lesion to the tongue. And then loosen that as tightly as Roman.
But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another wire in such a manner in all its time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the direction of two healthy teeth and of two marred ones, as well as sometimes these tied:
And when it is done that a tooth or two are returned to their places after the falling of each one, and they are recrescent as we have recounted, and that they are marred.
And this is done only by good artificers and wise.
And sometimes it is fitted some cause of the bones of cow, and it is made as such as the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the place in which the tooth fails, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves with that for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which comes from the tongue some times or is natural with which man is born, or accidental and accidental by plague which is already consolidated.
And the operation on it is that men open the mouth of the patient, his head existing in the tieu se; and elevate his tongue, and then cut that ligament nerve according to the latitude within which the tongue is loosened from its recess.
But if in that there is any hardness or knotting, and this is due to the consolidation of plague, then you cast an ounce and split that by the latitude within which you have incised the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And guard yourself that no fissure is made in the skin of the flesh and that you split here the artery and blood comes.
And then wash the vestiges of the incision with water or with wine or with warm water; and then place the tongue loosely; so is the way which holds the patient's tongue in any night so that it is not consolidated again.
But if blood flows, place on the spot vitriol tri-sated; but if the blood comes, then cauterize the spot with a blunt cautery which convenes to this. And this cure with the other causes within which it is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Sometimes a boil appears on the tongue resembling a small lump that prohibits the tongue from its natural operation; and often it is magnified within which the mouth is opened.
And the operation on it is that men open the mouth of the patient, seeing in front of the sun and consider the boil.
And if you see it of dark color or of black, hard, to which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that quarter for it is cancerous.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put the ounce on it, and cut it with a subtle spatula, and cut it from all parts; and if blood comes to you in the hour of your operation, then you place desus zegi tri-sated, that is vitriol, within which the blood is restrained.
And then return to your work within which you had treated it with compliment of it, within which it is washed with wine and salt; and cure it with the other cure to water within which it is healed.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of the extraction of a boil from the ears and of that which is nothing in the throat and of the other boils.
When in the throat there is a swelling, so are the glands which are assembled swollen, which sometimes appear outside and are called boils, which when you cure them with water that we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the boil is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; let it lie there within which it is ripened, and then either you will extract it, or it will be broken by itself.
And if it is of white color, radon, and the root of it is subtle, then that is the one that must be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the boil has already rested of it covered with a complete repaus or if it is diminished with any diminution; and then do make the patient stand before the sun, and his head be in the tieu se, and open his mouth, and the servant takes between his hands presses the tongue of him from with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it is made of silver or of brass, and it is subtle with a point.
Then, as you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the boil, and catch upon that your gaze, then take an ounce and place it in the middle, and pull that to the outside parts as much as you can. Other water that you pull some cause of the tunics, and then cut that with the instrument of which this is the form:
Other water that you pull some cause of the tunics, and then cut that with the instrument of which this is the form: And it is assembled to forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the straight of the other, very sharp, the one which is of iron indi embedded.
But if this instrument is not to you present, then cut that with a spatula of which this is the form of it: And it is sharp on one part, not sharp on the other part.
And since you have incised one well, cut the other according to this same manner of incision, and then the incision the patient should wash with warm water
But if there is a flow of blood, wash with water of decoction of the bark of millefolium or of myrtle leaf and similar to those of the stiptic causes within which the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure it within which it is healed.
And sometimes there are born in the throat other boils other than those boils, and cut those according to what I have said in the incision of two wells equally.
And I had already treated a woman of an abscess that was located in the throat of her, the abscess tended to a brown color, of little feeling, the one that had already closed the throat of her, and the woman breathed with tight meat, and had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and she had already arrived at death if may agues stood for a day or two.
And the abscess had already grown so much that there were two fingers inside that it came out through two tracts.
Therefore, I thought to treat her fistularly and I stayed in one of them, and I pulled out that one, and it was thrown out of it a large portion, and then I incised that one from where I understood the other tract, and then I opened the mouth of it, and I compressed her tongue, and then I stayed the one in that abscess.
And then I abscessed a large portion of it, and it did not run from it but a little of blood. Therefore, the throat of that woman was absolutely opened, and she began to drink water, and then she ate food, so I did not stop inciding that abscess many times for a long time, and a new abscess succeeded in its place, the one that incised until it was prolonged.
Therefore, I brought a needle and cauterized the throat of her, so as to add no more; and then I walked around and I did not know what God did of that, after me.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of incision of a boil when it is abscesses.
When catarr arises in the boil, and it is abscesses and it is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the part below thick and round, and then it is called bubo.
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and it does not confer your cure, and you see many times that the abscess cauterizes already it is gone from it and it is subtle, then cover that you incised the one that is aggregated round; and if it is at that longitude, and it is sanguine, of brown color or of black, and it is not felt in it, then cover that you attempt the incision of it, because in that there is fear about the patient.
And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient to be seen and press his tongue with an instrument of which you process its form and then stay the one in the new, and pull that one down and incise that one with one of the two instruments the ones that are said in the incision of two wells.
And cover that you do not incise that one but what is adjusted over the natural term its addition, because if you incise that one more, you will lead the one's speaking.
And after the incision, use of that which have been recommended in the incision of two wells, and cure that one until it is healed.
But if the patient were frightened by the incision of it, cover that you use of an engine in the cauterization of it its fear, and the manner of the cautery in it is not but with sharp water, and it is that you stay the head of the patient in your own, and then press the tongue of it with the instrument the one that we have said, and then take of the water the one that we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and confer with that cause alive, and stay that not thick nor subtle, and of that fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Be the extramitat of it concavity in which is stayed the medicine as well as the concavity of a spoon of ray, and stay the instrument with the medicine over the boil, and the patient jagua over his latz so that it runs saliva or musellage of the mouth of that one by the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend from that one of any cause over the throat of it and that it leads that one.
And after your hand with the medicine, and express that one over the uvula for the space of a middle hour until you see that one being darkened and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cloth and envelopes that one over the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and intermet the ray with the cloth in a canula of above until the cloth adheres in that canula, and do that many times until you achieve what you want of the cauterization of the uvula, and after that, lay that one because it dried and falls down after three days or four.
And if you indigeysses that you iterate the medicine, iterate that one, and after the cauterization abstergeys in the circuit of the uvula with cloth imbued in border, and modify with that which is in the circuit of it of the medicine, and be washed with cold water, and be cured for the moment with embrocation, and dedicate with gargarismes until it is healed.
And this kind of cure is more safe than incision and more long of fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with that which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with subfumigation in this manner: receive calament, ysop, origua, ruda, sicados arabic, camomilla, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in an olla, and be submerged with hot wine, and boil; and the olla be well fought with lut decently, and be in the middle place of the olla a tract, over which is stayed an instrument concavity of ram according to this manner; be made of silver or of ram.
And the limb is inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the uvula above the pharynx, until the uvula is somewhat obscured.
And then repeat this process until it is dry, and be careful not to do this treatment at the beginning of the development of abscesses, because it would tighten too much on the abscess, and in the case that you do this, you should declare the abscess of the patient.
But if you do not have this instrument at present, then take a cane and on the end of it make a hollow of wax, so that the patient's mouth is covered, because the wax prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat and of other causes.
Many things adhere to the throat or a thorn of fish or some other cause.
Therefore, it is necessary that you extract what appears of those things, over which you place your gaze, because you press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it is declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is hidden to you in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because often the cause annexed to the throat is forced-out by vomiting; or that the patient swallows a piece of bread or a root of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or  chew a piece of dried sea sponge, and tie it firmly with a thread, and then the patient swallows it, because when it reaches the place where the thorns are and are extracted, then they are forced-out. And more, take an eel and tie it with a thread, and it is placed and gently extracted; or take a pear and gently the stem and gently the bottom.
But if they are not forced-out with those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it is thicker than a ray, and at the end of it is a concavity which you insert into the patient's throat with ease.
And have the patient's head elevated upwards, and be careful that the touch of his bone of the throat, so that it does not break his body and with that which pushes the bone or the thorn, or that the physician with his hand.
But however, that the patient is more easily inserted, by his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and pushes down, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it is forced-out.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of the extraction of bloodsucker annexed to the throat.
When a leech is medicated with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and does not confer, consider then in the throat of the patient to the sun, because you have examined the tongue of him with the instrument which we have recommended to you.
Therefore, if you see the leech, extract it with a small pin or with a subtle gesture gently.
And if it is not possible to extract with that, then take a concave tube and insert it into the patient's throat, and then place in the concavity of the tube a burning iron, and do this as many times (until the leech is dead and is removed from the throat) and abstain the patient all day from water.
And then chew a full mouthful of cold water, and work the patient's mouth in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow any of that and bad luck the water one hour after another with your hand, because the leech as soon as it feels the water catches.
But if it is not forced-out with what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cinnamon or with asafoetida with the instrument which we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so long as it falls.
And there is another way of operation in fumigation of that, which is that you take a bowl in which there are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a blanket in the middle of which there is a hole, and it is composed in that hole the end of the instrument; and then let go from below the fumigation; and have the patient put their mouth at the end of the tube, and clamp their mouth so that the fumigation is not forced-out until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech, because the leech will immediately fall.
And if it does not catch, then you repeat the fumigation many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and eat salty and hot foods, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that with this regimen it be forced-out.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech of the throat is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, unless that in it there is some curvature: Which is placed in the throat, and the end of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is gripped, in which it is sharpened with a file, so that, when you grasp any cause, it does not let go.
Chapter XL.
In which is the sum of the discourse concerning abscesses and their incision.
Abscesses are certain kinds, of certain manners, according to the remembrance of them, of each in this book.
And they are diverse in their perforation and incision by two manners, of which one is by the species of abscesses themselves; and by that which we understand of the humidities.
And the second manner is according to the places in which they happen in the body, for the abscess that happens in the head is another from the abscess that happens in the buttock; and the abscess in the fleshy place is another from the abscess that happens in the joint; and to each of them is its own way of operation.
And more than abscesses are some which ought not to be perforated until the maturity of the healing in those or the completion of them.
There are other abscesses which ought to be lanced when they are ripe, and not until the completion of them, as abscesses that are near the joints, for when an abscess is near a joint, its being is prolonged until it can exert that which is in the circuit of it, and then it is likely that the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, so that it becomes a cause of contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the lancing of it until it is ripe, it will cause harm to the principal member; or it is near the buttock, therefore lance it before it is ripe; and you ought not to lance it crude, from incomplete digestion, but that which is near the buttock, so that you cannot make the prepuce of it and extend it to the parts behind the buttock, and make a fistula, or that it may be made in the term of it that it may not be healed. But more, you ought to know the hour of the lancing of the abscess, and thus it is when it is ripe.
And know that it is ripe when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, and according to the diminution of the heat and of the pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And that you ought to know the lancing to be done in the place farthest from the abscess and of pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
And lancing always should be done along the length of the flesh or of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or of the feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, lastly, in all places equal in which there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use of lancing according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is best to let the lancing of it until the digestion of it is confirmed according to its completion, as we have said; for if you lance it before that, it prolongates the body of the pus of it and of much filth, and then very likely the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it.
But some abscesses are lanced according to the width of the flesh or of the body as necessity demands, or according to that which the member indicates.
And you ought to administer little lancing, and in large abscesses a large lancing and many sections according to the variety of the greatness of the abscesses.
And others are of abscesses in which the wound ought to be concaved and be incised, when it is done so that it may be like bread and it is made in the term that it already sticks, as that which happens in troops of boils and buboes.
And of those are those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those is that in which it is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as the abscesses of the angles.
And of those are those in which a round section and a lunar section, and similar to those, are administered.
But that one to whom there is no such as his abscesses are superficial, you ought to lance that with a superficial lancing, or plane only.
And you ought when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, that you lance it and do not take that you extract all the pus in that hour; having extracted from it one part, and then plug the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and then do this many times according to gradation until it is all gone.
And most of all if the patient is of feeble virtue, or woman pregnant, or child small, or old in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the egress of the pus, and very likely the patient will die, and you operate on them.
Therefore guard this chapter with great care, and in the lancing of these abscesses, you ought to abstain from the plagues and consider therefore if the plague of the abscess is little, or is a plain section, then you administer the poultices of it or of a counter-poultice; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the lancing are many, then you ought to place a cloth in each one until they meet together.
And if in the abscess is cut off a part of the wound or has concaved that in the circuit, then you ought to cover it with a poultice of old cloth or a thread made of linen of it, as when you have treated loaves or roots, its humidity; and strengthen that in the third day; and then process that and cure it with that which you ought of the unguents until it is healed.
But if blood flow occurs during the time of the operation, then you administer cold water and sweet wine to the patient, mixing a cloth with them, and place it over the bleeding area many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and care, and follow the powders that I have recommended in many places in this book and its division.
But if it is in winter, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you must put powders in wine and hot oil, and place them on the area.
And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you must place powders mixed with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all that be heated until the third day, as we have said, and then you must open the abscess and cleanse it and administer to it what is necessary for its healing.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said of every abscess in what manner is the way of its cure by chapters individually.
Chapter .xli.
Of the incision of abscesses that come in the neck of the head.
In the neck of the head, small abscesses appear, and they are of a kind of nodes which contain tunics that are to their making; and the kinds of them are many.
And of them are pimples, and of those are those that contain moisture similar to lime. And of those are those that contain moisture similar to powder, and resembling them; and of those are those that are stony, hard.
And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must, the exterior of those does not cause artery opposition.
And the operation in the section of those is that you probe those with an instrument the shape of which comes near thus, the one which is called entromes, as long as you know that it contains.
Because if that which contains is moisture, then you cut that with a section according to the length by a superficial section according to this form:
And it begins in the section of the line of .B. into the line of .G. Therefore, as the moisture is evacuated, then you excoriate that skin that contains that moisture, and do not leave of that any cause of all, for troops many times return, if there remain of that any cause.
And then you submerge the wound in Egyptian wash, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that the wound and leave it for another day, for with that you corrode all that is raw of that pellicle.
And then repeat over that wound with Egyptian wash second and third times if you judge it necessary, until you are confident that there is no raw cause of that pellicle; then cure the wound with wash until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it according to this form: with a section having the form of a cross, and get onces between the two lips of the section and scour that from all parts, and exert your strength in the extraction of the tunic which contains that.
But if your artery makes opposition, then do what I have recounted to you first.
And similarly do in the stony abscess of section and cure according to what we have said to you; and section over a stony abscess is lighter, because it is of little blood and of little moisture.
And sometimes there are some of these abscesses which are in the head in some men with which there is no moisture at all; the cause of which is because I incised upon an abscess in the head of an old woman and retrieved the abscess as a hard, rough, white thing, which could not be squeezed, and if anyone was struck with that, it would bring them plague.
But in the other abscesses accidents in the head other than this one is not this chapter, as well as the abscesses that come to the heads of children and which you must root from the ears, but the section of all of these is a superficial section.
And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them so that the body of the body be relieved of the sickness in the lower parts.
And then cure those with what is necessary for that cure.
Chapter .xlii.
Of the incision of scrophulas which occur in the neck.
Many times these abscesses become in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in the other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and are many that are generated among them, and all scrofulous of those is within its own tunic, and as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
And the kinds of these scrofulas are many, for of those some are stony, and of those some contain humidities, and of those some are malignant ones which do not obey cure.
Therefore, in that one which you see of good disposition in the Touch, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the neck, and is smooth in all parts, and is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not hard, then you must incise that with a superficial section from the lower part to the upper part of the body of the line of .G. into the line of .B., and scour that from all parts, and extend the lips of the neck with an onci, or with many onces if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more caution that the vein or nerve is not cut.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that you do not injure the patient with a cut, or that you cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and you prohibit yourself from your operation, then apply a tri-smelted vitriol poultice or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and tighten the wound, and leave that within which the sharpness of the abscess rests and the wound is softened and begins to be pus-filled. When the blood is cut.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then inquire with your little finger if there is any cause of other small abscesses, therefore cut those and cleanse them.
And if it is in the root of the large abscess, then cover it so that you do not cut that abscess from its root. Cover it so that you hold it with a strong double-folded cloth and let it remain within until it falls by itself.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already submerged in Egyptian wash, and then cure it.
And if you cut that abscess completely, then cover it so that you adjust the two lips of the wound and sew them together as soon as pus comes out so that there is no superfluity.
But if you see that there is superfluity due to the size of the abscess, cover it so that you understand to cut the root of it, and extract it and administer suture and what has been said.
And those of the abscesses that contain humidity, perforate it with a superficial puncture where you see the place of maturation of it, and place a puncture of it so that it drains the pus from the bottom of the body, as we have said.
And then administer puncture, lukewarm washes and similar things to those, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleansed, then cure it with a wash of generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter .xliii.
Of the section of the pile of the abscess accidental within the gullet.
The ancients said this section in the epiglottis, and no one in our land has done it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men having a squint, cover that the extraction of the epiglottis be avoided, as for that it is not done well for that all the veins and major arteries of the body are here.
But in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or gullet or the two ears, when the illness is not in the canal, cover that you use the section of the epiglottis to avoid the damage which is done by perforation.
Therefore, when we want this, cover that they cut the epiglottis below three circles of the circles of the epiglottis, or four with a small section for the width in that which is between two circles by quantity, that the section be in cartilage, not in the flesh, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the blood vessels of it are there.
And if the physician is fearful, cover that he then extend the throat of the gullet with tongs, and then open the throat until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if he sees any cause of them.
And then cut the cartilage as we have recounted; and it is significant over the section of the canal by the flame which is of that it is emitted with what is of it discolored and by the abscess of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour is remauguda in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the throat of the wound, and sew that alone with the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recounted, exposure is nothing but that you see that some of these abscesses have already opened the gullet of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and the skin of it is dried up, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound by any respiration, and be saved from death.
And for that reason command to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice of it is for three days; and then command so the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and put it in her gullet and cut with it a part of the trachea of the lung, and I was called to the cure of her, and I brought back the woman as if she was dying, and uncovered the wound and brought back the blood which was emitted from the wound small.
Therefore, I was confessed that she had not cut a vein nor guided it, and the wind was coming from the wound, and I cured her until she was healed.
And I did not accuse the servant if not that she was hoarse in the voice, and after some days she returned to improvement of her dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epilepsy there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the incision over the abscess which occurs in the throat outside, and is called a hernia of the throat.
This abscess called a hernia of the throat is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is common in women.
And it is according to two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one it is not born of healing.
And the accidental one is according to two ways, one of which is similar to fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to an abscess that is made by the clogging of an artery, and in that one there is fear. And no cove that it be presumed to him as iron except in that which is small. And then you probe that and investigate it with the finger, and if you find that it is similar to a fatty node, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise it as you would with the nodes, and extract it with the thing that contains it from the skin and the bursa; and if not, then you scrutinize its whole being, and then cure the place with whatever is necessary for healing before it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of the incision of the kinds of nodes.
Of the nodes there are many kinds and I have already said all the kinds of them in the division.
And I will recount thus the difference between a node and an excrescence as you make a doubt.
Therefore I say that in an excrescence there is heat and fever and violent pains until the boiling of the superfluity is calmed; and it is complicated with putrefaction that at that hour the fever, the pain, and the heat cease.
But in a node there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that which is in its own sac, like a lion's cub.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a cheese and is made like that, whether it is larger or smaller, and they are according to two kinds, whether they are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, that you examine it and investigate it at the beginning with the instrument that is called an intromes, according to as it will come its form in the chapter which is near this.
And the manner of inquiry of abscesses and of all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid place which you find in the abscess, and you will revolve your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the core.
And then finally your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and you extract the intromes and consider what is found in the residue of it.
And if the humidity is flowing out, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial incision according to as I have said in the other abscesses.
And if from the residue of the intromes there is no humidity, then you know that it is fatty.
And dry it over it with a section having the shape of a cross according to this form: as you are taught, and suspend it with pins, and exfoliate the core from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sac, if you can, over it and extract that sania with the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many times it must be done, and then you extract it in pieces until there remains no cause from it.
Because if from it remains no cause, little or much, the node returns according to the most.
And if you see that from it remains any small part, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and tighten the wound, and place upon it that which is cauterized, and cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you stitch the two lips of it and cure it with what encloses.
But if a pulsating vein is in it, whether it is pulsating or not, then you cauterize and moisten the place with a mixture of vitriol and lye, and let it stay straight for two or three days until you can scar the wound and that the boiling of the blood is calmed; and then return to incise that which is broken from the node.
Chapter XXXVI.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary in incision and perforation.
Of those there are the forms of the intromes, and they are of three kinds, of which one is large, and of those one is medium, and of those one is small.
The form of the large introme is this:
The form of the small introme is this:
They are made of iron, of wood, of extremities well-rounded, so that they fit into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the instruments, and they are called probes, and one of them is called a berid.
And there are three kinds, for some are large, medium, and small.
The form of the large one, its form:
The form of the medium one, its form:
The form of the small one, its form:
Convey that they are for those abscesses and fistulas and buboes so that among them are those of the bones and other causes.
And they are made round, thick, long, like large needles with which the scabs are sewn, and they are made of citric bronze, or of lead or of iron, or of silver, And the best are when they are made of citric bronze.
And they are made the probes of black plum, the ones which are agreed that for those ones to be opened the fistulas in the concavity of which they are reflected, that they are reflected with their lightness with those reflections.
And they are of three species, for some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its stricture.
Form of the large plum probe:
Form of the medium plum probe:
Form of the small plum probe:
The forms of the probes are of many species, for some of them are simple, to which there is only one curvature, and they are of three species: large, small, and medium.
And of them are probes orps, and they are of three species.
And of those are probes having two curvatures, and they are of three species.
And of those are having three curvatures, and they are of three species.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Form of a simple small probe, its form:
Form of a large probe having two curvatures: Form of a medium probe having two curvatures: Form of a small probe having two curvatures:
Form of a large probe having three curvatures:
Form of a medium probe having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three species, for some of them are large, medium, and small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of the medium scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which a section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but that a gentle incision of the nodes be made, the fear of incision of vein or nerve, and by those the disease be healed and tranquility be restored a little by the burning which devours the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of spatulas, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, as you see.
They are made of bronze and are similar to a ray with which and alcohol is made.
And it is in the lateral extremity pointed with a spatula hidden and in that one runs to the parts inside and outside, when you want, as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden among the fingers when perforating the abscesses and do not perceive the ailments, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of leeches with which the flow of blood is abscised, and they are of three species; large, medium, and small; the forms of them:
They are made of citric bronze, round with some length, and they are subtle.
And because these are the species of leeches, you must have large, medium, and small ones, so that by those you can abscise the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when to you first it is not medicine.
However, do not use those to abscise blood in every location of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places, such as in the folds of the arms and legs, and in the folds of the breasts, and of the belly and of the groins, and similar to those of the fleshy, moist folds.
And sometimes those instruments are made of others small ones resembling little scoops according to this form; by which the blood is abscised when it is done by phlebotomy, or by incision of vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Chapter .xlvii.
Of the cure of the nipples of men which are assembled from women.
Sometimes the nipples of some men become inflamed as they begin to be hairy, and then the nipples become inflamed, and the nipples are assembled from women, and they are far away from the pus.
And to that one who has this, it is necessary that he incisions those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B. to the line of G., and then he excoriates the whole thickness, and then he fills the wound with a medication of flesh color, and then he adjusts the two lips of the wound with stitching, and care for that until it is healed.
But if the nipple declines to the sides and is softened by its magnitude as it should be in women, then it is cut in two halves, its pus overflows, with two sections similar to a lunar figure, of which each one is contained in the other, as long as the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line of B. and the line of G. And then he excoriates the groove which is between the two lips of the wound, and removes the fat, and administers what we have said of the stitching and of the powders, what is necessary in the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not comply with the incision of that which it is necessary to cut due to the restlessness of the patient, and the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with a cotto submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it until that corrosive corrodes what is left of the gray matter, and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
Of the perforation of abscesses that come from the nipple.
These abscesses that come from the nipple are of the kind of scrophulas, hard, the ones that contain a skin that is sac.
And of those there are some that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G. to the line of B. And as all that is in the abscess of the pus is evacuated, then you fill it with old cotto and leave it until the next day.
And then the cotto is removed and it is cured with a suitable ointment to that, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the kind of nodes and of the scrophulas, then you dissect it as we have said in the section about the scrophulas equally.
But if the wound is extended in such a way that it is possible to burn it, then administer cauterization to it according to what we have said before.
Chapter .xlix.
Of the section of abscesses that occur due to artery or vein.
When an artery is ruptured, and the groove which is above it is consolidated, then many times an abscess occurs. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: that when an abscess is due to the artery, it is long aggregated in the front of the body; and that when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel in it a kind of stridor.
And that one which is due to a vein is rounded and manifests on the surface of the body.
And the section over this abscess is an error, and most of all in that which is below the armpits, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, therefore, that its cure with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or on the head, should be avoided.
But over that which is of those due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, dissect in the groove a long section; and then pull the section with forceps and the artery, and delirate from the tunics until it is uncovered.
And then put over it a needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to be able to extract two arteries which are in the temples.
And then pierce the place which is between the two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it comes out, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer care in which it is generated power until the ligaments fall; and then care for it with suitable ointments to that until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to a section of a vein, then you must have with your hand that which is possible of the abscess with the groove, and then introduce the needle below the place which you have had below your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract that from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with a good ligament according to what I have told you in the ligament of the grape of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then introduce the thread with that needle below all the abscess, following the incision of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in the middle of it until when it is issued what is in it, then you dissect the superfluity of the groove, and leave what of it is tied.
And then place on it the powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with warm compresses and poultices while it is healing.
Chapter 1 of the abscess which occurs due to a twisting of nerves.
Thus as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses occur in the nerves when they are struck or occur due to excessive work, and in similar ways.
And it is made most in the places of the  joints or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are damaged.
And it is a serious abscess, and it is similar in color to the rest of the body, and in the majority of its positions it is  inflamed, and when it is tightly pressed with force, the patient feels like a stupor.
And it is not an abscess that is attached in the front of the body, and for this reason the chain is left, and it is damaged in every part and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore those that are in the joints should not be enclosed with iron, because it will very much worsen the contraction.
But that which is in the head or on the forehead,  it should be enclosed with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then you take it with the forceps and excise it to the root.
And if it is large, then you suspend it with a hook, and you excoriate it, and then you close it; and adjust the wound with sutures, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter II.
Of the incision of an abscess which occurs from a boil that occurs to the belly.
And it happens to some men, boils that occur in the bellies of those and in other parts of the body of those, some of which are called funguses because of their similarity to fungi, of which the root is fine and the head of it is thick; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are very magnified.
And I have already seen one, and in the belly of him there were two parts which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, of fine root.
And already the lips of those were reversed and were splitting, and humidity flowed from it all the time.
Therefore I incised those and attributed one in weight of eighteen ounces. and the other of six ounces.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider if the patient is humid, and the color of the boil is white, humid, of fine root; then you incise it with a spatula wide, and be in your presence cauterize it in the fire, because many times the blood of the section of it is expelled a lot; and if you see the blood, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient pale and fearful, guard yourself from incision with iron; but then take a piece of recent lead made, and strengthen it with that boil, the manner of which is that we have said; and leave it there for two days.
And then adjust in the stricture of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease to tighten the lead greater devetz in the boil, until it is excised and falls by itself with its work.
But if the boil is of thick root, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and terror, and especially in that which is in the belly.
But it is possible that you incise the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then care for it until the wound is healed.
And guard yourself that you do not presume to incise that boil which is of dusky color, of little feeling, of slight regard, because that is an abscess of cancer.
And I will come with a recollection of cancer then.
Chapter III.
Of the cure of an eminence of the navel.
An eminence of the navel is made for many causes; or by fissures of the skin which is over the belly, and veins of it the flesh or bowel according to what it should be in the other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery according to what has been said before, or by wind contracted in it.
But if it is by a fissure of the skin and by the protrusion of the flesh, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is lean in pain, and then appears from different situations. And if it is by the protrusion of the bowel, then the situation of it with that which we have recounted, of more vehement diversity, and when you press it with your hands it is hidden, and then it returns; and very much is felt in it, and it is magnified a lot by the entrance of the bath and vehement work.
But if it is by humidity, then it is lean and it is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it increased.
And if it is by blood, then with these signs appears the abscess in black declining.
But if it is by flesh nothing, then the abscess is serious, thick and hard, and it is placed according to a quantity.
But if it is due to wind, then the touch of him is lion.
And the operation on him is that you consider if the prominence of the navel is due to blood from the artery, or from the vein, or due to wind; therefore, if you are prohibited from the cure of him, because in that there is fear and terror as you are taught in the chapter in which I said the abscesses by artery and by vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the hernia or the cloth, then you must command the patient to hold his leg, and be standing extended; and then you must try in the circuit of all the navel, and then command him to stay between his hands on his two, and then surround with a spatula wide in the circuit of the navel on the place which you have shown with the probe; and then extend the majority of the abscess to the parts above with a large incision; and then tie it in the circuit with a strong thread or with a lead and the manner of tying decent.
And then cut the middle of the abscess extended on the ligament and introduce your finger into that point and try the hernia; and if you have found it nor guarded by the ligament, then you extract it and impel the hernia to the parts outside of the belly.
And if you have found the cloth, then take it with a knife; and incise the superfluities of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that point, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put in those two strong threads and introduce the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a manner of cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place until the extended flesh can fall by itself; or incise it when it is subtle and can be done, and then cure it with water that is customary of the ointments until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh nothing in it or due to humidity, then you must concaves the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or the humidity, which you find in it, and then cure it with water that is customary and that consolidates the place.
Chapter .liii.
Of the cure of cancer.
We have already said, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner it is to be cured with medicines, and that it is dangerous in it the cure with iron because it is not ulcerated; and we have said cancer generated in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
And the ancients said that some times cancer is in a place where it is possible the eradication of it, as of the cancer which is in the nipples or in the groin and their likeness of the members allocated to extract all that, and most when it is commencing small.
But when it is ancient and is large, you must not trust to it, because I have not been able to heal from that kind nor have I seen another, nor that has reached to it.
And the operation on it is when it is allocated as we have said, is that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black cholera some times, and then blood it, if a manifest repletion is found.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which he is located with operation, and then prohibit in the tract incisions which are due to it; and then concave from all part with the good bone saw meticulous excision until there remains no cause of the roots of it. And leave the blood to run, and do not cut this lightly, and express the places, and absorb the thick blood all with your hand or with instrument with which is to you possible of the instruments.
But if to you makes contrariety of thick blood incision of vein or of artery, then cauterize that until the flux of the blood is ceased, and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .liv.
Of the cure of hydrops.
We have already recounted, in the division, of the species of hydrops of the water, and the signs of each species, of the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of althitas alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanistres nor to the species of yposarcha, because that is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of hydrops tympanistre with medicines and do not confer your medication, then consider, that if to the patient already is achieved debility, or is with that other illness another hydrops, as if it is in him cough or body of belly and alike to those, then guard yourself that you do not medicate him with iron, because fear is over that.
But if you see the patient of exuberant virtue, and in him there is no other illness but hydrops solely, and not child nor old, then the manner of the operation of it is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister then expresses the belly of him with his hand, expelling the water to the part below the navel, and then take spatula spines according to this form:
be of two parts sharp long, of sharp extremity as a spatula; but however be in it some brevity small by small, so that in the operation with it you do not pass into the hernia, and that you lead it.
And consider if the generation of hydropsy is from the bowels, for when you have the section at the navel, it should be three fingers wide on the right side, over the pubic bone.
But if the generation of hydropsy is from liver disease, then your section should be on the left side of the navel, three fingers wide.
And if the generation of it is from the spleen, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not let your section be on the side where the patient wants to make the incision, so that the superfluities do not run to that place freely.
And then perforate with the instrument the whole skin, and then insert into that section, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the skin and the subcutaneous tissue, and you will excise that; and if the quantity of one fingernail or around.
And then perforate the subcutaneous tissue until the spatula reaches the desired location, and that is the place of the water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape: and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or brass or lead, and at the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on the sides of it there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the end of it is made blunt like a feather, as sometimes:
And at the end of it, which is the most superior, there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately rises on the instrument, therefore it evacuates the water in the middle quantity, for if you evacuate more than that, it is not good in the hour, for the patient will die from the resolution of his animal spirit, or he will fall into a five-day sickness which is near death.
But evacuate according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what the dispositions of the patient signify to you of the virtue of his pulse and of the goodness of it.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it because it is retained immediately by the skin which retains the hole that is on the subcutaneous tissue of which, and I remind you that you should perforate it in that manner.
And then repeat the instrument the next day if the patient tolerates water, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with caution, and guard yourself from error so that there remains little water.
But if you fear for the patient, and let out a large quantity of water, then cure him by burying him in hot sand, and put a lot of moisture in the bath, and wait in the sun for a long time; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen and the liver after the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in what has preceded.
Chapter 75.
Of the cure of children who are born with the places of urination unperforated.
Sometimes, certain children are born from the womb of their mother and the head of their urethra is not perforated (or it is a straight hole or it is not in its place).
Therefore, it is necessary to repair with perforation as soon as it is born with a very fine spatula, according to this form:
And place in the hole a fine lead pin and tie it, and keep it for three days or four.
And when it wants to urinate, it will be able to and urinate; and then return that.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes on the place, will not let this open.
But that one whose hole is straight should be medicated with a lead pin, as we have said, for too many days until it is widened.
But those in which the hole is not in its place, are called "defects," which causes those, that are born with the hole at the end of the head of the urethra, so that they cannot urinate at the sides of their body, until they raise the urethra with their hand to the sides above; and it is not due to their generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad disease.
And the manner of the operation in them is that the patient be laid on his back, and then extend the head of the urethra of him with your left hand with vehement extraction, and incise the head of the head of the urethra from the place of the prepuce with a sharp spatula, as if it were an incision of a feather, so that you do not cut any part, so that the middle of it comes to resemble the head of the urethra and that the hole falls in the middle place as it should.
And guard yourself in your operation of blood flow, for many times accidents happen in this; and place yourself to it with water that you have stopped the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 76.
Of the whitlow which happens in the prepuce at the head of the urethra and of corruption and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the urethra.
Many times this whitlow happens in the urethra and is a prominence of bad flesh.
And of those one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, however, which you should suspend with a fine thread and cut that which entirely encloses it; and then place upon that cut, submerged in Egyptian poultice; and then, that, cure it with a diaphanous poultice until it is healed.
And if it is malignant, of a white color, then you should administer a cautery near the incision of it and the root of it.
But if the white one is in the foreskin of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the white one is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the white one which is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you cure the one outside, because when you cure that one at the same time as the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be troubled.
And if there are blackening and corruption in the genitals and the foreskin, then you should remove all that which is already blackened and which is about to corrupt or that which is already corrupted; and then lay upon that with honey, which is mixed with the flour of the rind of millet and of herbs, crushed and sifted.
And then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
Because the cautery is useful in two dispositions at once, so it is for the flow of blood and for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed all at once, then you should insert into the flesh of the foreskin a lead pipe so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in the one whose foreskin is his, and upon it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion happens because of plague or abscess) you should excoriate with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all sides.
And if it is difficult to separate them delicately, then you should excoriate with a spatula some cause of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is fine, is easily perforated by its slight thickness.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thread of silk, which is already soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then it should be cured with a vi stiptic until it is consolidated.
Chapter .lvii.
Of the purification of children and the cure of that which happens to those of circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like the other plagues: however, since it is of our operation and our will, and it is done to those of our children, it is necessary that we assign to that the better operation and the lighter way, losing less to health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in some of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, the reason for which is that I have found the majority of the artificers and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a knife and with torrets; and they use a ligament with a thread and an incision with the nail.
And I have already tried all these manners and have not found better purification with shears, with a ligament with a thread than in purification with the nail, because many times the edge runs away more below, because the foreskin has two tunics, and the tunic deeper remains, and it is very easily forced to another incision and sure pain. And in purification which is done by alphecati, and is digital, of which the barbers use, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not secured, because very easily it enters into the furrow of it.
But in the operation with a nail, very easily it obscures iron and corrupts your operation. And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and many times it comes in such a manner that there is no need for purification, and I have seen that.
But of the purification which is done with shears and ligaments with a thread, the goodness, experience has shown me, because the shears are of proportional incision, for which the sharpness that is below is as the sharpness that is above; and therefore, as you press your hand so proportionally to both sharpnesses, and you incision so according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the thread with a figure containing the foreskin of the penis from all sides, with which there is no error of all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie down most if it is of those who understand a little, that you do nothing but you tie the thread in his penis only, and that you let it in for the other day.
And then make him happy in all that manner that is possible to you from that which receives his intelligence. And then make him lie between your legs, prepared, and do not be seen by him; and hide the shears in your hand or your foot, that the child does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
And then introduce your hand into the rectum and blow into the anus, and pull that in until the head of the rectum comes out, and then modify that which is attached to it of dirt.
The shape of the forceps for modification, this is the shape:
One side should be non-cutting and the other should be cutting, so that the handle of the key does not come out, and the length of the two points is as long as the length of two handles equally.
But the error in modification is that if the intestines are removed too forcefully from the anus, or part of it, the incision should be made.
Therefore, as you extend that with your fingernail in front of the abscess of the area and that you cut it according to equality.
And if you cannot have it with your fingernail, then remove it with a hook and cut it.
But if three days have passed, and what is swollen remains below the rectum, an abscess, then you let it out until the abscess is cauterized, and excoriate that with ease, and cut it according to what you have prepared.
And guard yourself from the head of the rectum, because it would not be good for it.
And therefore care for that with the water that the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise of the powders.
And if it is cut from the anus beyond measure, and it obeys the parts above, then it will not hurt it.
And but care for that with the water that we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lviii.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is made by an obstruction made by a stone or by congealed blood, or by a tumor or by a tumor, and similar to those of water that we have said of the ways of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with the water that we have said, and the cause is very violent on the patient, then you must administer an extraction from him with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It should be of silver and be a subtle lion concave, as well as a tube of bird feather with the subtlety of a long ray in the likeness of a palm and a half, to which there is a subtle tube at the head of it.
And the manner of the excretion of urine by this is that you take the double thread and tie it in the middle of it wool or cloth for good binding; and introduce the extremities of the thread into the part below of the syringe, and cut with the forceps if there are any superfluous causes of the wool, but introduce it into the tube with vehemence, and then engage the syringe with the border and with album of cow.
And make the patient lie on his back, and rub his bladder and rectum with moist oil, and olive oil and water.
And then introduce the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the rectum; and then double the rectum above at the level of the navel; and then push the syringe inside that; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and that cent le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, and no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.
And then extend the thread with the wool little by little, because the urine seeps into the wool.
And then remove it and do for the cure of urine, and use the syringe, do not cease to do water and use the syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient recovers relief.
Chapter .lix.
Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with clampcedra and with similar instruments which are agreeable to this.
When there occurs in the bladder ulceration or abscess, or congealed blood in that, or it is constricted by a tumor, and you want to distill waters and medicines into that, then it is done with an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is the shape of it:
But that at the extremity of it is blunt, so it is closed. And in that there are three straps: two from one side, as many times.
At the beginning, the place is concave, in which that which is enclosed is, and as much as it fills that, its addition, until when any cause is withdrawn from those humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, with that it is drawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what is made clampcedra with which is phicat naphta in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, as you want to prohibit humidities in the bladder, introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw with that which is enclosed to the parts above, because the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
And then introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the urethra according to what we have recounted in the tongue; and then drive the humidity with that which is driven, because that humidity goes to the bladder immediately, and the patient feels that.
Form of the cristeri subtle with which the bladder is cristerized, and that is the form:
And it is made of silver or of laton, of which the head must be like a small feather, and below it a cane with a ligament.
And then take the bladder of the goat, and place in that the humidity that you want to cristerize in the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong ligament with a double cord, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then introduce the extremity of the cristeri into the urethra.
And then tighten your hand over the bladder with the humidity with the structure descending until the patient feels that that humidity has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle from that; and pierce that of all its roundness; and then introduce a strong thread into those holes, as many times as there are; and then attach the circle so that it is attached to the sofatur, because you put in that which you want of the humidities, and oils and waters.
And then you tie that to the instrument and do with that as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter .lx.
Of the extraction of  peyra.
We have already said in the division the species of peyras and their cure with medicines, and the difference between peyras generated in the bowels and peyras generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have said the peyras in which catz operation with hand, and section.
And the peyras generated in the bladder properly is that which is found in the bladder.
And you are narrating that with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that peyras generated in the bladder mostly come to children; and of the signs of it is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels his urethra, and many times it pains, and then it is raised; and with that, there is a hole in the anus in many of them.
And it is easier the healing of children of that until they have reached fourteen years; and it is difficult cure in the old. But in the young it is easier because it is among those.
And of that one in which the peyras is larger and the cure is easier; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, as we come to the cure of that, we must, at the beginning of that, modify the patient with the cristeri which extracts all the wound which is in their bowels; because that wound sometimes prohibits the entry of the peyras, and the investigation of it.
And then place the patient on their feet and sit them and make them cough so that the peyras descends to the bottom of the bladder, or which jumps from that place sometimes.
And then make that cezer between your hands prepared, and the hands of him are below the parts of him, so that the bladder is all made declining to the parts below.
And then pierce that and all that through.
Therefore, if you feel the peyras in the space, then you cut immediately with section upon it.
And if you do not feel all of it with your touch, then you must that you anoint with oil your said index of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the said middle if it is a young one complete, and introduce that into his anus. And pierce of the peyras until it stays below your said. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon that with your said, and expel that to the parts outside ves the place of which you have made the section.
And command the minister that presses the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand extends the genitals to the parts above, and with his other hand re-moves the codena which is below the genitals, in the part of the place where the section is made.
And then introduce the spatula, well incident of which this is the form of it: And cut into him where there is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, towards the left side of the thigh; and let the incision be on that bone and your finger be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the incision outside be wide and the inside narrow according to the quantity that comes out of the bone to him as possible, and no more, because very hard compresses your finger which is in the anus the bone must the incision, and is thrown out its faculty.
And know that of the bone there is some to which so angle and margins, so that the incision of it is made difficult by this.
And of that some there is like a gland, and it is round, and it is made of it light incision.
Therefore if it is that one which so angles and margins, adjust in the fissure.
And if it is not so thrown out, then cover that you engage on that, or that you squeeze on that with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is as a file as you squeeze on the bone, and do not escape from it; or that you intermingle of it a subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you cannot on that, then you enlarge the tract a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut off in strength that with vitriol trissat.
But if the bone is more than one, then at the beginning you impel the hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then you cut on it; and then impel a little towards that; and similarly do so if there are more than two.
And if it is a very large bone, then ignorance is that you cut that with a large incision, because it happens to the patient one of two causes: or that it dies or that it brings to him a continuous distillation of urine, because for that the place is not of all consolidated.
But administer expulsion of it while it is thrown out, or engage in the fracture of it with the forceps until it extracts that in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ens of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that. And pause on that cloth infused in oil and wine, or in rubbed oil and water, so that after the abscess may be given.
And then turn the patient onto his back, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you have untied that, embrocate the place with water and oil, and then cure that with an enguent diafinicon and an enguent diabazilicon until it is healed.
But if in the wound happens a suppurative, putrid, and corrosive abscess, and of that semblance as if the blood is in the bladder frozen, and for that the urine is prohibited (and this is known by the egress of blood with urine), then intermingle your finger in the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it provokes the bladder to corruption of the bladder and of it putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and with opposition to all species, with that which you convene to it of the cure until it is healed.
And cover in the hours of all the cure that you lie both things and adjust the medicines which are placed on the place.
And if the bone is small and is in the middle of the thigh, and it is stuck in it, and the passage of urine is prohibited, then cure that with water which I recommend before you reach the incision, because many times by this cure it is accused of incision; and already I have spoken of this, and it is that you take a steel perforator, of which this is the form of it:
of triangular extremity, sharp, stuck in a shaft.
And then take a thread, and tie with it the thigh below the bone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then intermingle the iron in the thigh, perforating with facility until the perforator comes to that bone. And revolve the perforator with your hand in that small bone little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it until you make that of the other part penetrate; because the urine is immediately released.
And then press your hand over that which is broken from the bone of the part outside of the thigh, because that is broken, and it is thrown out with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not to your apparatus for any cause which prohibits you from it, then tie a thread below the bone, and another thread above the bone. And then cut on the bone in that thigh between two ligatures. And then extract that. And then untie the ligament and modify the congealed blood, which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary a ligament of thread below the bone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligament above, because when the thread is untied the egress of the bone, the coda returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for that it is necessary to you when you tie the thread above, that you elevate the coda to the upper parts, or that it returns you must fulfill your compliment, and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter .lxix.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are rarely produced.
But if a stone is found in any of them, then its cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is that the woman must be very strong and a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman well-versed who describes if she puts herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or is of the women having husbands.
The third is that you do not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially the operation with a hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the incision over the stone in women is far from the place of the stone, because it is feared that the incision is premature, and in that there is fear.
But if necessity compels you to do so, then you must take a female doctor well-versed, and few are found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek a male doctor skilled and subtle, or present a woman matron well-versed in the ways of women, or a woman who in this art has been divided by the art.
Therefore, do that presentation, and command him to do all that you tell him, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; the reason for this is that he should regard if the woman is a virgin, then he must put his finger in her anus and want the stone.
Therefore, if that is found, force that from her, and then command him to insert over that.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and inquire about the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and comprehend that with good comprehension.
Therefore, if that is found, then command her to gradually withdraw that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the sum of her virtue until it reaches the root of the vagina.
And after inserting over that position of the majority of the vagina, reach the root of the vagina from any part that is to her stopped and feel the stone in that part, and the finger of her should not be removed from the stone, short of her.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; and after inserting the ray over that incision, and if she feels the stone, then adjust in incision according to the quantity which she knows that the stone is thrown from that.
And know that the species of stones are many: for some are small and large, and sharp and rough, and long and round, and having ramps.
Therefore, you know how many species are of it by what you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust in the place vitriol trissated and take that for an hour until the blood is abstained, and then return to your operation until the stone is ejected.
And do that you prepare with you of the instruments which are said in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by those in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of the blood is from the artery that is incised, then you put powder on the place and strengthen that with poultices and stricture descent, and do not repeat that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for very soon the patient will die. And after cure the wound.
And after the sharpness of the blood is ceded, after a few days, and the place can be opened, then you return to your operation until the stone is ejected.
Chapter lxii.
On the incision over hernia.
Hernia is nothing but an accumulation of humidity in the white membrane which is below the scrotum containing the testicles, and it is called the scrotum.
And sometimes it is in the proper panniculus which nature has prepared it in the part of the testicle, before it is known that it is another testicle; and it is the scrotum of the genitals between the white membrane which we have said, and it is not that but tart.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which happens to the genitals, so that to those is poured this matter, and sometimes it happens due to a blow made upon the genitals.
And this humidity is having many colors, for the color of it or is declining to citrine or sanguine, or red, or it is black and slimy, or it is watery white, and this is the most.
And the signs by which it is known that this accumulation of water is this: for if it is in the white scrotum which we have said, then the abscess is rounded declining a little to length as if the figure of a testicle, and appears the genitals, for the humidity contains that of all parts.
And if the humidity is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is rounded with the part of the testicle and so man estimates that it is another testicle.
And if the humidity is between the scrotum and the white membrane, then catz below the sentiment.
And as you want the knowledge of the color of the humidity, then you probe the color of the humidity in the abscess with an instrument which the form is preceded; and according to what is seen in the trace of the instrument, judge of what is inside it.
Therefore, when we come to the care of him with iron, then we command the patient to be flexible if it is possible, and times the body of him full.
Then, he should be laid on his back on some cause a little high, and place below him many cloths.
Then, sit you on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow on the right of him, the one who extends his hand on one of two sides to the groin of the genitals and to the part of the navel of the belly.
Then, take a broad spatula and split the groin of the genitals from the middle place for the length inside near the penis.
And the section is made according to the rectum equally distant from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white cup encompassing.
And scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not injure that; and your scraping with the one that you scrape by a gentle partition that it may be suspended with the most subtle and carefully examine with the scraping according to the quantity as much as possible.
Then, pierce the cup full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
Then, separate between the two labia of the section with a hook, and extend the cup to the upper parts; and do not touch the groin encompassing, and cut the cup in that manner that is to you possible. And cut that with its totality or in pieces, and mostly its subtle side, for if you do not scrutinize exquisitely the incision of it, it is not made safe that the water does not return.
But if the  fluid proceeds from that outside of its groin in the time of your operation, then when you will have completed the section of the cup, return it inside, and then adjust the two labia of the groin of the genitals with suture, and then cure that so as the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if the fluid is corrupted by another illness, then you must cut the vessels which are on the suspensory, and extract the fluid, and then cure that with the water that we have said.
But if the water is aggregated in two parts simultaneously, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, cut that part according to that you have done in the other equally; and if it is to your view that it is an operation, then you do it.
And then you cleanse the blood, and introduce into the sections wool immersed in oil or in rose oil; and place before other wool which you have immersed in wine and oil, and expand that over the genitals and the navel of the belly; and place above doubled cloths and powders, and tie those above with a bandage which is according to this form:
And then take two cloths and be filled with carded wool according to this likeness; and be made the extremities with which is pressed of cloth or of wet wool, and be added with structure in the waistband of the breeches, and one of the extremities presses from the buttock inside to the two, and the second presses to the part of the knee, and two extremities over two thighs below and two other extremities over two hips, and all the structure be adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
And some times this hernia is medicated artificially with cautery in place of section with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cautery and that you cut with that the groin of the genitals, and it is ignited according to that we have recounted until it is discovered the white cup containing the water, and then you take cautery according to this form: and it is assembled like a Greek letter.
And then pierce with that cup, and it is ignited until all the humidity is expelled.
And then extend the cup with hooks, and scrape with hooks, and scrape with a subtle cautery ignited; and cut that according to that is to you possible until you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself of the fluid that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from flow of blood, and better than operation with section.
But if to you does contrariety abscess caut in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or flow of blood, then you must cure what contrariety does to you by that, with cure which convenes to him according to that is said.
But if the patient is fearful, and does not expect the second operation for its horror, then administer perforation according to that we have recounted here; and it is when it is certified you, by that which we have said of the significations, that that hernia is watery.
Then you must make the patient lie on some elevated cushion, then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a broad spatula, and place the perforation according to the length of the body.
And be the aperture wide until it runs all the water.
And then place over the place cloth and tie that and leave that, so that it runs the remaining of the water. And then cure that until the wound is healed.
But if contrariety is in the emission of the water in that hour you pierce that; and this is not done except for that because the white panniculus in the orifice of the wound does contrariety and prohibits the emission of the water, then you must put in the wound a probe or instrument with which is extracted the water from the hydropitz, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the opening of the wound a small one.
And know that the water returns, and it is watered again after about six months or around those; and as it is watered, then it is pierced according to that same manner, so that the patient may pass his days thus.
Chapter .lxiii.
Of the section on fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section on this hernia, fear is lost to harm in the greatest dispositions; because to me it has been seen the dismissal of it and to be saved by that better.
And I am remembering the operation in that and the kinds of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that the abscesses arise in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and this is done for many causes: either by acute excess, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not felt pain in it, and the abscess is grave.
And very often is the abscess petrified, of which the color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it is made by the knotting of the arteries, and by the inflation of those so that already it is perceived the memory of it, or by the inflation of veins.
But that which is by the inflation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and do not cover that which you touch.
But that which is made by the inflation of a vein is not dispersed from it by any cause, despite the compression with the fingers.
And it is already possible that on this species a section is made and on the other flesh; and that you insert the blade of the genitals, and then extend the  humor to the parts below, and extract that from the white head, and deliver the suspensory of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensory more than you deliver that from all parts of the humor.
Therefore, if the humor is already in those carnations consolidated, then you must extract the humor and insert that.
And if there is adhesion for any cause of the head, or between that which is between the vessels, then you must deliver all that adhesion and insert it by a round incision.
But if it is the birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you must insert all that which is of it, and extract the humor as we have said.
Therefore, as the operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
Of the cure of hernia that is of the womb.
It is an abscess enveloped by some envelope resembling a bud with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult movement exercise and walking on the patient.
And in the cure of this disease it is for fear of that for which it is preceded memory.
However, it is necessary to say that the operation is done on it according to how I have done the first.
And I say that you must make the patient lie on a raised cushion; and then pull the suspensory of the testicles to the lower parts; and then take the blade of the genitals with your fingers with the vessels that are probed to the groin; and hold those other instruments that you have, and extend them with vehement extension.
And then insert with a sharp spatula by a transverse incision in the right of the vessels until the vessels are uncovered.
And then excoriate all parts as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
And then place in those a needle in which is a double thread, and tie that in the first of the places where you have pierced the vit, and tie that other time in the rear of them. And then insert those in the middle place by a right incision according to the length of the body, and extract that which is added from the fetid and corrupted humors.
And then cure the wound with the cure of the other wounds in which you want to be healed so that the vessels which are nourished by one of the two genitals may not be harmed, for it is not bad for that.
But if you pierce the vit to all the vessels, then you must extract the testicles or that the testicles by that be tied to the vessels, so that it be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they be established, or that be tied so that it be not helpful to them.
Chapter .lxv.
Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
The advent of this hernia is by a section that must be made in the head extended over the belly of the part of the corners of the navel of the belly, because by extending the bowels of that rupture to one of the bowels.
And this rupture is either of the head or of excision of it, and these two species are caused by many causes: either percussion, or sautz, or clamor, or elevation of any heavy cause, or semblance.
And the sign of that, when it is by extension of the head, is that it happens little by little in a long time, and it does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess equal within the veins because that the head compresses the bowel.
And the sign of it is when it is a section of the head, because at the beginning it causes sudden violent pain; and after the abscess appears diverse after the codena proper appears, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and its body to the parts below the head.
And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine the cloth, and this intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is done with flatulence, and sometimes it runs in the intestine split, and here it is retained, and this is a great detriment to the patient, and sometimes it makes the pain worse and more when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the species of this disease with iron there is fear, because whoever is to be avoided the hunting in that.
And the way of the operation of that is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand to the parts behind his cavity if he obeys his return, and then it is reversed over his belly between your hands, and elevate the legs of him.
And then tighten the cord which seizes the cord of the testicles to the parts below, and incise the cord of the testicles all along; and then fix in two lips of the incision hooks according to how you indicated to open the incision with those.
And if the incision according to the quantity that to you is possible that of that the humor be forgotten.
And then excoriate that skin which is below the cord of the testicles, until that the white hard skin of each part be discovered.
Now you introduce your finger into that which seizes the testicle, into that which is between the white skin, which is below the cord of the humor, and between the skin second, and dissolve with that adherence that is in the part behind the humor.
And then hold with your hand the cord of the testicles to the parts below, and with that extend the white skin up with your left hand, and elevate the humor with the skin to the part of the incision; and command the minister that extend the humor upwards and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with complete solution.
And seek with your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white hard skin. But if you find of it any cause, then you peel that to the belly below.
And then incise in the part below of the cord of the testicles by incision of which runs blood and heals as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And then administer wool submerged in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the ligament which we have recommended (and sometimes the white skin is cauterized, which we have said near the incision fear of blood flow, because many times those happen) and leave the ligament until that by itself it falls.
But if the hunting of him is delayed, then of cold water be embroiled, and place over that until it falls according to that we have said.
And then cure the wound with the other cure of the wounds until that it be healed.
Chapter .lxvi.
Of  ventous hernia.
In this hernia no one has been seen that has been dared on the cure of it with iron.
And the first said that it is done as we have recommended in the hernia that is with vi; which is that you tie the vessels near the incision over that with facility of it; and then dry in the middle place around the abscess with that which opened it, until that the vessels fall.
And cure the wound according to that we have said until that it be healed.
Chapter .lxvii.
Of the  disruption that is made in the  anguonars.
Sometimes it becomes rupture in the anguonars as we have said, and emerges the place.
And do not leave to the genitals any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if they leave, that is little; and return it in all hours.
But if it is prolonged the time with that, it is adjusted fissure in the skin until that the intestine descends in the skin; and it happens that by the extension of the skin which is in the anguonars as we have said, which cause is that the skin is extended, and then it is softened and the place is abscesses and emerges.
And the care of him is with cautery as it is preceded by the narration of him.
And some times it is cured with iron in this manner: and that the patient lies on his two hands between his thighs, and then dries the place of the rupture of the boils emerging with a section by the width according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white cloth that is under the loincloth until it is uncovered.
And then take the ray and place it on the prominent place of the cloth, and press it against the front of the belly.
And then sew the two prominent places on the end of the ray of the cloth, and adjust with the suture one of them with the other.
And then extract the end of the ray, and do not cut the cloth at all, nor extend the bowel, nor other cause as you may learn in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the cure of the plagues, and as you cut the threads, cleanse that and restore the plague until it is consolidated; because the cloth is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is more proper to health.
Chapter .lxviii.
Of the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Many times the scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is fed by the regard of it.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked in the cure of it to make the patient lie on his two hands, and cut all the scrotum which is softened over the natural scrotum; and then adjust the two lips with the suture.
And if you want, sew at the beginning the superfluity of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and with firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then cure by cure of the other plagues until it is healed and the threads fall.
Chapter .lxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excused, but for the reason it is told to me that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary the remembrance of it except for two ways, of which one is so that it is in the science of the doctor when he is asked about it, that he knows the cure of it to whom it happens; and the other way is that we many times have need of castration of other animals for our benefits for them, as well as of goats, and sheep, and pigs, and similar to the animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by fissure to section.
But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the beast to be seized in warm water until its genitals are softened and are limp and that they hang. And then take those with your hand until they are soft and do not appear after the touch.
But in castration done by fissure and section, cover that you have the beast and press the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
And then lie the suspensory, and cut over each testicle with a section between the two testicles processed.
And then cut those more that you have each excoriated. And do not leave on those of the cloth any cause, but the subtle cloth which is over the vessels.
And this way of castration is better the one done by attrition, because attrition strong leaves no cause of the testicles for which the beast desires coyt.
And then cure the plague until it is healed.
Chapter .lxx.
Of the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: the one is that it appears in that which separates the space in the scrotum of testicles, in that which is between two testicles figures a cunh of woman in which it is.
And sometimes from that comes urine which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
But in women it is a species: and it is that the cunh of the woman over the vulva is as two testicles of a man a little of all diminished at the front part as the perpucii of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of the men and of one species of the women. And it is that when you cut those joined flesh until the impregnation of it escapes, and then that you cure those with the cure of the other plagues.
And in the second species of men of which you see urine which is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation in it.
Chapter .xxi.
Of leninge and prominent flesh due to causes of women.
Lentigo, which is very often adjusted on natural causes while it is stressed and is made less noticeable; and sometimes it is magnified in some women so much that it spreads as in men and interferes with intercourse.
Therefore, it is necessary that you have the superfluity of the linen with your hand or with a sponge.
And at the last incision, mainly in the front of the root, so that it does not become a flow of blood.
And then care for it with the cure of the plagues until it is healed.
May flesh born is flesh that is in the womb of the mother until it is full, and forth it is issued to the parts before according to the semblance of the cow (and therefore the first we call this "causal disease"); therefore when we incise it as we incise linen, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxii.
Of the cure of the hernia.
Hernia is when the cone of the woman is not perforated, or the tract is small. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to illness which has preceded, and that is made either by flesh not properly adjusted or by a subtle or thick cyph.
And it is made either in the front of the mother, or in the ribs of her, or in the higher part of her, or in the lower part of her, and prohibits childbirth and pregnancy, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by examination of the womb, if the opacity is apparent, it is proven; but if it is not apparent, then you seek it with your fingers or with the ray.
But if the opacity is by a subtle cyph, and it is proven to the two labia, then you cut and disrupt it.
And it is that you pause on the two labia powders, and then place your fingers, indicating both sides at once.
And the woman be upon her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two labia with force so that that subtle cyph is broken and the opacity is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it over the location, and wash it with warm water every day so that the incised location does not become consolidated.
But if the cyph is thick and thick, then it is necessary that you incise it with a spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the opacity is due to flesh, then suspend it with a sponge, and incise it.
And be with you the medicines that cause the cessation of blood flow by biting, such as hacacatia, and dragon's blood, and incense, adjusted with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead pipe so that the plague is not slightly consolidated.
And keep it for some days and administer calgua of the lily.
And then be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents happen in the mother's nativity of other flesh, and then it is necessary to incise according to this manner. But if this is due to a hard abscess, to the hard abscess which is in the mother, it is not made contrary to iron in any manner.
Chapter .lxxiii.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids and tail and red botch that happens in the womb of women.
Hemorrhoids are the appearance of many veins in the orifices, from which blood flows continuously; and as old hemorrhoids are made, they are called piles.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and their signs, and I say so those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and piles when they are in the front of the mother and do not appear to the touch, then in those no cure be made with iron.
But those which are in the orifice of the mother upon which you feel, those are the ones that are cured.
And it is necessary that you put the woman in a position of ease and then extend the piles with the forceps, or with rough cloth, and incise them with the razors.
And then pulverize over those of the blood flow of one of the incised powders by biting, such as acacia and similar to those.
And then bandage her feet for an hour, and then place it in cold water.
And if the blood flow persists, then make that seer in a decoction of suma and of the peels of mugwort and of guaiacum and of similar things.
And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with it on her back.
And if the blood is cut off, it is good; and if not, make adhere to the two buttocks, and to the nipples their scarification.
And then take wool and submerge it in the juice of cilantro or in the juice of arnica or in the juice of guaiacum with vinegar and make it adhere to the location; and then cure the location with poultices until it is healed.
And take care of that within that he may be healed.
Chapter .lxxiv.
Of the perforation of the eyssedura accident in the mother.
Many kinds of abscesses happen in the mother, such as boils and abscesses,  and ulcers, and buboes, and eruptions, and fistulas, hemorrhoids, and boils, and other abscesses. And I have already said these ailments and the kinds of those and their symptoms, and their cures in the division.
And now I say in this treatise of an abscess that comes in the mother when it is of abscesses that are healing, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is done with iron.
Therefore, consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that redness and if it catches on that feeling, then do not cut with perforation of it, and take care of it with that which helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
And then have you make the woman lie on a cot that has two cots; and recline on her two and adjust her feet to the part behind the belly, and her thighs be spread, and place her arms behind her shoulders, and tie her with a bandage to that which is convenient.
And then the midwife follows from the right side and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the mother is opened, the form of which will come in those causes that will be done after.
And then when you want to administer this instrument, you put it with the ray on the perineum of the mother of the woman, and that which of the instrument is entered into the mother be no more than the perineum and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the perineum of the mother, then have you place powders on the texture of the perineum of the mother so that it be prohibited the instrument of all instrument in the perineum of the mother.
And then have you place the vertige that runs in the instrument from the right side and that the minister have the instrument and revolve the vertige until the orifice of the mother be opened.
And as the excretion appears, and is touched with the hand and is lion and moist, then have you succeed that of the head of it with a spatula lat.
And as the sania is evacuated, then have you place in the plague a mecha submerged in oil rubbed or green oil in which there is some stickiness; and place the calca7 in the section in the perineum of the mother.
And place before the mother and on the pentenilh clean wool submerged in water in which there are boiled mallows.
And then when it is cured after two days with rinsing which is convenient to that until it be healed.
And sometimes the mother and the plague are washed in such a way that it is christened with water and honey, and then with water in which the root of lily or of aristeologia longua is boiled, and then returns to the rinsing.
And if the plague is demented in the mother, then have you be prohibited from the cure of it with iron, have care of it with that which we have said in the division.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach the midwives in what manner the living embryos be medicated when they are according to unnatural figure.
Necessary cause is that the midwife knows in the beginning the figure of the natural enfantament by the signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman express to the parts behind and desire to smell the air, and above that it is relieved by that which is above it of the part, and hasten the eyssiment of the embryo, then you know that this part is according to the natural figure, and it is the eyssiment of it over its head, and the second one with that or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Therefore, as you see those signs, then have you the belly of it be compressed so that the embryo descends slightly, and when they descend over its head, they give it the second one, and it is washed of those superfluities with good modification.
But that which is another this part is unnatural and un-lausable, because when the embryo is eyssed over its feet and the body of it is eyssed before the head of it and the feet of it, and the hand of it one, or at the foot of it. or it is eyssed the head of it and the hand of it, or at the belly of it, and fort leu is converted over its col, and similar to the figures of it un-lausablas.
Therefore, necessary cause is to the midwife that she be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
And I have shown all figure of those, and what kind is in those for so that it be signified by it and be sat upon it.
When the feyt is eyssed over its head by natural egrecio, and that is vehement over the woman and is fayt to it difficult part, and sometimes the vertut of it already debilitated, then have you that be sezer, or what the women have it, and evaporates the conh of it with fenugrec coyt and with humid oils.
And then introduce the metronome between his small shoulder blades and make a cut with it, or pierce it with your fingernail until you drain what is in it of humidity. And press the woman's belly while she pushes the fetus.
But if she does not push, then make the woman drink a concoction of ptillium and fenugreek with a knife.
And then command her, the one who is giving birth, to be compressed and make that movement with condition; and keep her mouth and nose closed for one hour, because the fetus will be born soon.
And if the two arms of the fetus are already born at the beginning, then make those be reduced little by little with ease. But if she does not obey the instruction, then place the woman on a stretcher and lift her feet up, and then shake the stretcher on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the shaking.
And if the arms are not brought back in and the fetus dies, then make incisions in them and extract the remains of the fetus or lay the body on your hand with cloth and extract it with equality, because that will be born.
When the fetus lies on its feet, then make you push those upwards, and then turn the little fetus, and then make it straight, and then take one foot of it and extend those little by little.
But when it is born within the thighs, then command her to push, and make that movement with condition, because it will be born if God wills it.
And if it is not born with what we have recommended, then return the little fetus little by little until you place it back in its natural figure, because that will be born with easy delivery.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take a concoction of althea and dissolved gum, and pound everything in the mortar with good percussion, and then line with it the vagina of the woman, the lowest part of her belly. And then make that cezer in hot water, until you achieve the contractions.
And when the parts of her have become softened, then make a fumigation of myrtle for her and place that under her. And when she has endured the fumigation for an hour, then make her lie on a stretcher, and then make that movement and extend her mouth, and take from that, and press the lower part of her belly with light compression, because the fetus will be born soon.
Delivery of the fetus laterally while holding one of its arms. Make an attempt to reduce the arm, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her move.
And if moving doesn't work, then make her lie on the sheet, and shake her thighs with vehement shaking, and then administer ointments which I will tell you and recommend of concoctions.
And if the childbirth has come, then make her lie on a stretcher, and then study about the reduction of the arm, and straighten the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman move and command her to push until it is born.
Delivery of the fetus on the back with its arms and its fascia on the side of its mother. Make the midwife have the hand of the fetus and then turn it little by little, and that with ease.
And when it is and how it is straightened, and then place on its vagina what we have recommended of oil and concoctions.
And then command her to push little by little, and when you have done that, then make her lie on a stretcher and command her to be inclined on the right side, and then command her to be compressed; and make that movement with condition. Exit of the prepared fetus on the side.
When the mother's horrifics are expelled in this manner, consider, and then make an incision with your fingernail into the vagina until it is evacuated of its humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended on the face and the neck of it, then make an incision on the navel so that it is not held back and dies.
And then gently push the patient's feet towards their buttocks while you hold that second cloth, and tell the woman to compress herself several times, and the sir to be laid lightly with a slight movement, if God wills it.
Exitus of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are born sometimes, and sometimes even three or four, but this is strange and rare; however, it is due to nature, not to life.
And count those, whether they are multiplied, one second, and they are separated by the sac, distinguish those among the ligaments in the umbilical cord of each of them, and sometimes they are laid as if it were one fetus with a slight natural movement, and they are born sometimes with a movement not laudable as we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult during childbirth and come to what we have said of unnatural figures, then take care of them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skillful and makes what is done with facility and subtlety, and with tardiness, and is ingenious according to all figure according to what is prepared for her by the mind leading to health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and is aborted.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten, and I have already verified that one woman aborted six, and another gave birth to ten, the cause of which was made by the measurement of the glorious wise men.
And all this covers that which is in the science of the midwife, for it is very important to that appearance of this, and therefore one pauses to it as much as one should.
Chapter .lxxvi.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you cure the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of the medicine and it is not outside, and you are forced to use the operation with your hand, then consider if the woman is of sound virtue and is not with any of the accidents for which she is feared to be harmed.
Then, the woman must be laid upon her back on her two, and her head be inclined downwards and her thighs be elevated.
And the minister should have those two parts or be tied on the bed so that the body of him does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with humid oils and with a mucilage of althea and fennel and the seeds of the lily.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then introduces her hand with facility into the mother, and then seeks with the hand the place in which the forceps are placed in the fetus.
And convenient places in this: therefore you consider if the fetus is prepared that descends upon its head, and then you place the forceps in its heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or even the beard, or in the fork of it, or in the proper places of the back, or even the hypochondria.
But if the descent is upon the feet of it, then in the pelvis, or in the middle of the back.
And it is necessary that you have the forceps with the right hand, and place the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and introduce the hand with facility and place the forceps in one of those places which we have said, until you reach the left cause.
And then pause and place in the opposite position of it another forceps, or the third if it is necessary, so that the traction be equal, and not be an extension according to its rectitude alone.
And be careful to all parts, so that the movement of it be alleviated as it is done in every part of the eradication of it.
And it is necessary in it that which is between them the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and introduces those expertly and revolves with those which are retained.
Therefore, if the part of the fetus is laid, then the forceps are changed into the place which is higher; and do so until the whole fetus is laid.
But if the hand is inside the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by the constriction of it, then it is necessary to wrap a cloth over it; and then extract it until the whole is laid, and incise it either at the junction of the hand or in the groin.
And so you must do in the other hand and in the two feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is an accident to it in the movement, or there is water adjusted in the head of it, then it is necessary to introduce between the fingers the spatula and split the head and extract the water, or that which disgorges it with an instrument which is called “alundat”, the form of which will come with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is next to this.
And similarly, if the bone is of great size by nature: and then when the bone is inserted into the wound, or that bone is placed as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is pulled out and is constricted by the collarbone, then it is split so that the moisture which is in the feet is poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor obstructed by such things, then you cut the head as soon as it is possible to you.
And if the bowels of the belly are festering or are in it hydropic, then you must pierce that so that the moisture which is in it runs out.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then the traction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the womb is lighter.
But if it is constricted by the belly and the feet, then you must extract that with a cloth which you will have wrapped over your hand, and that you make the belly and the feet so that water runs out of those.
But if the other members are seized and the head returns, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the womb is closed, then she inserts her hand into the perineum, and seeks with that the head, and pulls that with her fingers into the mouth of the womb, and then inserts into it a hook, or two hooks, and pulls it with those.
And if the mouth of the womb is constricted by an abscess caused by the heat, then it is not to be rubbed on it; but it is to be administered with an infusion of moist fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible, it is to be pricked: and it is to be administered with the water that we have said in the living fetus.
And if that is not possible, then it is to be incised in pieces, and it is to be extracted.
And you must not leave any cause of the second birth.
And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer the water that we have said for the cure of the abscesses caused by the heat of the womb.
And if there occurs a flow of blood, then send them down in styptic waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in the womb of whom was a dead fetus, and then on that same fire another pregnancy, and then the dead fetus is another. It happened to me a long time ago an abscess in his navel; and it inflated so that it opened, and began to throw out pus.
And I was called to the cure of him, and medicated him for a long time, and the plague was not consolidated.
Then I placed on him some causes of plasters of strong attraction, and extracted a bone from him, and after passing some days, I extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, as in the belly there were no bones.
And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore, I continued to treat the abscess, and extracted from it many bones, the woman existing in her usual dispositions, and already living in that manner for a long time, correcting her a little bit of pus.
And I do not affirm that this is strange, but that in this there is science and help to that which the physician artifices with his hand for the cure administers.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of a verge with which the womb is opened:
This is the form of a stretcher in which the boards are fitted, at the fitting of which there are two verges in two extremities of two feet. But however, this verge must be more subtle of a stricture, and be made either of ebony or of a beam of wood.
And its width of each beam is two fingers and the margin of each is one finger, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle place of the two beams there are two adjustments of that same beam, the length of which is the majority of one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the womb so that it may be opened with those when you revolve the two prescribed verges.
Another form similar to that more subtle and lighter:
It is made of ebony or wood beams according to the resemblance of forceps. But however, at the extremity of it there are two additions as you see, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the womb with those, then you make the woman lie on her back with her feet dangling, open that which is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, evenly according to the quantity that you want of the opening of the mouth of the womb until the midwife makes it so that you want.
The form of vertigo which the ancients say:
The form of impelling which is pushed by the foot:
The form of dizziness which is contained by the great head
And it is assembled like forceps, which has teeth at the extremity, sometimes, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes, which has teeth like teeth of a saw with which it is incised and contained. The form of dizziness little:
The form of a nail having a spine:
The form of a nail having two spines:
The form of a spatula having two extremities with which the head is cut off:
The form of two broad spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied the species of that and are prepared by the artificers, as much as is lighter to their operation and as much as more by the men for their quantity.
And in works of those instruments already whatever it is of you should be prepared, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
Of the extraction of the secondine.
When the secondine is retained in childbirth, then you command the patient to retain her breath, and then make that stir with a condition, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of her and over her nostrils, and if by this it is expelled outside, it is good.
And if not, then you take a cloth and perforate in the cover a hole and place in that herbs burning the mouth of the mother, as such as calamint and rue and anise and chamomile and sicadas arabic and cassia lignea and santaurea. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and place that over the fire.
And then place a tube of cane in the mouth of the mother, and keep that inside so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then make that stir as we have said, and the secondine is ejected outside with velocity.
But if remaining after this cure and it is not expelled, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of altea, and then introduce that into the vagina and search with that the secondine, and as she has found it, then take it and extend it little by little. But if it is annexed in the perineum of the mother, then introduce her hand as we have recounted, and when she has found the secondine, extract it little by little according to rectum so that the mother does not feel the traction vehement. It is necessary that it be changed to the right and left sides with facility.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recounted the cure with stir and with medication of the cloth with herbs.
But if it is not expelled with all the causes which we have recounted, then guard that you do not tire on that in iteration of extraction, but rather that what is emitted from it to the mouth of the mother lies on the cloth of the woman, and then christenize that with an enguent and tetrafarmacon; for that will make it rot so that after a few days and it will be dissolved and it will be expelled.
But when you may, it is raised bad odor to the head, and to the stomach, and what you read the patient; and then it is necessary that fumigations and conveniences be administered to it.
But some of the Ancients are already explored fumigation of nazitort and dried figs.
The form of instrument with which the woman is fumigated for the retention of menstruation and the secondine:
It is made of  wood or of bronze.
And it is placed the fine extremity in the vagina and the wide extremity over the fire, and the fumigation is placed over the embers of the fire.
And keep that inside so that the fumigation is consumed and iterate another.
Of the cure of the unperforated anus of the child.
Many children are born and their anuses are not perforated, which already have a subtle and opaque. Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to pierce with her finger that opaque; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guard that it does not touch the sphincter.
And then place on that wool soaked in wine and oil; and then cure that with an enguent until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is opaque, then place in the hole a tube for several days, and remove it when the child will want to defecate.
And already accidents opacity of the anus by consolidation of plague or of abscess; therefore it is necessary that that consolidation be incised, and then it be cured with what we have said of the cure and of the lead.
Of the cure of fistulas that end below.
The fistulas that develop in the lower part below the navel and their thickness which develop near the anus or in the space of one part.
And it is a fistula or a tumor.
And when that lump is old and runs from the white, moist, or subtle pus, and sometimes from these fistulas, some penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by what is emitted from them by the exit and by the windiness; and sometimes the patient feels the exit, and very often it is emitted from them worms.
And sometimes from these fistulas, some penetrate into the space into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and sometimes from these penetrating into the junction of the thigh and into the knot of the hip.
And in which it is known that a fistula penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate, is that you put your finger inside the anus, and you insert a subtle probe of lead or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
But if there is tortuosity, then you insert a subtle probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel it at all, nor do you process any cause of ejection or worms or windiness, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and then you turn to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the vagina, then the meaning of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it so that the place with medicine may be consolidated.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the thigh or into the bone and causing pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe penetrates here if there is no tortuosity into the bone, and causing pain in the circuit of the part; and that from it there is pus always; and that it does not value in that medication, nor is it consolidated with an enema.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure of all, and the cure of those is the work and vanity of the medical leaves upon which they are founded.
But in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is expected according to what I will tell you, and what I have already done and proved.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his two and elevates his legs up, the thighs being inclined to the belly of him, and then insert a probe of lead, or of lead if there is tortuosity in the fistula, until you know the place where the probe penetrates.
And if that feels the patient around the buttock, then cover that you insert your finger inside the buttock.
And if you feel in your finger the probe already by itself penetrating, or another thing that you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, for it is not in that healing, as we have said.
But however, some say that it is healed in some men tart.
And of the medication by which healing is expected in it is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it is preceded, and insert that ignited one into the fistula until it reaches around the buttock; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those flesh adjusted to the fistula have been cauterized, which are like the quill of a bird's feather.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border until they can all those flesh that are cauterized, and then cure that with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, well is; and if not, then it is not healed in any time by other cure.
And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is veiled with flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula in that which seizes the surface of the codena, then dry the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying with the probe, and in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the probe penetrates, and by the probe is liberated and caught.
And then purify those fistula flesh which are assembled to the quill of a bird's feather and do not break from those any cause.
But if flow of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when you were inserting those flesh, then the best that may be and of the lighter pus instrument is to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts good two habits: it is the cauterization of those flesh adjusted, and abscess of the blood excretion of the humidities.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border or in caus trissat until the place gets brac, and then cure the plague with enemas flesh hard generating and consolidating.
And so medicines in which there is styptic and excretion; when then it is restored it is already healed and you do not fear iteration.
But if the fistula has already reached into the preon of the anus and is elongated from that surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and inquire with that.
And therefore if you feel the probe and between you and it is veiled with skin or flesh, and is proper to the penetration, then there is no operation in it but according to my trust and of hope.
This cause is administered in him in three ways: or that you cauterize that as we have said; or that you reduce that while you can achieve the concavity of it so that it is possible for you to intervene the parts and the proper cure; and do not proceed to cut it so that you do not cut the tendon containing the tail, and that it happens over the patient as the will of the egistio; and then cure him with what we have said as strong as it is sir; or that you elongate that veil and cleanse that pus that dries that inside the buttock, as we have said, or with a probe or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then cleanse those carned fistula that are in the section within the one you can by percrustation; and then strive to make the restoration of the whole plague with section, and if the orifice of pus above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the buttock, and it is pus lighter for the patient. And some times the fistula is finished in this way: it is when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it is in the latz of the buttock around the surface of the body with the cord and on the edge of the buttock, then take probe of perforated extremity, that is as well as an awl of preparing the hearts according to this form:
And introduce into that faithful envelope of v feels or around those; and then introduce probe with feel in the fistula until you achieve the concavity of it.
But if it is penetrating in the edge of the buttock prop dedintz, then you extract the feel from that trauc as you introduce your finger into the buttock; and extract the extremity of the feel and adjust the two extremities simultaneously, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you may have incised the feel in the flesh, tighten well that inside that those carns are incised that are between two extremities of the feel and that they join.
And then cure the plague until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make that penetrate, in whatever way it is prepared for you, so that it is not in the preon, because it is not to you that you do this so that you do not cut the tendon; and then do it with that until it is healed.
The form of spatum spinos with which the fistula is fended: the curvature of which is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that you do not cut what is not necessary, as sometimes.
Of suture of hemorrhoids in which blood runs in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are in two ways, because they are between the buttock seeming like that of carbons, or those that are like the fat of rasim. And of those so small and large, and that the blood runs from those always and is one, and are many, and are outside the buttock, and in the extremities of it.
But however those that are outside the buttock are according to the less of moisture, of those that run clear water or a little blood with a continuous body, and are according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is inside the buttock is that you command the patient to lie down and to express until the buttock is empty and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take and suspend with hooks or what you have those with your nail, and then you cut those of their roots.
But if the hooks are not held in those because of the moisture of them and their softening, then take those with rough cloth or with a stick or with a fleece of wool, and extract those with your fingers, and then cut those and pulverize over them some powders caudas near the incision, so that they are applied to those in place of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterization. And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the buttock does not obey the egress, then cristerize the patient with a crister in which there is a small bite, and wash it with that water that is in the buttock and that obeys the egress slightly when the patient is expressed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the buttock, then the cause of them is lighter, and it is that you take those with your nail, or that you take those with a hook, and cut those, and then cure those with the water that we have said until they are healed.
And that which you have incised, cover that you administer suture of them according to this way: take feel enveloped and introduce that into a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the parts above, and make that penetrate with the needle in the root of the other part, and envelop the two extremities of the feel in the part below the needle, and so laterally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong structure, and then untie the feel and extract the needle.
And do this to all, and leave one of them untied, so that the superfluity of blood runs from that.
And then put on the buttock cloth infused in rose oil or in cero; and put that on the buttock and command the patient to rest. And then leave that until it dries; and when it is dried, cure those with ointments or with other cure until it is healed.
And because old ones are not helpful in this medicine, then when you see those with a point of a spatula or with your fingernail, while they are moist and have a host of pus from them, which prevents them from consolidating; and then cure them when they are consolidated.
Then you must scrape those with vigorous pus, the first ones that have blood and are excoriated; and then cure them when they are healed.
Know that hemorrhoids, it is key, and it is not if not a red nodule according to the color of the body resembling a head of a key, and it is made in all the body and mostly in the parts below the feet and in the buttocks, and therefore by those pains you must know the ailment.
And therefore, when you see that which is in the circuit of the key, and it is held with the forceps or with an instrument, and it is eradicated from its root; and then cure that.
And if you wish, cauterize as previously described in its chapter.
But warts are a small, rough, round fistula on the surface of the body, and many times they come in the most of the children.
And the cure of them is that you extend and cut that, or that you tighten that with a thread or with a needle while it is being cauterized. And if you wish, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with an acute medicine.
But a nettle is a small, rough, or thick fistula on the surface of the body, going into the skin, and when the sting touches that, it is felt in it, resembling a bite of a wasp, and it is made around the body.
And the cure of it is that you take a quill of eagle or of vulture, and it is strong, and place that over the nettle while you contain it with the circle of the quill from the parts of it; and then you revolve your hand with the quill while you cut that which is in the circuit of the nettle, and you place that in the skin of the flesh, and that you eradicate the nettle from its root.
And if you wish, do that with a quill of iron or of steel, according to this form:
Let the upper part of the quill be drawn to a subtlety, blunt (so it is not perforated), enveloped so that over the said, the apprehension of it be abolished and the revolution of that.
And if you wish, cauterize the nettle according to what is previously said in the cauterization of a boil in the chapter of cauterization.
On the form of the instruments that are administered to give baptism.
Sometimes baptism is performed with silver or with lead or with iron melted or hammered; and sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those to whom it is administered, that is, that which is administered in the cure of the little children be small; and of those whose necks are weak or sore, the baptisms of those are small.
The form of a large and few baptism:
The head of the quill of it above where the bag is tied is wide according to this manner; and be to it distinction the one where the bag is tied as it is sometimes.
And the extremity of it further down, which is inserted into the anus, be blunt (so it is not open) much like a lion, drawn to a subtlety; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and be the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and a little thicker.
And be the bag in which are placed the medicines of animal bladder or of sheepskin, and the root of it be a palm.
And be it perforated by many holes as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes the thickness of the finger.
And then insert into those holes a strong thread of strong thread, the one of ten threads, or about those; and adjust with that the bag; and when it is placed in it the bag, be straight in the head of the baptismal font between two distinguishing ones with strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the bag with the medicine, that it be heated according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and guard yourself that it be not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient be laid on his back, and elevate his legs and place under him a cushion on which already are the men or a pillow; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with egg white or with a mucilage of fennel or of similar; and then insert that into the anus with facility, and then the minister takes the bag and expresses that with two hands and at the same time with vehemence until it be evacuated in the bowel all that which is in the baptismal font; and then extract the baptismal font and the patient raise his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that to emission, hold as much as it may; and if it sleeps with that for a whole night, it is more beneficial in healing.
But if you are treating those with diseases of the solution of the belly and the expulsion of it the loin, then you iterate the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or boils, then be the cautery very subtle and lion, of the cauteries with which the children are cauterized.
Of the cure of the plagues.
And I have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues what was convenient to the free, and I say thus the cure of those with my and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore I say that the plagues are diversified according to what in which the plagues are made and according to the place on which the plagues fall.
And the causes for which many times the plagues are made are such as a wound from a stone, or incision from a sword or dagger, or percussion with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
But the plagues that are in the parts of the body are such as a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the arm, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I am recounting the cure of some plagues so that you pause that reasoning and rule over the other plagues.
And I will begin with the plagues of the head simple, for the remembrance of the composed will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when a simple plague happens in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from a wound from a stone or similar, and the wound has already been cleaned only and it is a large plague and you fear about that patient having an abscess, then you cauterize and flebotomize the cephalic immediately, and do not delay this; and extract to that of the blood according to the quantity of the virtue of it if no other cause prohibits fleubotomia, more especially if the blood that is drawn from the plague is little.
And be the fleubotomia of the opposite side of the afflicted part; and guard the patient from repletion and from wine and from heavy foods.
But if from the ministration any cause prohibits, then be it lessened of the food and do not approach to meat nor to wine.
And pause on the plague, if to it there happens an abscess cauterize, coat infused in rose oil or in wine in which it is steeped.
But if it is sure of an abscess cauterize, then pause on the plague, if it is recent with its blood and the air has not changed that the powder which I will recount aprop small.
And if the air has already changed that, then pause on poultices until it is healed.
But if the plague is great or is from an incision from a sword and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted by puss, then adjust those with suture according to that I will recount of the suture of them.
But if the plague has already been discovered from the bone and skin, and there is no retention of it but a small suspension, then incise that and then cure the plague with medicines and restore the flesh in the place of the wound, and command the patient to be sparing of foods in which there is thickness: caps and forms cooked and similar to them, until it is composed.
And if there is a putrefaction in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that putrefied and throw it away, and then cure that.
But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which the flow of blood could come, and it is not incised by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that not incised, then you incise that with a spatula, or tie that; and if necessity provokes that what we have said does not confer, then you cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is lighter; inasmuch that you pulverize on those this powder, for consolidated that before the air changes them.
And the manner of the powder is this: receive olive oil parted one, of dragon's blood parted two, of cauterized no-extinct parted three; be all three ground and sifted, and of it be the plague filled, and be constricted by good constriction until well over that it adheres, and be coagulated with the blood.
And after strengthens that with poultices and leave it, and do not untie it while it is so that it is not suppurated, for no medicine is eradicated from it until it is healed.
And sometimes do that alone cauterize, when it is not to you in present olive oil and dragon's blood.
And already do this same operation in the great plagues when it is convenient that it be paused on those and be tightened, and are recent plagues with their blood, those which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and more especially when it is in summer time, then it is not understood in the position of this powder, but rather cure those with what we have said, inasmuch that you pause on those poultices digested, or that you pause on those powder of barley flour with water and honey until they get putrefaction; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if a fracture occurs in the bone, and it is small, then you extract it with a splint.
And I will say the cure for head fractures in those that are venomous.
Of the plagues of the neck.
But if the fracture occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and between the fracture of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in its place, but that its cure is avoided with that which makes vehement clotting, such as zinc and zeger that is vitriol and similar to their wounds to the nerves and counteracts that. And do not place on the fracture any cause of all cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of it is to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
And if that is cured with light medicines, such as it is washed with sweet water, some herbs infused in rose oil or un-rose oil, and it is washed with sweet water and the other stones minced according to this manner, and moistened.
But if the fracture is large, then administer suturing, or shorten the lips of it, and then cure that with powders until it is healed.
But if the fracture is deep or occurs in the lowest part of the bone, then perforate it in the most depressed location.
But if in the fracture an artery is already cut and there is a flow of blood, then separate or cauterize it, or tie it up if necessity provokes that.
But if the vertebrae of the throat or all are already cut, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the collarbone with sutures over the canal of the throat and do not touch it; raise it equal to it and reduce it to its natural figure, and then strengthen it with a decent structure, and leave it for some days; and then cure it with poultices in which there is clotting and excitation until it is healed.
But if the fracture in the bone has already been made in price, then strike it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can from it; and what to you is not apparent, leave it until the fracture heals, and it is separated and the discharge from it is relieved.
And if the fracture is recent, then pulverize over it the powder which has been recommended to you. But if a fistula is made in the fracture, then cure it with that of which the memory will come close in its chapter.
If it is a percussion of a lance or a dagger, and sometimes of it the depth, then consider more if from the fracture there is windiness when the patient is ill; then you know that the fracture is mortal.
And if in it there is no depth and the fracture is recent with its blood, then you place on it in the first hour powder, and do not strengthen it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and that it returns to the heart and that it kills the patient; but place on it an attractive poultice, and untie it twice a day.
And if the poultice is not to you present, then you place in the orifice of the fracture a piece of old cloth so that it sucks up what is of the humidities; and make the patient sleep over the fracture so that it flows what is in it adjusted.
But if from the fracture have passed three days or more and it does not occur to the patient spasms nor tremor of the heart nor constriction of the throat, and sometimes the other good dispositions of it, then you know that the fracture is saved; and therefore cure it with poultices and with the other cure until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is excused, and already all time is open, then you know that a fistula has already been made; cure it therefore by its chapter.
And if the fracture is by incision of a sword or dagger, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure it with that which is preceded by sutures, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if already a price has been made in the bone, and there are already cut pieces from it, then you turn the fracture and try to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the fracture heals, that the extraction of them is relieved.
And of the other accidental fractures in the other members the judgment in cure is the judgment of that which we have said.
Of the fractures of the abdomen.
The indisposition which occurs in the abdomen is either great, or little, or medium.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and it is seen that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of the intrusion of them to their place as soon as possible, because it opens and becomes thickened so that the entrance of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best incision is median, because in that one the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, as it is in the two species mentioned before.
And know that the suture of the belly is done in four ways, but two sutures are common that are used in sutures of other wounds of the body.
And two other sutures proper are used in other wounds, but they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you each one with exposition and explanation.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the hernia through that, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then it is done in one of two ways: or by the smallness of the incision as we have said, or when the hernia has come inflammation because of the cold of the air.
And therefore when this is so, then you should cover that in the way that you submerge a sponge or cloth wet in tepid water, or that you soak in water with squill, and cypress, and spice, and cover the hernia with that until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes this is done with the one which has astringency, and it is better than the water alone in the resolution of the inflammation.
And therefore when you see the inflammation be resolved, then you moisten the hernia with water in which is steeped mallow and other herbs, because by this it is alleviated the pain of it with little cause.
But if the pain of it is excused by this cure, then you widen the incision a little with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first cure is better, when it is proper that it is not a section, and that it is not occupied in drying by necessity and failing.
Of the instrument, this is the shape of it:
One part of it is sharp, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is fine, and not as fine as a spatula, but it is blunt a little.
And therefore when the wound is amplified and the hernia is outside, then it should be reduced according to the form of its natural, in its proper place, if it is possible on that, because it is better.
But when the incision is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it should be done that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you place the head and feet higher than the middle parts.
And similarly if the incision is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you place your understanding and your consideration always in that way so that the part in which the wound is is higher than the other.
And thus it should be administered in large wounds and in median wounds.
And in small wounds, place what is prepared by you, and make that it be ministered between your two fingers, the one which has the incision all with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then uncover from that to the one who seizes the suture any cause from another.
And this is the manner of common suture: one that you take the needle, or count of needle according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and then lay it from the extremity of the incision of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle one, or other that you do not put thread in the two extremities of the cord, with two extremities of the forceps that is left the cord of the parts of the finger, until you make that penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the forceps, and four orders are made.
And then strengthen with double thread in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by decent addition; and then lay the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in that, and then tie that with thread as it is tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the whole constriction of the wound.
And let the needles be median between thickness and fineness, because the fine needles lightly incised the flesh; and the thick ones are of difficult entrance in the cord, and therefore for that reason let them be median in fineness and thickness.
And do not let the needle be placed in the two extremities of the cord properly much, so that the flesh is not lightly incised and that the wound be healed before its consolidation.
And do not be prolonged of suture so that the wound be prohibited from consolidation.
And then cut the extremities of the needles so that they do not prick the patient's sleep; and place on the suture poultices expanded of all part, those which have the extremities of the needles; and leave those until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And these kinds of suture with needles in this manner is most convenient in small wounds, because it suffices in the suture of them one needle or two or around those.
But the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with suture the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the forceps, in one go, with a needle in which the thread is enveloped equal in fineness and thickness.
And when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, reduce the needle from that same portion from which you began, so that the thread retracted is drawn from the higher portion to the wound, so that the suture is like a suture of cloth with which the cloths are strengthened.
And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suture serves the men.
And with this suture, I sewed the wound that was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been afflicted with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was greater than a palm, and it was said that the intestines were around two palms of the belly of the man, and the disruption was in the middle of the limb; and therefore I reduced it after that the intestines had been pierced by the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and I cured him and he is healed; and after that, he lived for many years, and he was converted to his dispositions.
And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle, he was healed, because I did not cure him with ointment, because it was in a place where ointment was not found nor any medicine, but I placed on the wound a clean cloth twice a day and washed it diligently with honey water until he was healed.
But I say two kinds of sutures proper according to the narration of Word.
And it is that you begin with a suture of the cord, and introduce the needle from the front part to the back part.
And therefore, as the needle penetrates the cord and in that same lacertz according to straightness and length of the whole body, and leaves the extremity of the ciphac in which you have introduced the needle; and make it penetrate in the other extremity the needle from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the mihat.
And then, as you have made that penetration, then you make that penetration another time in that same extremity of the mihat from the front part to the back part; and leave the extremity of the ciphac that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity from the back part to the front part.
And make penetration with that one which you make that penetration in the ciphac in the extremity of the mirat which is in the part of it while all that penetrates.
And then, as you begin from this same side and sew this with the extremity that is of the ciphac in the other place, and extract the needle from the cord which penetrated, and then reduce that one in that cord and body the extremity of the ciphac that is in the other side with this extremity of the mirat; and extract that one from the cord which is of the part of it.
And do this one time and another, and do this one time and another until you sew all that is in front according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with suture of pellicies with which you sew the hairs, in such a way that you sew the ciphac one time from the part of the extremity of the cord, and that you leave that other time until you have made it complete.
But the second kind of proper suture which I call Gualia, and this is of the sermon of it and by it recommended, is that you sew it according to similarity with which some medicants sew it, in such a way that they join all the parts to their corresponding part to it convenient by nature; and they apply the extremity of one of it and the extremity of the mirat to the other extremity of it, and this is done according to that which I recommend to you.
Cover that you put the needle in the extremity of the mirat to your own from the front part, and make that penetration to the back part in that same one, and leave two extremities of the ciphac; and then, turn the needle and make that penetration from front to back in two extremities of the ciphac.
And then, turn those each one, and make each one penetrate from the back part into the front part in two extremities of the mirat others that are in the opposite place.
And this manner of suture is better than the common suture lighter, and is the suture of which I preceded recollection.
This is the sermon of Gualia.
And some said to me, suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you introduce in these each one a thread, and begin with introduction of needle of that which you owe you, and make that penetrate into the other place according to suture of those with which they sew the hides equally.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than of the other places of the belly.
But the judgment of the medication of the wound is the judgment of the other wounds.
Which cause is that when you congeal the wound recent with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the intestines and sew it and adapt it decently, then it rests on that encarnativa powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then it rests on that some ointments which are at your presence until they make hard and they draw the threads, and be consolidated ciphac and mirat; and then cure it as is the cure of the other wounds until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines, then place a poultice on that area, because it begins to sweat, to grow old, and to change every two days, so that as you and I have taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medication in many situations when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague will communicate to the main limbs, then you should submerge linen cloth in oil of good quality, or in rose oil, and place it on the area between the joints and leave the bandages.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the bowels, because many times this happens, then cauterize that with a black stippling vi, and especially if the perforation is reached in the bowel and is made an exit through the cavity of it.
And know that that which is of the large bowel is of lighter healing than that which is in the finer bowels.
And it is of difficult healing because the bowel called "gegunu" does not receive healing from a plague that occurs in it at all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of the magnitude of those that are in them, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of the proximity of that to the nature of nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the plague is the membrane, and you get that recently, reduce it according to your recipe with which you reduce the bowels equally.
But if it has passed to it space and it is already made green or black, then you should strengthen that with a needle over the area that is blackened by it, so that blood flows, because in the membrane are veins and arteries.
And then cut that which is other than that ligament, and place the ends of the needle hanging from the part left of the plague wound, so that over you may be relieved the attraction of it, you must the casing of the membrane and emission of the sweat of the plague.
Memorization of the plagues when they occur in the bowel.
When a rupture occurs in the bowel and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because I saw that one who was plagued in his belly with a blow of a lance and it was the plague of the right side of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and he had from it passage and flatulence.
Therefore, I thought about the cure of him, since it was not confident in the healing of him, but I continued to refine it until it was healed and the area was consolidated.
And I saw that the area was already consolidated, I put on the patient that he should beware of any accident of evil in his belly; and that he should not happen to any by that evil accident and break in his many dispositions eating and drinking, and then between bath and exercise in his feet.
And already said some experienced ones that when a plague occurs in the bowel, and it is small, then it should be tied according to this manner: and it is that you take  spiders of large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and place a spider of those that has the mouth open on the two lips of the plague; therefore, when it takes on those and strengthens its mouth, cut off its head, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another spider near the first, and do not cease this to do with spiders one near another according to the quantity of the whole plague.
And then reduce those and the plague; and remain those annexed heads in the bowel until the bowel is healed; and do not happen to the patient any harm.
And it is already possible that the bowel be tied with a fine needle which is made of the bowel of an animal annexed to it, because it is more in a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these bowel needles, and be it much skinned, and then tie the extremity of it with a needle of thread, enveloped, and then introduce that needle into the needle and body with that bowel, and reduce it into the rupture.
And this manner of suturing with spiders is not but according to a way of trust and of hope.
But if the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the finer bowels, because then it is not engendered but subtilization, and it is not healed of it at all.
Of the cure of  zoster and fistula.
Know that every plague and abscess when it is inflamed and becomes ancient, and is made an ulcer, and is not consolidated and sweats all the time and is not cut off, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is called a fistula, and we call it that zoster.
And fistula according to truth is a fistula, hard, white with which there is no pain and to which the cavity is as the cavity of a bird's bone; and for this reason, it is called by some "rizatz," that is, bone.
And it is in some people humid, which sweats; and very soon the humidity is cut off in some hours. And sometimes this humidity is much, and is little, and is thick, and is fine.
I have shown all those causes, the signs of them, and their cure with medicines in the division.
And I tell you as I have done with the cure of fistula, which is made by way of operation with my hand.
And know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for some of them reach the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the head, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the vertebrae of the spine, or any of the joints composed in such a way that they are connected by the hand and the foot; and of these, those that give rise to them in proximity to the main limb and its likeness.
And therefore of these fistulas that are in this manner, those are of difficult healing diseases, and they do not receive cure, and occupation with them is work and ignorance.
And if it is of the fistulas any the depth of which does not reach those places that have been said, and you wait and trust in the cure of it, and you want to arrive at the knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or of bronze, and if the fistula goes straight, and you examine it with it.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of fine lead, because lead with the lightness of its body is eased and curved of its tortuosity.
And if the fistula is having many horrible things, it is not possible for you to signify upon it with a probe.
Therefore, cleanse the orifice by its orifices, because the moisture by which you cleanse it must go through the other orifices and run out of them.
And then inquire exquisitely, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if here you have bone or nerve, and whether the concavity of the fistula is distant or proximate, or whether it is a fistula that has many orifices and is on top of all this with the sum of your strength, with your interrogation, with which you interrogate the patient, and the invention of the pain you must apply your hand to the place, and resemblances of the significations and causes accidental to the abscess.
And when you will have stood on all those causes with true station, then come to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if the fistula is apparent proximate or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which I have told you.
Then you dry the fistula according to what has been said before in its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the heel and its likenesses, and cure that until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of distant depth, and it is straight, then you must cut that into the preon as much as you think is possible, and then modify that of all its corrupted flesh; and then administer poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce those into the concavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do this with that several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that which is rotten in the concavity of the fistula of the corruption.
And then restore that with bandages which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it according to what we have recounted.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then you inquire about it and dry it according to what we have recounted, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main limb as we have said.
But if the bone is to you discovered and there is in it any corruption and blackness, then you cut that out until the corruption is hosted entirely; and then cure that with what encases it until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and throws back as it did, then you know that you have not arrived at the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you uncover it again and exquisitely make the incision and purification of it with your most powerful hand, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, well is it; and if not, then you know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore in that you can do nothing but leave it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to pull that out, then you pull it out with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
And if there are many bones, then exquisitely make the extraction of all of them, and of those leave none behind with your strength.
But if to you any cause of the humors makes contrary, and in their incision there is no fear nor error, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are there, and deliver the bones.
But if to you is not the preparation of removing the bones of your hour, then pause over the wound what you can place on it, and leave it until that is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound that it is not consolidated, and the section which you have incised in your operation is constricted.
However, if you fear, pause over it a poultice submerged in its tripe mixed with oil, or a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green poultices, because when they will soften those ligaments, and the bones are of their separation the ablation, and of those attractions the alleviation.
But if it is a large bone, such as the thigh bone or hip bone, or similar to those, and the part that is corrupted is only the surface of it, then remove that with a resin, only from behind, so that the blackness and corruption remain, and then restore the wound.
But if the part that is corrupted is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and to cut all the way into the area where the corruption has reached, and then cure it from within so that it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you have a man in his thigh so that you place that as an example and helper over your operation.
Take a young man, around thirty years old, who has an accident in his thigh, and from the parts of the body, the evil is on the matter of the body, until the matter reaches the thigh, and it is matter of abscess with a large abscess, and it is not from an external cause.
And therefore take the time extended with that by the error of the doctors until the abscess is opened, and materials are brought out of it, and its cure is then stopped until the thigh is fistulated, and make in it moving orifices, which all throw out pus and the humidity of the body.
And therefore the cure took many months of doctors for about two years, and in those I was not wise but in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the thigh of him and the materials that were running from those orifices for a great course; and already the body of that man was all debilitated and the color of him was yellowish.
And therefore I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone.
And then I and carefully scrutinized all the orifices and found them to reach to all parts of the thigh.
And then I and cut myself and incised over one of the orifices where I described a part of the bone, and I found that corrupted, and it was already terrible and corrupted and degraded; and a part of the thigh had already been corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I sewed up what to me was discovered and prepared from the discovered bone.
And I cured that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I excised and sewed up, and I had already drained it.
And then I placed the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I repeated and discovered over the bone second time over the first discovery, and I found continuing corruption with the bone.
And I sewed up what appeared to me of that corruption, and then I made fair the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered over it another time and did not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and pierced the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I incised around an inch of it, and that I extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
And it was not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and the section of it, but for the disposition of the flesh of it and for the paucity of its tolerance and fear of death, because it happened to him at all hours for superfluity of evacuation syncope evil.
And therefore the healing is by entire healing, and nothing is in the place of bone, flesh hard; and it is made good the disposition of it in its body and returns the virtue of it; and it is converted in its dispositions and did not make to it contrariety in walking nor harm in any cause.
But if the bone is eminent in the place of the body already drawn, then when you succeed that in this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that eminent bone, and command someone to extend it upwards; and place that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then tie that over the flesh that is left the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you pull the flesh to the sides, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to sew so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
And place a board or table below the bone decently, because when you do this, the saw is not prohibited from cutting the corrupted flesh.
And cover that it is the sawing over the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, and force the sawing of it another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, abates is one part continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh of all parts altogether; and then place a board below, and then saw that of the first part where the corruption is until it is continued the sawing of the other part.
And be the sawing according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in it reason but ingenuity.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is very difficult; however, since you inquire about the corruption in what manner it appears to you, and that you open it, and cleanse it according to each disposition which is possible to you, and in each case make it rectified to you, when it does not do you contrariety vein or nerve.
And know which are the saws and the instruments to cut these bones are very much according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and greatness and smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; because whenever you prepare for every kind of operation, the instrument is convenient to that operation.
And know that that operation signifies to you about the kind of instrument of which you indigeysses; when with you is great study and long and knowledge of the ways of this art, and witness of ways of diseases, for then you already have by yourself what is convenient to them of the instruments to every disease.
And you so a you forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will place as simple with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experiment on others. Form of saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of a chisel: Let the head of this chisel be according to the form of the head of a star-shaped key, and the points of it be according to the form of the points of an awl.
And it is not convenient except that with that they be confricadatz the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or the mouth is wide.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another decent saw: let it be made with an arch of it as high as possible and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of boy knife decently made. Form of it:
Form of a razor which has a concavity:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another razor of curved extremity:
Form of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Form of another minor incisor:
Form of another incisor; this one resembling a chisel, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ration of the bones:
Form of a chisel which is convenient for the ration of that one which is perforated of the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and of acute extremity.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly as all the causes that we have said of razors and incisors and saws.
Of incising extremities and the serration of the bones.
The extremities can be either by intrinsic cause or by extrinsic cause, or as you will have medicated that corruption by cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption goes from the member which you do not strike any cause, then when you incise that member into that which the honor aches the corruption, so that the patient escapes from that of death or malice which is the greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that one to whom it happens, is that the member is made black before it is cured that fire has already burned it, or it can be brought near the blackness before the pus comes into that member that sees it and that nourishes the whole body; and therefore you cut it with incision.
And similarly if it is the cause of the corruption by the percussion of some venomous causes as well as from a sea scorpion or from a viper or from a rutula and from similar things.
And if the corruption or the percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters into the hand.
And similarly if it happens to the hand, then you incise it from the root of the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption so that it nourishes in the wrist of the arm.
And if instead of that, then you incise the arm into the armpit in the juncture.
And if the corruption passes another and sometimes encircles the armpit, then in that it is the death of the patient; and administer another cause another to that in cure is the quantity of virtue.
And similarly do of the foot when corruption envezeys the toe of the foot, then you incise it into one of the toes.
And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then you incise the whole foot. But if it enters into the thigh, then you incise the thigh into the juncture of the thigh.
And if the corruption has already arrived upon the thigh, then in it there is no made but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the manner of incising the member or of sawing it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part furthest from where you want to incise, and strengthen another ligament over the place; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments in a lat spatulum until all the flesh is uncovered; and then it is incised or sawed.
And so that it be placed cloth from all parts so that it does not touch the area, and that the patient comes the lesion adjusted and cauterized abscess.
But if there occurs a flow of blood while working, then you cauterize the area carefully, or place on it some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication before it is completed.
And then bind the affected limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his foot, this same accident which I have told you, which is that which happens when blackness occurs in his foot with a burning that was assembled like the burning of fire.
And that corruption happens first in his toe before it spreads throughout the whole foot.
And then that man prepares himself to put in pus that he feels the cure going to the limb with the violence of it that becomes numb from pain and burning, and the incision in that foot goes into the joint, and fire heals.
Long time happens to him that same corruption in the toe of the hand I indicated.
And then it comes to me, and so I, having pierced and repercussed that superfluity with what I place over the hand of the medicines, then the purification of the body of him; and it does not repercuss the superfluity and it begins to go to the other toe before it begins in the hand.
And he asked me to incise his hand, and I did not want to do that, hoping for the repercussion of that superfluity, and more that I feared the incision of his hand would be dead, because the virtue of the patient was over coming.
And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and I came to know that that man prepared and incised his hand entirely, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration except so that it may be an aid on that which catches of this sickness, and that its signification for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
Of the cure of the bowels and the quality of clysterization with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and pus is extracted from it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is above it as if it were fine cloth, and it has not reached the back corruption, and it has not imprinted on the bone or on the nerves or on the ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
But however, if the space is prolonged until the corruption presses on some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure of it is that the skin is incised entirely as if it were rolled up, and more so when it is fine and made like cloth, and composes that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin adheres and that that corruption has not achieved further consequence, and in the skin there has passed through from the front, then you cure that with clysters.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the brac that you see is of fetid odor, then you clysterize that with an Egyptian medicine which is of oil and strong wine and ginger receiving equal parts, and they are placed in a vessel, and they are boiled over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and clysterize with that the sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then you extract that with a sponge; and do this for so many days until the sinus is purified and the stench is removed.
And sometimes it is clysterized with water of ash, when the medicine is not present to you; and it is that you take the ash of wheat, and put water over it; and then collect that and clysterize with it until you confess that the sinus is then healed.
And if the patient does not have tolerance over the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ash, then clysterize that with water and honey and that it be mixed with ginger, and clysterize that with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey is that it purifies and washes, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and more so when in the wine there is superfluity of astringency and dryness.
And as you do this sometimes and you confess that the sinus is already healed, then clysterize that with water that makes flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take of  dyaconfin and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or that you clysterize with it some medicines and other gargles that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise of gargles.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow in which the clyster nozzle is not received, then you enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and put in it a poultice wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the lips of it with suture and leave it for the quantity in which between the clyster its addition.
And if the patient's orifice from which the arm protrudes is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the lowest place that is in it so that the arm runs into it, because when the arm is contracted in the pre-existence of the sinus, the flesh is generated in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus into the environment of the lowest bone as you want, then pierce it so that you prepare the member with the preparation by which the arm runs lightly according to what is at your apparel and that no cause of the arm is retained in it.
But that which is on the orifice of the sinus, which you remove every hour so that what is adjusted in it of the arm may escape. And so that you know if what runs from it of the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is undigested.
And thus you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in it an abscess.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is thrown on the orifice of the sinus already adheres, or approaches adhesion, then you may it the third day, and when you untie the plague, then change the cloth for another and renew the enguent.
But if from the sinus a proper space yields a subtle virus, then do not despair of its adhesion, because the healing of it approaches, because some men in whom the late generation of flesh in their wounds, and of those it is done the contrary of it.
And if from the sinus after many days is issued undigested arm, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is the prolonged cause, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as a diaphani conguent, when in it is adjusted superfluity of addition of zegi.
And the last one among those that is cured, is that you take diaphani conguent and dissolve it in rose oil, and on it pour a little vinegar in its substance, and then mix that with it, and use of that.
And already it seems in that action, when there is no arm, diaphani conguent, honey when it is cooked until it is thickened, and use of it; or that you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind all and pulverize on the honey when it is on the fire, and then line it on cloth and strengthen that on the sinus; and line it with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and pulverize on cloth and strengthen that.
And sometimes are administered with it aristolochia long and roots of celestial lily (and it is celestial lily) and flour of errs and centaurea, and use of those simples or adjust them, grind them and sieve and pulverize on the honey which I have recommended; and use of it.
And if the sinus is prolonged, and is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the pre-existence of it, and already make inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with fistular cure, as above is said.
Of the cure of panariti and ingrown toenails and the addition of a finger incision and section.
Panariti is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the finger of the hand or foot, and very often arises in the other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, or it is an abscess of an abscess caut, or it is corrupted, and throws out arm while it corrodes the roots of the nail, and very often corrupts the whole, and very often spreads its corruption to the bone while it is to it a fetid odor, and is made the extremity of the finger lamed, and the color of it is made dark.
And therefore when you will have that with the water that we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then cove that you incise with iron all the superfluity that is remaining from the nail and then cauterize the wound with fire, because fire cauterization is useful in this.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail voids already compress the flesh to the sides of the finger, and they begin to prick it and let it out, then cove that you place a fine ray under the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and impel it upwards and incise it with ease, and place on that which remains of the flesh of the medicinal corrosive concoctions until it is all removed; and then cure it with enguent until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already entered the bone, then cove that you incise the bone and extract it, because no time is healed that in it the bone is corrupted.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption going into the wound, then you cut it in one of the nuts according to how it is pressed its memory, and then take care of it while it is healing.
But if the nail is bruised or rubbed, and there is pain in that area, then when you first begin to treat the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula, making a transverse section from top to bottom, and guard yourself that the section does not reach into the flesh that is left from the nail, for you will cause the patient great pain, and it will be the cause of the birth of superfluous flesh in the area; and then take care of that area with water that relieves pain.
But this adjusted flesh, which is born in the hands of some men, it is very hard, all flesh, and very hard in the bones, or very hard in the nail.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth of them in some nuts of the hands. But that one that is born in some nuts of the finger does not get worse, and this one that is born in the joints very hard is worse.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is lighter, and it is that you cut that according to its root with a broad spatula.
But of that one that is born at the root of the joint, the healing is difficult; and therefore guard yourself from the abscess of it.
But in that one that is born in the finger, when you first cut the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw it with one of those saws convenient to water, and then take care of it while it is healing.
But consolidation, which happens to the fingers between their many movements or by birth of the man who is born with it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similarities, then when you cut that consolidation while the fingers return to their natural form.
And then place between their cloths of the bandages in olive oil rubbed so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between them, or place between them a lamina of subtle lead while it is consolidating according to what is necessary.
And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient to the figure of the limb.
Of incisions of vices, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and they are veins convoluted thick and full of melancholic superfluities which come in motion in the limbs of the body, and the major advent of them in the legs, and more in the legs of the travelers and the laborers and the carriers.
Therefore, it is necessary that you administer purging of the body of black bile some times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
But the cure of them with iron is according to two manners: one is that it be incised and that the black blood be thrown out, and the other manner is that the vein be elevated and all of it be extracted.
The incision of it is according to this manner: first embroil the leg with lukewarm water so that the thick blood be resolved, which is feculent of the leg, and then strengthen the leg of the patient to the most sovereign part of the thigh, and to the part below the knee with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place, or in two, or in three with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood with your hand from the part below the leg and upwards, and downwards, until the quantity of blood that you want and that you see is sufficient, and which will take the virtue of the ailment.
And then apply that, and command him to abstain from foods that engender black bile.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that night to the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you that raze the leg of the patient, if in it there are movements, and then put it in a bath and embroil the leg of it with lukewarm water until it becomes reddish and the veins are exuberant; or that it be exercised by strong exercise, if the bath is not present, until the limb be scalded.
And then cut the vein in the right of the vein by incision in the long or in the back of it below the knee, or in the lowest part of it below the ankle.
And then open the vein with forceps and scrape the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and it is of the appearance of it that sometimes that rogue is declining to blackness.
And therefore when you evacuate and from the vein you see that white which is cord.
And then you put below that the ray until it be elevated and be thrown from the vein, and suspend that with a lance or lion's horn.
And then cut another incision near that incision for three fingers, and then scrape the vein from the part below the vein until it appears.
And then elevate that and cut it in the back incision below the ankle, and then extract that and elevate it until it is drawn out by the second incision, and then extract that from the incision that is above it.
And do this until you extract that from the incision that is most sovereign or most high of all the incisions, until all is drawn out; and then cut that.
And if it does not obey to you to extract and elevate, then introduce a needle with a strong double thread and tie that and extract it, or introduce behind it the ray and turn your hand to all parts within which it is thrown. And guard yourself that it not be cut; for if it is broken, it is made difficult for you to elevate that gut and it comes upon the patient for that harm.
And when that whole gut is put back, then place upon the place of the plague wool soaked in wine and oil rubbed and oil unrubbed, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the gut is contracted having tortuosity in which it is wrapped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude according to what we have said, then cover that which you do upon that whole part of tortuosity of it and to the places of its wrapping, and then suspend that with hooks until you elevate that whole.
And guard yourself that your section that you do not cut the vein and that you do not wound that, for difficult it will be for you to elevate that; and serve your prudence in that.
Form of the incision with which the gut is cut:
It is not to it sharpened as with the hooks nor is it of sharp extremity so that it does not wound the vein; and it is of gross flexibility leon, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; having in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
Of the extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in arid lands as in the Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India arid and of little fertility and in which there are no herbs nor aybre.
And very much it is generated in other places of the body other than the legs.
And the gestation of it is of putrefaction that comes from the bone as if venom is led from the inside of the body serpents and worms and scarids and worms that are engendered between the bone and the flesh.
And sign of the reception of the advent of it is of this vein that accidents in the leg inflammation vehement; and then the place is vesicated; and then begins the vein to issue from the place of that vesication which seems rooted of plant.
And therefore, when it appears from him the extremity, then you should wrap over that a piece of lead of which the weight is of a dragon.  Within two dragons, and no more, and hold that and let the lead hang from the leg.
And so many times as you see of it some cause to the parts outside, bandage that in lead and bandage that. And if the gut is prolonged, then you introduce a part of it and envelop the remnant; and do not cut that of root within which it is issued, for if you cut that it is contracted and enters into the flesh and makes to happen abscess and poyredura in the place and bad ulceration.
For that which cover that it be treated gradually and be extracted little by little, until it is put back from the end of it and no remnant of it any cause in the body.
And of this vein is issued in some men that it is in its length of five palms and ten and already has come to me that it issued one of twenty palms.
And if it is cut at the time of its medication, then introduce the ray in the tract of it and perforate that with long tract with the body, until it is evacuated all that which is in the matter, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many ramps, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and come to it many orifices, and it is issued from some orifice ram.
And therefore cure that as we have said in the division and with what is said above.
Of section above worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine pain.
This malady is named in some lands as the bovine malady for that it often happens to oxen and it is worm few one of which is born between the bone and the flesh, and goes in all the body up and down, and is shown at the feeling of its increase of limb in limb until it disrupts the bone and appears outside.
And the generation of it is by putrefaction of some humors as if accidents worms and serpents and earthworms and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for the malice of it, for when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and has come to the brain, then very much it breaks in it and enters and destroys the brain, and that happens many times.
And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done if not with its ambulation and appearance of it at the feeling, and then cover that which is above it and that which is below it with liament and strong constriction, and then dry above it and extract that.
And if it is preondat in the flesh and not the atrobes, then you pause cautery with fire above the place until it dies, and the major cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
If you see that being arrived at the head near the temple, then tighten over the eyebrow with a firm constriction, and then squeeze over it, and extract that; and so that the patient uses modification of his body with medicines evacuating putrid bad humors, and guard himself from foods generating putrefaction.
On the section for the ailment of nafir.
This illness is called nafir in our land, and it is pain which comes in certain members, and then it is changed from member to member.
And I have already seen that, as I will tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflation in the vein of the arm, and since it was warm for an hour, I saw that inflation go as if it were a worm rising, but more lightly than being by, as if it were living silver when it runs from place to place.
And then the pain went to that place and it spread to the muscle, and then it stayed there for an hour.
And then it corrected in the other body until it reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to her that she should roll herself over her whole body as I had seen; and I was too amazed by the change of it and the speed of member to member. And I had already seen that before in my own heels in that manner, however, I have seen many who attribute pain to be changed from member to member. But I did not see that in the heels as in the woman.
And I did not think that it was anything but that because the woman was old, on so of dry body and of exposed veins, and in this appearance it felt that changeable windiness.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retrograde cure in those who are delicate and with humid bodies of well-covered veins.
And as you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not to you apparent at the temple as we have said, then you tighten over that and leave it slightly and squeeze over that until that windiness is constricted, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it at your temples, then you cure that with the shaking of the body and with that which you expel windiness, and charms those with foul pills and with pills of serapi and the like.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they strike, for their diversity is that of those that have large points, and small, and concave, and blunt, some are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have shafts.
And of the signs of the servant is when it strikes in it an arrow, and pierces the bone, and it is felt from the cyphasis which is above the brain, for it causes by it soda vehement, and scotomia, and vertigo, and roaring in the heels, and inflammation and roaring of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and very soon is cut off the word and destroyed the voice, and it is felt from the place of the plague a white humidity resembling powder, and eyes of it resembling the fluidity of the flesh.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then you abstain from the cure and the extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it strikes in the heart, are that it is near the left nipple, and felt with that which it has been placed in hard cause, and it is not a void cause; and very soon the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the hand, and running of the plague black blood, and it feels that coldness of the extremities, and sweat cold, and syncope; and therefore know that death descends all the way down.
And the signs when the arrow has plagued the lung, are so easily blood spume from the plague, and the vessels that are near the neck are apoplectic, and the color of the patient is changed, and he expires great spirit, and demands the attraction of cold air.
And if it strikes the arrow in the ligament which is in the feet, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it is made the leg great with vehement pain and with sigh, and not are bad all the members of the muscles.
And if it strikes the arrow in the stomach, then very soon eyes of the plague food any undigested.
And if it strikes the arrow in the belly, and it is placed in it, eyes some wound of the plague, or the membrane, or the intestine which is dislocated, and there is no hope in the cure of it extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow enters the bladder, and urine is expelled outside, and some process occurs from it to the external parts, and there is a great deal of pain on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
May the other members, as well as the face, neck, throat, shoulders and arms, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the hip, and the leg and their likenesses, be saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I recount to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may signify it to you about your cure.
The cause is, that in a man a shot arrow in the lacrimal of his eye at the root of the nose, and you extracted that from the other part, leaving the gray of the eyebrow of him, and he is healed, and it did not harm in the eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was shot in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be obtained from it except for a small extremity with which it adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head in which there were no feathers.
And the Jew healed, and it did not harm in his eye at all.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one that has feathers; and therefore I incised it between two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; and therefore I subtly maneuvered it, and then extracted it, and the Christian healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who was shot in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and therefore, because forty days passed and there was no change in him from his dispositions, I incised on the arrow and maneuvered it, and he healed, and it did not harm him at all.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow was shot in his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and because it was about seven years, he pulled the arrow out at the root of the groin.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow was shot in her belly, and the wound was consolidated from within her, and she was not changed in her dispositions in any way, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow was shot in his face and the wound was consolidated, and he broke the arrow, not feeling much pain, and many appearances were like this.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes who was shot in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And I was called to his cure about three days after the shooting of the arrow.
And then I felt the wound of the arrow very strictly; and then I inquired about it with subtle attempts, and I did not feel it; but I felt a prick below the right feather, and therefore I suspected that prick was because of the extremity of the arrow.
And I plastered the place with a plaster in which there is attractive and digestive virtue, confessing to myself that the place will be festered so that it appears to me the place of the arrow, so that it will dry on it.
And it did not harm in the place significantly that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days and it did not harm at all; and the wound was consolidated meanwhile, and he broke the wound from the extraction of it for a space of many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and recounted this to me.
And then I placed on the wound medicine acute corrosive for many days until it opened, and with the attempt I felt it, and I felt the extremity of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the shaft.
And then I adjusted it in the appearance of the wound with that acute medicine until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the arrow, and it passed to me time with it for the space of time within four months.
And then because the wound had been amplified, and it was possible for me to intervene with forceps in it, and remove it, without any impediment, then I did not cease to subtly maneuver and engineer on it with manners of ingenuity, until one day I began on it with manners of ingenious to hang it with forceps carefully made, according to how it will come in the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the patient healed entirely, and he did not suffer in it in any way.
And I recount to you the quality of the extraction of some arrows so that you may pause this rule and signification about what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not understood with narration nor do they comprehend them in the book.
And the wise artificer compares with few about much; and with what is present about what is absent; and finds novel operation and novel instrument of the descent of the foreign causes of the art when they occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not taken out of the limbs in which they are lodged except in two ways: either by traction of the place where they enter; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is lodged by the place where it entered, or the arrow proceeds in fleshy place, and is pulled and taken out.
And if it does not obey the easement of the hour in which it is caught, then you must leave it for several days until the flesh around it can be softened, and the traction and its egress are relieved.
And similarly if it is lodged in bone and does not obey you to the easement, then leave that one for several days and repeat that with traction and motion each day, and it will be taken out.
And if it does not obey you to the easement after several days, then you must drill into the circuit of the arrow in that bone from every part with a subtle drill until the place of the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already lodged in the place of the body, and is hidden from the feeling, then you inquire that one with a probe, and if you feel that, then pull that one with some instruments which are convenient to its extraction.
And if you cannot over it due to the constriction of the plague and the length of the preon, and here there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then you cut on the plague until it is enlarged and that it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is to the ears in which it is held, then you deliure the flesh in which it is lodged from every part with all the effort that you can make; and engineer over that, if you cannot over the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in torsion of those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use with a twist of your hand with forceps to all parts until it makes that obey; and subtly with subtle dexterity that the arrow is not broken and that it is made to you difficult extraction of it and of that extraction.
And if you cannot over that of your hour, then you leave it for several days until the parts that are in the circuit of it can be softened, and then repeat that because then it is relieved. But if to you makes contrary flow of blood, then you administer that which we have said of cure in its chapter.
And guard your virtue of incision of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer ingenuity in every manner to you possible of the evasion of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and tardiness and firmness as I have to you recommended.
And therefore that you may make the arrow contrary so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should the placement of the arrow in him, for it is more helpful. But if that is not to you possible, then you administer that which is to you possible for the figures.
But the arrows that are taken out by the contrary of the other part, or that already from it proceed some part to the parts of outside, or make glibness the extraction of the arrow by feeling of the part pus above the codena proper and sometimes that eminent; therefore you cut on that; and be the section according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then pull that, because it is made lighter to easement.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lame according to contrariety until the arrow presses in the bone, and enlarge to itself, and then extract that.
And if not, leave that for several days, and then repeat that until it is possible.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you impel that with it.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulsion, then you introduce and that, if it is blunt, a curved instrument so that between the concavity of it in the tail of the arrow and then impel that with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then you impel that with a strong instrument entering into it, for the arrow is relieved by that.
And if the arrow is intoxicated, then you must concave all the flesh in which it is the vein, if it is to you possible that, and then care for that with that which it convenes.
And if the arrow catches in the feet, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and is proximate so that you touch that with the probe, and it is to you possible to cut on that, then cut on that and guard yourself from incision of vein or of nerve, and extract that, and then close the wound if it is indigens, and care for that until it is healed.
Shape of forceps with which arrows are shot:
Let the extremities of them be like a bird's beak that are made like a saw when they take hold of the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of these, many species are made, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
As if a ray so that the entry of it into the concave arrow is eased and it is impelled with that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy of which it is customary to make phlebotomy of .xxx. Of which there are in the head .xvi. There are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two veins which are in the two temples apparent; and two veins which are in two lacrimals of two holes which are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guidegi that are in the neck; and two veins which are in the upper lip; and two veins which are in the lower lip; and— these are the veins which are called algelic—; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. But the veins which are phlebotomized in the arms are .v.; Four of which is a cephalica, and it is the wild vein; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and blunt, and it is a medium-sized vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalica; and that name the people "vein of the whole body," and basilica is the vein which is placed in the domestic vein, and it is called "citillar," and the vulgars call that "vein of the belly"; and funis of the arm, and it is placed over the focil, and it is that in which it is phlebotomized, and it is that which appears on the poutz by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the little auricular and the smallest one, and there are two ramps in it.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of those is that which is below the curvature of the denolh of the wild vein; and the second is sophena, and its place is below the camba of the domestic vein; and the sciatica vein, and its place is below the camba of the wild vein; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
The use of the veins that are near the ears is for ancient catarrhs and emigrants and sahafati and old bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: that it be rasped the head of the patient, and that the head of the patient be rubbed in the occiput in the place of both veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then tighten the patient's neck with a bandage until the two appear and the places of them near the ears in two depressed places of the head; and try that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here is the attempt.
Then you take the sharp lance, and it is that which is incident, and then you introduce that below the vein in the codena until the phlebotomy comes to the bone. And then elevate your hand with the vein and the codena to the upper parts and introduce the vein with an incident incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make it as much of the blood as you want.
And then tighten with poultices and leave that until it is healed.
And already it was preceded at the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
But of the two arterial veins that are in the temples the use of phlebotomy is for ancient emigrants and sode evil and obstinate ophthalmia and courses of acute superfluities effused to the holes.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck well until the two veins appear to the feeling by manifest appearance and the pulse of them below your finger is demonstrated; and then you try it.
And then you elevate the codena above the vein to the upper parts with your finger indicating, and introduce the incident phlebotomy below, and elevate the vein upwards; and introduce that as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood run according to the quantity of your need.
And then untie the constriction of the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour, and then place on that a poultice and tighten that above with strong constriction, and leave that until it is healed.
And already is preceded the remembrance of them, and of those the incision, and the traction at the beginning of the book.
And therefore the use of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is like the phlebotomy of the cephalica to the old ailments of the face and to emigrants and rogor and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is according to what I recommend to you; so is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then takes the instrument which is called the fossor of which this is the form of it:
Pause the point which is at the head of the fossor on that vein and strike upon it with a pench or with another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity which you want; and then untie the perforation of the patient and tighten that one until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with phlebotomy, however not so that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity as the others, rather it is of blunt extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is proper and very hard it would break in it the phlebotomy when it is subtle.
But the usefulness of the two veins that are at the lacrimals of two heels for scabies of the heels by rogor and sebol in the heels, and to the diseases of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you if you are standing over the head of him.
And be made the phlebotomy according to the transverse in longitude a little with phlebotomy a little, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, very much the extremity of it is broken.
And then make run of the blood as much as is to you necessary, and pause over those cuts, and tighten those for a night, and then untie those.
But the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is conferent to acute fever and to soda vehement, and to the diseases of the face and emigranea and rogor that happens in the face, and mostly when it is old.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient tightens his neck and then take his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy subtle long and place that one in the middle place of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cover that you ultimes your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and make run of the blood according to your necessity; and then tie that one for a night, because that one is restored lightly.
But the usefulness of the phlebotomy of the two guidegui is to constriction of ale and to the beginning of leprosy and to many diseases and inpetige and bad ulcers corrosive as well as herpotromeno.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient tightens both in his neck with a liament; and be the artifices over the head of the patient, and the patient be sitting on a sella.
And then phlebotomize the vein along with phlebotomy ample little by little; and then extract of blood according to temperate quantity or according to what you times of necessity that is to what; and then make semblant of the other vein.
And then untie the liament and tighten the two veins with a middle stricture so that the patient not be prefocated, and leave until in the morning because the plague is healed.
And the usefulness of the phlebotomy of the algerich veins, conferes to small apostemas and pustulas of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the circuit of it.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that you make seize the patient before you, and tighten the neck of him with a bandage, and then revolve the lips of him and watch the two veins of which the one is of the right of the lip and the second of the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each one of both, and this more is because in the circuit of those so veins small black; and therefore inscise each one by incision inscident.
But if doubt is of you, and you do not know which one of those is, then you understand to incision of the major of those, and of the most manifest of those.
And make the semblant of the two veins that are in the lips above.
But of two veins that are below the tongue the usefulness is to the phlebotomy of the cephalica to prefocacios that are in the guolayro, to the disease of the uvula, and to diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that follow the patient between your hands before the sun, and elevate the tongue of him, and watch below the tongue, of the one side of it vein and of the other side vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
And therefore phlebotomize each one; and guard yourself that you do not ultimes your hand in phlebotomizing those, because below those so arteries.
And your veins that are phlebotomized in the groin are in those that corr custom in all the men, and the phlebotomy of them is made according to two manners, or put with the phlebotomy mirtilat or olive to subtlety declining; or secsar with phlebotomy cutellar, and call si alnessil, and this is the form of it:
Let the patient's vein be as such times, and you should open the concave veins full, appearing thick, and to those that contain thick, troubled blood.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and of more subtle extremity, and you should make phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle, citrus blood.
But the benefit of phlebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: that which extracts the blood of the ailments that are left the throat and the neck, and from that which affects the feet and the belly.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when phlebotomizing that, to guard well and be over-cautious in that, because below it there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and there will flow blood, so that he who phlebotomizes that with phlebotomy pungent, should advance it with incision.
And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then you should leave that and that you change to the other, or that you seek some branch of it; or that you phlebotomize in the place of its end of the arm, because that is manifest; and dissect that with phlebotomy incision as we have said.
But if you want the phlebotomy of its middle, then you should go before the stricture of the arm that you touch the place within which you know the place of the wrists, and then press on it with your hand; and then raise the arm and dissect the vein with concave incision with phlebotomy as we have said; and guard yourself that the percussion for some space of the place of the artery.
And when you see, as if you were stretching the ligament, inflammation in the place that you have pressed with your hand, then that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as if it were the gold of a child, and the blood is subtle and red, then you should know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then you should stop and place your finger on that for a long space; and then oppose your finger, and if the blood is cut off, because many times it is cut off, then you should stretch the arm and leave that.
And guard the patient from the moccion of him, and be over-cautious of him and do not harm him for some days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not cut off, and you see that you must not present medicine to that, then you should incise the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is contracted, and it is cut off the blood; or that you take a piece of fistic, and apply that, and take the one majority and stretch that over the place of the vein at the stricture descending to the ligament and to the pulses within the other day.
And then if the blood is cut off, it is well; and if not, then cure that with the water of which it is preceded to the remembrance of the place of the pulses cutting off the flow of blood.
And the abscission of the blood from him is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
But of the fusca vein the phlebotomy is a benefit that extracts the blood from the superior part of the head and the part below the body; for that reason because it is composed of a branch of the basilica and of a branch of cephalica, as we have said.
And so the phlebotomist should be over-cautious in the phlebotomy of that, because below that there is a nerve; and therefore if he adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and touches the nerve, it will cause stupor to him, and it is difficult the healing of him, and fort leu it is not healed of all, And this nerve many times appears to the feeling; and if it is hidden to some men and it is subtle and not shown, then you should pause the phlebotomy with the one with which you phlebotomized with incision of the knife, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should cut the vein in the length.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalica vein is that it attracts the blood of the head and comforts the ailments of the joints.
And so in this very thing, if you want that phlebotomy be done with phlebotomy Olivar or with phlebotomy Mirti; because it is the safest of all the veins, because it is not below it the artery nor nerve.
But however, fort leu is an abscess in some men, when it is not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but do not notice in re that abscess.
The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only in the preservation of health and in the hope and precaution of the occurrence of illnesses, and that phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins that are in the arm, that is: cephalic, basilic, and median; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when there appear signs of fullness.
And it should be performed phlebotomy on the third day or at the first hour that three hours have passed of the day.
But phlebotomy that is administered, more when it provokes convenience and necessity to it, or of night or of day, at every hour and in all times.
And that a child not be phlebotomized until they have reached fourteen years, and a woman who is pregnant not be phlebotomized until the fourth month into the seventh, and the elderly not be phlebotomized those who have already passed sixty years.
And since anyone wants to be phlebotomized in any way, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels before phlebotomy with a lion's enema, if there is a lot of fecal matter retained, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities into the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are cleansed, and that they do not harm the main limbs.
And they should not be phlebotomized those patients who are nauseous, suffering from indigestion, nor those recovering from illness or drunkenness until that is removed from them, nor those with dropsy, and more that phlebotomy should be feared near colic, near vomiting, near a distended belly, and near multiplication of coitus and labor and exercise of fasting or vigils and of every cause that dissolves the virtue, whether corporal or animal.
And before it, consider in the subtilization of humors, if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to it.
And before it, enter into a bath if no cause prohibits it, or exercise by any exercise so that the blood is subtiliated.
And pause the phlebotomy of him in the foot of the day, that is, around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And perforsa that the foot of that one be guarded on that day from all evils accidents animals, as is anguish, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, as is superfluous labor and pain and coitus and semblance to them.
And to his bed, let them make present the causes in the use of which custom of men am aromaticity and odor, and with balsams and semblance to those according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is softer than the cushion of that one who is to be phlebotomized.
And before it, extract his arm, and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and before it, strengthen the ligament with a strap and wrap that two times.
And let the stricture be temperate, for the stricture when it is not equal, or the stricture is with superfluity, then prohibit the flow of blood; or it is with softening, and then prohibit the body of blood emission.
And before the stricture, let him who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together amongst them while the veins are inflamed, and declared to the touch.
And before the phlebotomist anoints his phlebotomy with a little bit of olive oil properly; and before it, place his left hand's index finger on that vein, below the place where he wants the phlebotomy, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is settled for of the veins is the one that atrophies as the heart flees, and of those is that full of vitality and when you place the phlebotomy on that, it is contracted, and the phlebotomist is revealed; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens, that one is straitened.
And therefore, for this, let the phlebotomist be stopped and be solicited in all these causes.
And before the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one go, then well is it; and if not, then repeat it another time below that place a little, or on it with a festination, if the place is not apostemed.
And if the place is apostemed, or the patient fears, then leave it for a day or two, and do not strengthen the ligament, for strong it will draw the caut apostema, nor enter into a bath.
And before it, repeat the phlebotomy if the need.
And if the aperture is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not be the quantity of blood you want, then repeat the phlebotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the aperture a little, and do it with festination before the place is apostemed, for the place is apostemed in many men with little aperture.
But if that one is already apostemed, then do not repeat on it, for it excuses you no cause; and pause on that any part of the wound of olive oil, for it alleviates the body of the blood. And it is better in this place than olive and than the other oils.
And seemingly administers a wound of oil in all phlebotomy with which phlebotomists cut the veins of the prohibition of the body of blood, and do that tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is placed on the area, because the blood is subtle and is revolted when it is thick.
And if in the place of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, because many times it happens, and most to that who has not been bled but that time, or at the opening of the vein little, and then you cover, and place on the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen that for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And cover that it should do this near the closure of the blood of that vein with the compliment of it or of another vein.
And if it remains in the place for some days some blackness or greenness, do not notice it; and if you want, place on that some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mint or calamine or something similar to it.
And many times abscesses and bumps happen because of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And therefore place your hand over it, and if then you feel softness because of your compression over it, then that eminence is bad and evil; and therefore beware that you place on it any cause of what they have said, because it is very likely that it will flow from the artery blood.
And make a poultice with water in which it is stypticated, so that the place be endured, and meanwhile cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
And cover that you extract blood from every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color appearing on the blood according to what appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow until it is rough; and seemingly if you see it thick, then you let it flow until it is subtle; and seemingly if it is acute, until the acuteness of it is stayed.
And cover that to one who is full and strong and has need of the extraction of blood in one time, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomy be wide.
And in that who is frail, be done the contrary of that, and cover that you extract that in small times, and that the trauc be straight.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of the vein is that it be the transverse section, not the puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and from the incision of nerves, and is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And to which it is customary for syncope to happen because of the phlebotomy, and cover that you cure that before the phlebotomy with a little of bread soaked in wine of millegrains or of simple oxymel scalded; and extract from the one of the blood in three times or four.
And if it is a cold complexion, then prepare before the phlebotomy a poultice soaked in myrrh syrup or in honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in syrup aromatized and well-smelling.
And if syncope happens because of the phlebotomy, and the cause of it is the emission of much blood, then cover that you prepare to drink water of flesh and syrup well-smelling subtle; and use of aromaticity with some kind of herb, and be the one's feet rubbed with it.
And use of the other causes that have been said in the division in the chapter of syncope by evacuation.
And he who wants to evacuate his arm and dissolve his blood according to time, cover that to him of whom the phlebotomy is by much evacuation, and the virtue of him is frail, that he evacuate the blood little by little, so as according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
But he who wants to evacuate his arm, and give it his blood a second time, and his body is strong, then do that about seven or nine hours of the first phlebotomy.
But he who wants to throw the blood of his body to the contrary of the part to which it declines, cover that it be evacuated on the second day or the third.
But that body in which there is much blood already scalded and is acute and causes fever, cover that it be given from it blood in one time and that a great quantity be thrown out of it and the opening be amplified until syncope happens, because you will have kept all the conditions of phlebotomy; and that you place your hand over the wrist of it because of the blood of the body, so that it does not become death in the place of syncope, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not cover that when you want to untie the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since already be closed the orifice of the vein and be made difficult the emission of the blood, that you press over it with vehemence and curved be extended slightly, because this is too bad.
Have the let go until it be phlebotomized second; or remove this with the acuteness of the phlebotomy that is coagulated of the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place over it of tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress this with lighter compression until the blood be gone out.
And if the vein is suppurating, then leave that and do not touch it until the suppuration is settled.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood, and there is no excuse, then you bleed him in that place or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is flebitized in the place of the fusca or basilica, when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient puts his hand in cold water until the follicle reddens and the vein appears manifestly.
And after it is tightened over that ligament with a moderate stricture; and phlebotomize according to the transverse little, not longitudinally or according to the length.
And be the opening wide and be your phlebotomy with the one that you phlebotomize on the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you repeat the hand in the cold water and leave the blood to run in the water until you achieve your need.
But if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the iteration of the hand in the cold water, and the worse is placed the body of blood in cold water in times of winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than of all the other veins, because it leaves him no pulsating vein, nor nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein of the right hand is pertinent to the maladies of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that you tighten the hand with a ligament or with your hand, because you have placed it in cold water, until the vein is inflamed and is well demonstrated to the viewer; and then phlebotomize it transversely; and if it is incised that of all it will not be seen there in the red.
And conserve that you do not finish your hand with the phlebotomy, because from it are the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
And after, immerse your hand in cold water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not immerse it in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and its flow will be prohibited.
And as soon as the blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you place on the vein oil and salt, so that it may not be coagulated tightly; and similarly, it is as if you were to do in every narrow vein.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of that of the left hand, is that it is pertinent to the maladies of the spleen.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of it as you have done in the other.
And the benefit of the saphenous vein of the phlebotomy is to the maladies that are in the part below the body, as well as maladies of the womb, and to the retention of menstruation, and to the maladies of the lungs and ulcerations of the thighs and of the limbs ancient, and to their semblance of the maladies.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient puts his foot in cold water and makes friction over it until the veins appear well; and lie over the joint of the foot with a band; and the place of the vein the talo appears, and from that it is ramified in the surface of the foot, many ramps.
And therefore phlebotomize the widest branch or below the limb where the talo appears, because it is better and safer.
And if you phlebotomize it in the surface of the foot, then you guard yourself from the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot, and place your phlebotomy with the one that you would phlebotomize by the transverse, as if you wanted to incise it.
And be the phlebotomy skillful.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited; then you immerse the foot of him in cold water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then repeat with the phlebotomy on top of a little, because the place is safe; and do not fear from him malice, but that you guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do of the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
And of the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is below the talus of the left part.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of it is to pain of the hip when it is by blood clot.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient enters into a bath, and fastens and tightens the thigh of him from the side of the wide inside above the talus above four fingers with a long, subtle band, so that it appears not by that.
And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize it according to each engine that is to you possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise it by incision or cut it by section, because the place of it is safe.
And she is in many men well-known; and if you find it, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then phlebotomize some branch of it, and it is that which appears in the back of the foot opposite the auricular and the annular.
And guard yourself from the nerves, and make the blood flow as much as you want.
Then unwind the stricture and place it on the location of the phlebotomy cut and tighten the area, for it is slightly healed.
Of suction and the qualities of using them.
Suctions are of horns, or of glass, or of wood.
And suction is done in two ways: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is suction without scarification.
And this suction that is without scarification is in two ways, whether it is with fire or without fire.
And to the suctions that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations of the body, of which one in which suctions are placed is the occiput, and it is the back part of the head; and the middle location of the two parts of the neck together; and suctions of the chin below the jawbone below the mouth; and suctions of the two shoulder blades; and suctions of the hypochondrium, and it is above the end of the rib cage; and suctions of the two armpits; and suctions of the two groins.
And suction does not extract the blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not capture the virtue through them, as it is done by phlebotomy; nor is it advisable that suction be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity provokes suction for illness or for continuation, let us administer it at all times at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at any time it is.
And therefore when times in any cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command suction to be done more than it is passed from the day two or three hours.
And the benefit of suction of the neck is that when that confers gravity to the head and to that which is poured into the eyes; but it is advisable that that be near evacuation of the whole body.
And this suction is in the location of the phlebotomy of the cephalic.
And it is not light that use of it that one who is of frequent congestion, or in whom is catarrh, for it gives to that great harm.
And for that reason, it is not advisable to use it for the elderly, and in the heads of those who are frequent illnesses.
But to that one who above that is continuing over it is done oblivion; and for that reason, it is advisable that you command the suctioner to pause his hand a little with the suction to the parts behind, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But suction of the ankle is in the location of phlebotomy of the vena fusca and of the basilica: and for that reason confers to asthma, and to the constriction of the ale, and to the rupture of the sturment of the ale, and to cough, and to repletion.
And it is advisable that the ankle suction be pulled a little, for if it is placed behind, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the suction of the alhagdahan confers to the pains accidental in the head and to ophthalmia, and migraine, and pre-focus, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the location of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And it is advisable that you command the suctioner that he not press his hand with scarification for that he not pierce the artery and accident flows of blood.
And suction behind the chin confers to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gums, and appearance to their of the illnesses that are in the mouth, and stand in the location of phlebotomy of aliheric that is in the two lips.
But the suction that is done upon the two shoulder blades confers to caphatan, the which is done by repletion of heat.
And the suction of the two parts between the armpits confers benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, so it is of the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, for that one attracts the blood of all those veins more slender that are in the flesh, and those veins finer of the other veins more gross until that the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the suctioner that too much he does not proceed in scarification, for the location is denuded of flesh, and behind it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a suction with which is suctioned upon the buttocks and confers to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the ulcers further behind.
And tell the ventor to make a strong vent, and that it be of iron, because the place needs a strong incision; and very fine and subtle vent-holes should be made, and it should be scarified with a scarifier.
But vents made on the legs are less noticeable due to the smallness, because they draw blood from the whole body, and bring relief from old pains in the bowels and stomach, and bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and bring relief from both pain and inflammation; and they are in the place of a phlebotomy of two veins, and they are used to cure, and of two arteries.
But they weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
And the healing power of the vents is proper to the vents of the two legs.
And the quality of the position of the vents is that you place the vent at the beginning, and suck it with a gentle suction, and do not prolong the position of the vents, but pause them lightly, and move them carefully, and that the humors come to the place by gradual arrival. And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the place already reddened and inflated and that the flow of blood appears.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and then consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who has tender flesh of rare pores, you should scarify him once and no more, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the ventor to amplify the scarification and prolong it a little, and temper the suction with ease.
And if in the blood there is thickness, then you should scarify twice, because in the first scarification the way of subtilisation to the blood and its liquidity is opened. But in the second, the acquired scrutiny of the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, then the third scarification should be made so that the last is obtained.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little, one scarification is enough for us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scarify with many scarifications; and if we knew that the blood was thick, then we should scarify with a prolonged scarification.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision only.
And if that one whose incision is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, then the places of the vents should be anointed more gently, wider, and more resolved; if it is in summer, as it is with olive oil of aloe or violet oil, or almond oil, or olive oil of quince; and if it is in winter, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or of Saint John's wort, and to those similar.
And if the superfluity is thick, hot, then the oil should be marigold, or balm oil, or aloe oil, or fennel oil, and to those similar.
But if the ventor has wide pores of tender flesh, then he should be prohibited from oil, and he should have the places of the vents near his application washed with water or with cold water of a solar bath, or with quince water, or with water of burdock, and similar to those.
And the one whose blood is of much humidity, washes his vents with vinegar, or with myrtle and sumac water and similar to those.
And of the one whose superfluities are thick, wash his vents with old vinegar, or with water of hyssop, which is marjoram, or of a decoction of fennel, or of chamomile, and to those similar.
And the vent should be guarded before bathing; bathing should be administered near the bath for an hour or two, and he should sleep near the vent.
What is what should be done to regulate the ventor before phlebotomy.
You should consider at the beginning: then if the ventor or the one who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and vents over his blood, acute and inflammation, then you should pre-serve cooling causes, such as pickled vinegar, endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secanabin, and syrup, and to those similar.
And pause their foods as much as possible, and served bird meats, and foods seasoned with sour things, and to them similar.
And of the one whose complexion is cold, he should pre-serve to drink syrup of alva, or syrup of alsecanabin of seeds, and sumac, and wine very fragrant between veal and lamb; and that he should be commanded to use little drinking and eating, and pause the foods of him little and canary, and sparrows and small birds and doves.
And that on the day of ventosation and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the food.
And that some men should be given to drink in some hours tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, which is muscade, or alcelita before ventosation or phlebotomy or near, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is subtilated; and they should not take that scalfatz.
But the wounds that are made by scarification should be wounds that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the tip of the thigh, because these members do not suffer scarification on themselves.
And it is not desired for those, but rather the drawing of blood from the limb, thus as we place a cupping glass on the nipple in the illness of blood flow from the nose; and we use it so that the cold, viscous cupping glass of the limb is dissolved, thus as we place it on the belly and the navel; because it thins the limb and warms it and removes the pain as it resolves the cupping glass.
And it is already placed on the boils when they occur in their opening or pimple, because by virtue of the strong drawing they open the pimple and eradicate the pimple from its place.
And similarly it is done when it is placed on the liver and spleen, cupping glass in those enclosures.
And these cupping glasses are administered empty with suction alone; and some times they are administered with fire.
And some times they are administered full of tepid water in the illnesses of the spleen.
And this is because the cupping glass is to be filled and be larger, so it is water poured alone or water in which herbs are boiled according to what is convenient.
Form of cupping glass administered with fire: its orifice be the width of two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon be the majority of a palm; and be in the place of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the majority of it, the trauc be small according to the quantity that enters into it a needle.
Be made of iron or brass, of wide margins, lion, equal and smooth so that it does not damage the limb of its position over it.
And be in the middle of it a transverse bar of iron or of steel, on which is placed a candle with the fire.
And already be this cupping glass larger than the one we have recounted; and the pause smaller than that according to the illnesses and the state of him who uses it.
And the cupping glasses of the infants and the exhausted are other than the cupping glasses of the young and of the large bodies.
And the quality of placing this cupping glass with fire on the limb is that it extend the fire with wood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and place that on the middle of the transverse bar in the middle place of the cupping glass, so that the fire is ignited around the place left so that it does not burn the body of the patient.
And then it is placed on the limb of the patient, and the finger be on the trauc that we have said, into that when we have the cupping glasses and do not indicate that it shows the finger and that it escapes the vapor on that trauc, then the cupping glass is dissolved at once.
And then ignite the fire according to its manner, and repeat that if it is indicated of that.
But in a cupping glass that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse bar nor trauc, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb alone.
And this is the form of it: And this cupping glass as much as it is larger, it is better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in most limbs but in those limbs in which it is not possible to place cupping glasses, because of the smallness of those, such as the mouth and gums and similar to them; or in a limb devoid of flesh, such as the finger and the nose and their similar.
And the quality of using those that have been found leeches that are in the waters of the double-purified.
And then they are laid the day and the night in double water until they are famished, and that no remains any cause in the belly of those; and then be evacuated the body at the beginning with flebotomy and with cupping glasses; and then be cooled the limb of the patient until it reddens; and then be placed on it.
And as they are filled and case.
And if it is possible suction of the place with cupping glass, it is more posterior in judgment.
And if not, then wash the place with vinegar and then with much water; and be rubbed and pressed.
And if the course of the blood is prolonged after the placement of the leeches, and this is the result, then you put a cloth of it in cold water, and place that on top until the sweating is abated.
And if the blood is multiplied, then pulverize on it vitriol thrice-ground, or walnuts and similar to them of the stiptic causes, until the blood is stopped; or be placed on the place the majority of beans boiled, and be laid until the beans adhere to the place, and the blood is stopped.
And cove, if necessary, iteration of leeches, when it is possible to change those.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then be rubbed the place with recent blood or put a needle in the places until blood escapes; and then be placed, because those when they feel any blood at once adhere.
And when you want them to cough, sprinkle a little bit of crushed aloes, or salt, or ashes, on them, and then immediately cover them.
Thus begins the reading of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in the bones.
Oh, son, know that these foolish doctors and the common folk boast about this chapter, and those who never at any time looked at the books of the Ancients nor read even one letter from them.
And for this reason it has come to pass that this manner of the learned in our land is deprived; and you must not forget this at all; and I have not adopted this that I have taught, but through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study over the understanding of those, until I extracted the science from them.
And therefore I have turned to experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my best experiment has been passed; because I have now shortened it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of elongation; and I have shortened it at the end of shortening; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as it has been done by addition of declaration, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summary and collections from the being of fractures of bones, from those whose preamble is necessary before we begin the remembrance of broken and diverse members, of each one. Therefore, I say that in the prologue of this chapter, I will say the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which, at the beginning, the artificers are forced and they stand on the truth of those; so it is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art other than yourselves.
And therefore I say that when you come across a fracture or dislocation or sprain or wound, then you must, at the beginning, take care to yourself with phlebotomy or to let blood, or one of these, if no other cause prohibits it, as the weakness of virtue, or the one to whom you come across is a child, or old in decrepitude, or the time is of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then let him be content in his food of fresh herbs and of birds' flesh and of crabs; and we prohibit thick meats and filling him with foods and of all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are certain of the cautery abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the limb.
And then return the patient to his first regimen to which he is accustomed.
And therefore, as the broken bone begins to be restored, then the patient must be fed nutritious foods of nourishment much and heavy in which there is viscosity, such as foods made of cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and fish, and cows' bellies, and eggs, and fresh birds, and fat and similar to those, and with this regimen is made coagulation of fracture more lightly and better.
And know that the broken bones when they are in men who are in the first youth and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their limbs.
But however, nature adjusts and amnects over the broken bone of all parts any cause seeming to glut in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens that until it is at the same time conglutinated and tied together, until they come to the end of fortitude and firmness, as fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I will come with the remembrance of all species of fracture, explained in their distinct chapter from the other.
Many diversities of fracture in itself. And they are diversified the species of fracture of the bone in themselves; for there is made an arched fracture, another that happens in stars; and sometimes it is made a fracture according to the length of the bone: and in the fractures of the satagia and stars and additions coming and not coming, as it is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And to every species is engendered or torment proper in restoration of it according to that will come remembrance of it distinct in its places.
A sign of a broken bone. And by this is known a fracture of the bone: its twisting, and that prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and so of it when you compress it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no apparent twisting in the place, nor is it felt when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
However it is possible that there is a twisting or small fissure,  therefore you must feel it with your hand and with compression of the whole; however place upon it of the medicines of which remembrance is given to you at this moment, the which convenes to the place; and then be strict by subtle constriction.
And know that the place when it is curved and not split in two or other such thing that does not occur in it, as it is remauged whole part of its comparison, then you must begin from your hour to the rectification of it, however that it must occur after a cautery abscess.
And if it occurs abscess cautery, then leave it for some days until the abscess ceases; and then bandage it according to whichever manner that you can of lightness and of engineering.
And know that the restoration of it and the sharpening of it is less severe than of the bone in which such a thing occurs.
And then strengthen it according to that which will come the remembrance of it.
But if in the bone there are such things as splinters, then it is necessary extension of this broken limb from two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And be the your position with which you pause the limb in place according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended of the broken limb, then you perforate that you make return those additions with engineering and according to whichever manner that you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength that there does not occur upon the patient by your operation pain nor injury; and perforate yourself according to your power that you apply one bone with the other its companion according to their best forms.
And you must in that hour profitably touch with your hand that, and if you see here any other cause, rectify that and bandage it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, just as foolish doctors do that often cause abscess cautery by their operation, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen by the operation of their foolish acts.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil limb is that which I recommend; for that you know that the broken limbs are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small as the arm and the hand and the foot and similar to those, then you must the envelopment be of very fine cloth.
But those that are gross as the thigh or the leg, then you must in those be envelopment broad and hard, for the broad liament connects the great limb and strengthens that of all part with equal constriction, in such a way that in it no speck enters.
And then begin, then your evacuation of equation, pause liament convenient to that, over the place of that fracture with three envelopment or four according to the limb merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the liament.
And then come to that at the part most sovereign of the place of the fracture, and strengthen less that you do not force your constriction with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture. And then elongate yourself with envelopment of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the constriction little by little, until you take of the place a great part.
And then take another bandage and envelopment that other time over the broken place with envelopment, and then come to the envelopment at the part further from the fracture; and be your operation in the constriction of the envelopment and in the softening of that according to that we have said in the first envelopment below.
And then pause between the envelopment of stopa leon or cloth with which is equalized the twisting of the fracture, if in it is twisting; and if not, do not pause in it any cause.
And then pause over it another bandage, and then bandage over these envelopment stars decently made forthwith, if in the place there is no inflammation or abscess caut, and then pause over it that which sits the abscess that and that oste the inflammation; and leave that for some days; and then you strengthen over it the stars.
And let the poles of the majority of the cane be made of a thick, well-formed wood; or be of pine wood; or of palm branches; and let the width of each pole be according to this form and this figure:
However, that the pole that is placed upon that fracture be thicker and a little larger than the others, and the length of the pole according to how it is measured to the member in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen upon the poles with another bandage according to your first structure; and then tie it below properly according to what we have said of structure, and it is that it be your structure according to the place of the fracture more, and as much as it is elongated of the fracture, it is less the structure.
And that the threads be of medium thickness and subtlety, and be of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of some fools placing their threads of cords of linen, and it is a great error, when the bandage is outside equality.
And indeed, subtle threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to tighten the bandage with those that you want, and it is not that between pole and pole there be less than a finger.
And if the patient is said to be sore at the extremities of the poles near the bandage in those places, then place some cotton wool or carded wool between them so that it does not cause him injury.
Sometimes a fracture is with a plate, and accidents happen in the bone, and I will come with a remedy in that in the chapter according to singularity.
And know that you do not set all broken members with poles on the first day; the reason is that the limb, when it is large, should not be placed upon them poles but rather after a few days or seven or more, according to your safety of the arrival of a boil.
And this is the manner of the splints with which the Ancients restored, which were placed upon fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manner of splinting as a method of restoration of fracture, convenient to many complications and mostly to women and to children, because it is of that which does not bring heat nor cold; and it is that you take of flour powder, and it is the medulla of the flour that hangs from the movement of the mill in the sides of the mill.
And make it as such, except that you sift it with album of egg, and place the confection of it not thick nor subtle; and then use of it.
Another way to plaster a fractured, dislocated, and twisted: take asafoetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the root of wild millet, of each one dragon; of frankincense and aloes one dragon; alochil one dragon twenty; all be ground and sifted and mixed with water, or with the white of an egg if the complexion of the patient is cold; and then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores bones broken lightly, and gives strength to many men.
Another way to plaster which comforts a fracture and twist: take migrach and powdered white althea one dragon; of frankincense and aloes one dragon; of acacia one dragon six; of Armenian bol one dragon twenty.
All be triturated in a mortar with much contricio, and be sifted, and be comfitzed with water or with album of egg and be administered.
Manner of splint to joints and separated bones of their places, and soothes pain that happens in those and in fissures and fractures: be taken wool suet and be immersed in strong wine and boiled oil and be placed upon the place.
More in this plaster there is not virtue of restoration, of boil caute and expels pains properly.
Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree sort and leaves of wild poppy; conterey all and make plaster of them.
Manner of plaster abbreviated administered it behooves the restoration of fracture of bone and when you want resolution of the remaining of boil: recipe root of altea, of chamomile and flowers of violets, of flour of herbs, of all ana part .i.; Be all triturated and be comfitzed with wine, if the limb is not scalded.
But if it is scalded, then make it with humid coriander water or with water and use of it.
Another manner of plaster stronger in resolution than this first, when accidents happen hard boil that behooves the restoration of the limb: recipe of root of altea and of seed of lily, and of balaustia, and melilot, majorana, flowers of violet, of chamomile, of all ana part i equal; all be triturated and be comfitzed with water of sauce or with sweet water or with wine, all that according to the quality of the limb and the repose of the color of it.
But Hippocrates does not say in his book that it should be placed on the broken limb, but rather made of wax and oil and nothing else; and he recommends that it be of medium thickness.
But Gualia is seen to have been placed on the broken limb, and the causes in which it is dryness with a little heat are such as frankincense, incense, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
A way of plaster that comforts the injury and pain: take flour, of chickpeas, of human hair cut or feathers of birds, and of flax, and salt, parts equal; be ground and sifted and be cooked, and make a plaster.
But the quantity according to which the bandage should remain and then be untied, is that you consider if it does not happen pain nor swelling nor the bone is broken, it is not bad of its place, then you do not untie for many days. And if it happens to the place violent pain or swelling or inflammation, then you tie or untie that in the hour, and remove the plaster from it.
And take cloth of linen and sea sponge moistened, and submerge that in lukewarm water, and with that wash the place until that swelling and the pain is calmed; and then let the limb rest for an hour; and then place upon it wool fleece submerged in vinegar and oil or olive oil, and tie it over it for a night until you are sure of the abscess cauter, and that rests the inflammation of the limb, and be removed the pain of it.
And then repeat that stricture subtle and small plaster and do not tighten it for your first constriction, and more subtle with that until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and the fever and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents are already removed of all, and indigested of plaster and of stricture, then you repeat that as you have done at the beginning equally.
And if you do not happen to the limb any cause of those that we have said, then do not untie it but after three days or four or five or seven. And some times all that is left for twenty days according to what to you appears for the untieing of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches to the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the stricture more than in your first constriction all, and adjust in the thickness of the food of the patient, according to that is preceded the memory of it.
But if you see the place of the fracture already dry and extend more than it should, then you know that the nourishment is prohibited to reach that; and therefore embrocate that with lukewarm water despite all times that you untie that; and be that in all three days; and alleviate the stricture a little, and by this operation come to the limb the nourishment, and is healed lightly.
But that which do the foolish restorers of the fracture of the limb another time when it is not restored at the beginning, according to what it should, and it is restored according to tortuosity, it is error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if it were a straightener that this enlarged the Ancients in their books and they were angry with that done.
And I have not seen to any of them do that, for that it is more reasonable that that not be done.
Chapter Second: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because of fractures some is made by percussion of a blunt object, and the percussion stops all the bone inside the skull, which is left the bone, as if it were done in the shaft, and by this kind this species is named ascial; or the blunt object incides some part of the bone, and incides the flesh of it and does not pass the incision inside the back of it; and this species of fracture is named elevation absolute.
And the plague of these two fractures or is great or little, and of fracture that is compression or attrition; and cause of it is percussion with a strong blow or falling on stone, and their similitudes.
And this fracture or is penetrating that already approaches to the periosteum which is left the bone; or is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures or is great or little.
And of fracture is that which is made in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for that this species is named capillary fracture.
And is fracture that is made either by falling or by percussion of stone and its similitudes, that makes enter some lamina of the bone to the parts inside, and is made in the place concavity as it happens to the  payroles of ram when it happens to their percussion and is part of their entrance to the parts inside.
And most often this is done in the bodies of moist bones, as if it were the heads of infants.
And to all these species of fractures, are put weights as if they were stars separated. And I will come with remembrance of all that in its place.
And we shall know all these species of fracture by detection upon those and by inquiry of them with touches and examination of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And a special capillary is known by this that it is discovered over the bone, and it is cleansed, and linen is laid on it with a bandage, because the fracture appears black.
In the cure of a fracture, at the beginning consider the accidents of the patient, and if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest signification of pain, such as vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and sweating of the joints and redness of those, and resemblances to them of the accidents in the major dispositions, then it is not to be healed.
And if you see accidents not current, then you hope for health, then you begin the cure of it.
The reason for this is that if it has come to you the afflicted at the beginning as it is afflicted and this is in the days of winter, then you must study in the placement of the bone before the 14th day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you must bind the bone before the 7th day, because that which is left of the bone be corrupted by the panniculus, and that the accidents that we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already arrived at the panniculus covering the brain, and it is with small pieces and attrition, then you must insert the minute part and rub it, according to as I shall recount to you.
And it is that you raise the head of the afflicted patient, and uncover over the bone according to custom and manner to you possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be light upon the patient.
And if accidents happen to you, you must detect the bone, flows of blood or abscess caut, then you oppose it with what you must, and it is that you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and make the patient rest until the abscess is settled, and you are sure of the flow of blood; and then you begin in the circuit of the bone and in the ablation of it.
And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
And the one way is that you insert the bone with a straight incisor, and this is the form of it: And then administer another incisor this, a little wider than that; and this is the form of it:
And then administer more the incisor wider than the second.
And you must have you a number of different incisors, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are at the end of the sharpness of their extremities, and are of Indian iron or steel.
And use of them with facility in percussion upon the incisor so that it does not strike the head and damage it.
And if the bone is strong, hard, then you must perforate in the circuit of it before you administer the incisors with the drills, which are called non-deep drills.
And they are not called thus but because those do not stop the term of the bone of the test to that which is near it, for because the drill is round extremity or margin upon that which is left the head of it acute resembling a margin or a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these drills a great number of which as many as convenient to the thickness of each bone,  within that it be to you present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which be acute, the quantity in length and brevity be according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of drills: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the drill upon the bone and revolve that with your hands until you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then change the drill to another location, and pause that which is between all the tract the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around that.
And then insert with incisors that which is between each tract of the bone, and make that as subtle as you can upon that in the end of lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for some instruments which you will have prepared to that, as such as tongs and subtle forceps.
And you must guard with all caution that the incisor does not touch any cause of the cephalic.
And therefore, as you will have circled the bone perforating, and it is separated from the cephalic if it is continued with it, and you will have that extracted, you must raise and smooth that in the roughness of it of that which is in the bone with other instruments resembling an incisor, but however you must have it more thin and more subtle than the others incisors.
And if any pieces of the small bones and splinters remain, then take that with facility with that which you must of the instruments; and then cure the wound with liniments and ointments which we have said.
And the other way of operation is lighter, far from pain, which says Gualia and the lauzec for great lausor; and this is the sermon of it: Necessary is to you in the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone of the place in which is the fracture most vehement and most manifest, until when you will have discovered that part and you will have placed below it the extremity of this incisor lent and light of which this is the form:
And it is that the lenticular part is long and does not cut any cause, and the acute part is of it in two parts forward in length, as sometimes; that the lenticular part is adjusted to the skull with the face of it inciting acute in the bone.
And then strike upon the incision with a small mallet until all the bone is cut with ease as it is revolved, and you are sure of the periosteum that no accident happens in it in any manner, and if the physician were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
Now if any cause is annexed to the bone of the periosteum in some places of the bone, cut that of it with the extremity of the lenticular incision, and deliver that of it with ease, because it is delivered of it its detriment and its pain.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the periosteum, and that which is absciss or is stayed of the bone is the face of it, and remains in it roughness and subtle satagias, then when you remove that roughness and eradicate those satagias with subtle razors by which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it is possible to you administer of those in all places the most convenient of them and the most right of them according to what in which you are losing your operation that broken bone and its figure.
And then when you administer in your ratio with which razors the bone at the beginning the most broad of those razors, and then use it near the most subtle of it, and do not cease to do so according to continuity until you arrive at administering the most thick and the most subtle of all of them.
But in any of the other fractures small capillaries and subtle fractures, then when you administer care according to what you are losing to the rectification of it.
And it is the cause that it is not ammended upon all of those who have studied in that art. And stick upon that which we have written have shown in great fractures.
And if the periosteum is cut when you eradicate the bone, then when you take cloth of it according to the quantity of the plague, and submerge that in rose oil, and place that over the orifice of the plague; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place that over the first cloth and do that as lightly as you can over that, that you do not weigh down the skull; and then administer over that bandage wide, and do not tighten that except for the quantity that the plague has only.
And leave that with this care for a day or for two until you are sure of the abscess caut; and then untie that and then administer medicines with which is superfluous siccitat, as such as root of linen and flour of herbs, and powder of incense and of aristolochia, and of similar to those.
And it is that you make of these medicines powder that be pulverized over the plague, as such as are dried; and universally, administer in that all medicine of property of which is that it abstergesca and do not bite.
And keep yourself according to your virtue that the plague in your cure be clean; and not be in it surdicia of enguent nor other; nor do you allow to add virulence in it; because when it is adjusted upon the periosteum of the brain, it corrupts that and poyreys that, and accidies upon the patient according to that malice malignant.
And accidies in the skull of the head, as from it is modified the bone and mostly when it is less cared for, and it is black in the surface of it; and therefore consider then if accidies to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is parnicios ses tot dopte.
And if it does not accidies black but from the medicine that is placed over it, and it is in virtue of that medicine that make that blackness, then when you take of honey one part and of rose oil parts iii., and in those line you a cloth, and then place that over the skull; and then cure that with the species of cure that convenes until it be sanat.
Chapter .iii.
Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not broken of the nose but two parts together more sovereign, or one of those some times, for so in it you have two bones, for the part left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not accidies to it but attrition and tortuosity and sinuosity.
But if it is broken one of the two parts of it, then when you introduce the said little one into its nose, and that you equal that fracture inside with your said index, and the said pus outside, until it returns the nose according to its natural figure. And be done that by you with ease, and guard yourself that no cause by that your operation upon the patient pain.
And if the fracture is in the most sovereign part of the nose, and the said one does not reach to that, then when it be equal with the extremity of the ray in which it be little thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the semblance of that.
And covet yourself with the restoration of it in the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; and if not, then after the vii or x of the days of the repose of the abscess caut.
And then, inside the extremity of the nose, insert a piece of cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or put two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and make the splint thick enough to fill the hole of the nose.
And some of the old restorers said that the splints should be wrapped in leather and changed every day, but I haven't seen it; rather, I believe that the cloth should be wrapped in a mixture of albumen and powdered honey; and then leave it in place until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes, instead of a splint, it is inserted into the nose, a piece of cloth wrapped in lion's skin; and this is used when the nasal fracture is very severe and the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do this, and if you want, do splints.
And if another time an abscess occurs, cauterize it, and apply a plaster to the nose with cerot or with a cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
But if an abscess does not occur, then you should plaster it with sesame flour and powdered quince seeds mixed with albumen; and then place a piece of lion's skin on top, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
But if the nasal bones are broken with a small fracture or are crushed, then you should cut over them, and extract them with instruments suitable for that purpose; and then close the incision, and treat it with what consolidates and heals, and with appropriate plasters.
And if a plague occurs in the nose, then you should treat it with splints and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not accompanied by a plague, then look, if the fracture is only outward and not broken in two and curved at the parts inside, then its knowledge is lighter.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then you introduce your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then introduce the index finger of your right hand; and push with that the inward flexibility of the fracture with ease to the outer parts, with your other hand from the outer part of the bone; and so decently equalize them.
And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension of both parts according to rectitude as much as possible for the equalization of it.
And if there is a concussion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those of which you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or lead; and then place a cerot on the broken jaw, and place a piece of doubled cloth on top, and place a large, well-made piece of felt or a piece of sole leather equal in length to the jaw; and then apply it as you are equipped with the bandage of it and as you deem the application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place his food in a soft, lion's broth.
And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in any way, then you take it off on the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered of it and plaster it with powdered honey, with albumen, or with sesame flour, because you will have removed the cerot from it, and place wool on top of the plaster.
And thus, when it stands attached and adjusted, that plaster on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, that you do not remove it until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; because many times this fracture is straight in three weeks.
And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times in the sedation of it until it is healed, and the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a plague, then consider if it is a piece of the bone separated or splinters, then you should be subtle that you remove those splinters with what you deem appropriate in the removal of them from the instruments.
And if the orifice of the plague is narrow, then you should enlarge it with the fleubotomist according to the amount of your necessity.
And when you will have removed those splinters, and of those no sir remaugut remains, then you close the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and if not, place on it one of the plasters that you deem appropriate and heal it, until it is healed.
Chapter V.
Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Many times the clavicle is broken at the part in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without causing splinters; and it is easy to restore it; or it is so that splinters occur in it, and it is difficult to restore it; or it is so that the fracture is with a plague.
And the operation in that, when the fracture is with a plague, is that you make two ministers present, so that one holds the adjutori and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck with that part.
And then, with your hands, close the fracture, ensuring that the shape of it is as it should be, and that there is little prominence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then cover the patient's limb with a pad of cloth or wool, and make its size according to your need; and extend and elevate the shoulder, and compress the pad with your hand while you close the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the shoulder limb outwards, because it has reached the armpit, then cover the patient's head, and place a cushion of medium size on the muscle of the shoulder.
And the minister presses the muscle of the shoulder towards the armpit until the bone of the shoulder is elevated as it is in the armpit, and then you rectify the fracture and close it with your hands.
But if you feel pains in the shoulder and they are bad, then cover that area and remove those pains with ease.
And if it is held in the bone, then you make an incision of it with one of the scissors which you have prepared for this, because you had placed below the shoulder the instrument that serves the chisel; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the form:
And it is similar to a chisel of which this is the concavity; and its width is according to what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible to you in the operation; that it has two extremities thus as well, and one extremity is wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the plaque which you have incised when you have extracted the pain from the bone is wide, and there is sureness of pus cauter, then you adjust the two lips of the plaque with suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear pus cauter, then you fill the plaque with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the cut of the plaque.
And if pus cauter happens, then put a cloth soaked in vinegar and olive oil and wine, and place it over it.
And all, that the plate is not bad over the broken bone; and so that you see the patient every day, that when the ligament is softened or you see the plate already remaugued, then you rectify that and strengthen the binding.
And then place the sleeping of the patient on the neck of it, and place below the limb of it during the night a small cushion; so that with this it is elevated the helper of it from the side of it, and therefore is elevated the fracture of the shoulder to elevation of the muscle; or be the arm of it tied to the neck of it.
And do not untie the binding unless you happen in the place precisely or the abscess, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to that, and adjust in the stricture and restore that and let it until it is restored and coagulated the fracture of the shoulder.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in less time than that.
Chapter VI.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Shoulder.
The spatula tart is broken in the place lateral of it and not broken of it but the edges.
And therefore when it is broken the place of it - and it is broken in the middle place of it - and it is not known except by touch, then according to what is the figure of the fracture forces you the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every manner of ingenuity which is to you possible.
And then place on the place powder of wheat with egg white and linen cloth; and then place powdered cloth doubled; and then place over it a plate of fine wood according to the quantity of the spatula whole or more a little.
But if below the plate is concave in some of the places of the spatula, then you close that concavity with linen cloth, and then raise the plate according to equality.
And then strengthen above with a long strip with constriction decent and with firmness of the plate until it is not remaugued from its place.
And consider the ligament on each day; and every time it is softened, tie another one and tighten it and equal the star if it is moved from its place.
And place the patient on their back.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in .25.
And therefore when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and that you know for sure that that is of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone of the foot and place the bandage, then you split it on top, and remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle of the saddle, cauterize if it happens here.
Chapter .vii.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle part of it and that is hard; but the extremities of it must be that they are healed and comminuted.
And of the accidents of it when it is broken the middle of it is that it declines to the parts of it and happens to it great pain, and difficulty in the hale, and coughs, and fort leu and vomiting blood; and it is declared in it the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that it be raised the patient on their back, and place between the thighs of it a cushion; and then press on the muscles of it, and adjust the back of it with the hands of two sides, and subtiliate thee in the operation of it and in the equation according to all manner that is ad this possible and that convenes ad this, until that returns the figure of the bone according to that cove.
And then place on it plaster and lint and place above the star of table subtle of gauze or of caligi and of their similars in levitat, because that you envelop that in cloth; and then subtiliate thee in lian that over the broken bone that it not be harmful; and go with ligation according to roundness to the back sometimes, and tighten that with stricture decent; and then consider the ligation in every hour, and when it is softened tighten that.
And if necessity provokes to desliament of that you must corrode or pruziment, the pain, or the abscess that happens in the place, then you cut and untie that and eradicate the plaster and rectify that which happens by that with manner of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster, if times to that the face; and adjust to it stricture until that it be sanat.
Chapter .viii.
Of the restoration of the back when it is broken.
Know that fracture of the back does not catch but in places gross that follow the back; and of the extremities of them of the part in front does not happen to those contricio but because that they are cartilaginous. And cognition of it is not hidden to the feeling, therefore the inquiry of it with the fingers.
And the restoration is thus that you equal the fracture with the fingers according to the manner possible, until that it be equal according to that cove, and then plaster and tighten the broken bone with star, if it is needed of that.
And if the fracture of the back is declining to the parts of it, then happens to the patient pain vehement and puncture, thus as puncture that happens to that one who has pleureci, and because that the bone puts the membrane; and happens to it difficulty of hanelit, and coughs, and vomit of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Antixs are ingenious in that with motz engientz.
And of them it is that I say: cove that you pause viandas of the patient that engendered inflation and flatulence, because that the belly be inflated and be extended, and the fracture be impelled to the parts outside.
But we would not avoreys that because that it not be cause leugiera to generate abscess caut, if it does not happen; and if it already happens, then it helps ad that.
And they said some of them that it be paused desus ventoza and then that it suck am fortitut; and it is seeming to ratiocinacio, but however it is temut that the ventoza pulls the superfluitatz to the place by the debilitat.
And they said some of them: cove that the place be covered am lana that already is submerged in oil caut, and that they be placed pulvils between the back until that it be filled, that it be the ligation equal when it envelops that according to roundness; and then be cured the patient am cure of pleuresi of vianda and of medicine.
And if vehement cause constrenh the patient the which does not suffer, and the bone puts the membrane am puncture ledent, fear over the patient, then cove that they fenda upon the place, discover from the broken rib, and then place over that instrument that conserve the ciphac, the rememoracio of which is preceded, and that they inscidam the bone am facilitat, and extract that.
And then that they adjust the two lips of the plague, if it is great, am cozidura, and cure that am emplastres until that it be sanated.
And if it happens dedintz abscess, then you cut and enfone pulvils in oil rozat and place over the place, and that it be cured the patient am that which cove to the abscess dedintz.
And let him lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
Of the restoration of fractures of the vertebra of the back and neck.
Sometimes there is a fracture in the bones of the neck, and then there is a separation, and similarly in the vertebrae of the back. And if this happens to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, consider this: if the times their hands are already softened and stunned and dead and cannot move them or extend them or tighten them and when you constrain them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they feel no pain in them, then you know that it is not healing, and in the worst of dispositions it is mortal.
And if they move and feel pain in them from constriction with the fingers and puncture, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with cure.
And if you see in the vertebrae of the neck the same thing and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider his feet.
Then if you see that they are already softened, it happens to those that is happening in the hands, and when you put your hand on their back, there is a feeling of airiness and expulsion of their will, and sometimes he lies on his back and wants to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not work in the cure of him.
But if you do not see any cause of those things, the cause is better and less severe.
And the cure of him is that you perforate at the seat of the abscess with a cautery that you place on the fractured vertebra with olive oil or with boiled wool; place that on it several times a day until the abscess is cauterized.
And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and strengthen it on that with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and that he not sleep on the part with which he feels pain until he is healed.
And if it happens that the separation of the bone is severe or any other cause that is already separated from it, then cover that which is separated on the bone and that you hold that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and then cure that with some ointment of the ingredients, until it is healed.
But if the tailbone is broken, and it is the end of the coccyx, then cover that which is separated on the bone and that you hold that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and then cure that with some ointment of the ingredients, until it is healed.
And if you feel splinters broken in it, then cover that which is separated on the bone and that you hold that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and then cure that with some ointment of the ingredients, until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the restoration of the shoulder.
The bones of the shoulders are sometimes broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is nothing but a communication at the extremities of them and they are incised in the length and incline to the sides; and it happens to the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the shoulder is stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it so that it is over the fracture as is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of it, then you adjust that according to how it is situated by equation adjust until it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long or that which already inclines to the sides, then you make the patient lie on their belly until it is prepared for you the restoration of that fracture. And therefore when you have adjusted it, place on it plaster, and then place on that a splint of wood or of bone, and strengthen by stricture over which you do not fear puncture of fracture nor removal of the splint.
And adjust the concavity with that which fills it so that that presses the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
But if there happens an abscess cauterize, then you cease from extension of it and its restoration until it is cauterized the abscess, and place on it that which seizes it according to what is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it thus as it is covered.
And if splinters happen in the bone or they are comminuted, then you take them out.
Chapter XI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the arm.
Arm is that which is between the armpit to the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which is the one that you take wood plank of moderate thickness according to this form:
And have loops at two extremities two bandages, and then it is suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a chair; and then throw out his broken arm onto the wood until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place of which is annexed the curvature of the wood.
And then, if something heavy is placed upon it, or the minister extends it to the sides, then the physician, with his hands, joins the fracture together, while the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that the patient be laid on his neck and the hand on his neck is held; and he commands two ministers that one of them holds that which is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the patient's legs; and each of them extends to his side.
And if you want the extension to be more forceful, then you strengthen upon the fracture with one hand and upon that with another hand, and each of the two ministers extends to his two sides.
And therefore, if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then it should be placed half of the ligament on the  citillic and the other behind the fracture of the thigh.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the thigh, then it should be placed the ligament on that location and on that thigh.
Engage that with ease and work, and as soon as it is engaged according to what is proper and applied with good application, then strengthen that if it does not accidentally cause a boil caut.
But if an abscess occurs, then loosen the constriction within the seventh day, and place on it wool cloth soaked in vinegar and olive oil until the abscess rests, and then you strengthen that.
And the way of strengthening that is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that support, and place your hand open over their muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the support the arm so that the arm is in a place of stars, if you do not prohibit from that any cause of the broken bone.
And then use of stars.
And it is that you place over the fracture that star which is more wide and more strong of the other stars; and place between each star the width of the finger, and let the length of the stars be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers of every part.
And then strengthen over the stars with the constriction which I have said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your constriction over the location of the fracture be more tight. And as much as it is lengthened the fracture be the constriction less.
And therefore, if you see the situation of the stars and the constriction as we have said in the hour in which you restore the limb to its position, then you do.
And if you fear an abscess, then you loosen the constriction and the stars within the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that nothing happens in the place proximate or inflammation; or is prohibited the food to arrive at the limb by disposition of superfluity of constriction; and therefore rectify all that according to what we have said.
But if you are on confidence that nothing will happen from that, then do not untie the ligature until after three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep on his back, and his hands be on his stomach.
And place on the support a cushion full of wool well engaged, and consider at every hour of the night or of the day that the figure of the broken limb be not loosened nor dissolved, or that the ligament be softened, therefore rectify that all with your virtue.
And place the patient's food according to the order which we have before said, in such a way that the food be subtle at the beginning until it is begun to strengthen; and then it is that you increase the food of him.
Because of custom of the support and of the bed of him is that they be strengthened in forty days; and then it is that they should be untied and be administered baths and be medicated with ointments which rectify that.
And if the fracture is laid irritated, then you do not untie from that the ligament and the stars within the days or within two months.
Chapter .xii.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearms; of which one is small, and that is the one that lies the little finger, and the other is large and that is the one which is placed behind the little finger, from the part more behind.
And often the major forearm is broken alone, or the small one, and often they are broken together.
And when the small forearm is broken above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and the healing of it is lighter.
And when the forearm of it below the fracture of it is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse of that is when the two bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone which is broken is the small forearm above, then it is convenient to the physician, that the restoration of it, that place small extension with ease until that be engaged.
But if the large forearm is that which is broken, then it is that you place extension more vehement.
And if the two forearms are together broken, then it is that you place the extension more strongly.
And while you are holding the figure of your hand, you must restore it and extend it over a cushion, and the wrist of your hand should be at the top, more than all the others, and the earlobe should be lower than the others, and the patient should be lying on a fallen cradle.
And there should be a cushion in front of him in the height or upright position of him, so that the patient does not move.
And then the minister extends the arm from the back side with his hand or ligament, and another minister extends upwards seemingly.
And then the doctor aligns the bones while reducing it according to the best figure that he can.
And if in the fracture of the bones there are splinters, then you must pierce to reduce all the pieces in their place with your virtue.
And if there appears a splinter separated that pierces the tendon and it is not in your hope for the restoration of it, then you must place it on top and hold it according to the manner which we have said above.
But if the fracture is with a plate, I have already made a singular chapter about this, and therefore take the cure of this.
And if an abscess happens at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with cerate made of rose oil and white wax, and it should be of medium between thickness and fineness, and strengthen the cloth over it with a subtle structure until the abscess is reduced; and then remove the cerate and place a plaster prepared of powdered mold with the clear of egg, and then place stars; and let the star be the one which is placed over the fracture more wide and more strong.
And know that the number of the stars of the arm is six in the major disposisitions, or whether the fracture is in one focus or in two foci together.
And then place your structure over the place of the fracture more strong and more vehement, and when more it is situated at the top parts of the fracture or at the lower parts of it, place the structure a little more soft according to that it is preceded the remembrance of it in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are enveloped over the fracture should be soft and moist cloths, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is strengthened should be of the proper medium between subtle and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the ligament after a few days. And if there happens any cause for which rectification is necessary, as prudently as the one that happens to the limb, and then you must immerse the limb in warm water until that prudence ceases.
And let the limb not be constrained until it rests, and then return the structure.
And if the structure is already softened and the bone is already reduced and seems like that, then rectify everything with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited to reach the limb by superfluity of structure, because then you must soften that one a little and let it for a few days until it runs to that the nourishment, and then strengthen it.
But if the patient does not happen any of those causes that we have said, then he should not be dislocated for about 20 days or so.
And then let the arm of the patient be suspended by its virtue of movement agitation, and make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or strong it is restored in 28 days, and all this is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter .xiii.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the finger of the hand and of the fingers.
Know that to the finger of the hand and to the joints of the fingers, it often happens that fracture, and it does not happen to them but attrition many times.
And when a fracture or attrition happens to the hand, then the patient should follow lying flat and in front of him lies the cradle according to equality, and then place the hand of him over that extended.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor aligns them while they are conjoined with good conjoined.
And then you must place plaster and cotton wool, if there is no abscess; and then place stars above according to the quantity of the place, and you have already enveloped that in cloth of it.
But if the fracture is in the parts of the fingers of the palm, and then make a semblance of a sphere of cloth, and command the patient that he strengthen that with his fractured palm; then it should be strengthened with long cloth.
And let the star be of leather with cloth in which it is elevated, so that the leather is applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to what is necessary.
But if the fracture is at the outside parts, then you must place above a star and another star from the lower part in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then place the structure, as the hand is revolved to the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
And if a fracture happens to one of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the finger laid, it should be aligned as necessary and then strengthened with the palm, and if you want, place a small straight star to it so that the fracture is elevated and not damaged.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or in the index, or in the ear, or in the ring finger, then it should be bandaged and tied with the bandage that is the same as that which we have said in the hand; or they should all be tied according to continuity, and this is better; or rest on that small splint, as we have said in the hand.
And consider, in your restoration, and in that place, the disposition of cautery abscess and oppose — in your operation — to what happens when any cause of those things occurs, according to what is narrated about it.
Chapter XIV.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the thigh.
The bone of the thigh, when broken, is felt and declared according to how it is converted to the front and the superior part.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament is left below the fracture, and the patient is prone on his belly and face.
And then the minister extends all the ligament to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is near the root of the thigh, then the ligament is pulled down to the part of the pubic bone, so that the extension is there, and the other ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is near the pubic bone, then the ligament is pulled down to the pubic bone, and the extension is to the parts below.
And the physician aligns the bone with both its hands until it is reduced according to the natural appearance and the bone is joined by a good connection; then cover it with plaster and a splint, unless an abscess occurs in the limb. But if an abscess occurs in it, then you leave it for a few days until the abscess cauterizes, and then return to your cure.
The splint of it should be made like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and remove the superfluity from it; and then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the thigh.
And introduce a long splint between the thigh and the leg from the pubic bone to the parts below, and the ends of the splint from the superior part of both parts, and then roll over the leg and thigh what superfluity of the bandage.
And then place on the thigh in the place of that fracture splints, and place one splint over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the spaces between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the splint is coagulated.
And then begin with a strong splint in the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as much as you move away with the ligament from the place of the fracture, your splint should be smaller and lighter and softer.
And then extend both ends of the splint to the parts below until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
And then leave the splint on it, so that it does not occur to the limb corrosion or cauterized abscess or inflammation and similar things; and if any cause of those things occurs, then cut it from it, and rectify what occurs again, according to what we have said many times.
But if in the bone is the weight of the bone which puts, then cover it according to what is possible to you; and if not, then put on it and remove that, and cure with what precedes the recollection until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with other things that are adjusted to it, like we have said in the arm and the helper.
But however, in the restoration of it in this manner, do not occur to the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, then apply something to the other leg, then it is necessary that he limp on the one that is always.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few more or a few less, and all this is according to the diversity of the complexities and of the other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the pubic bone.
Know that a fracture of the bone of the pubic bone is difficult, but it often occurs with a lot of pain.
But if a fracture occurs, then it is not more than a fissure or a crack in its parts, and this is with a bandage or a few bandages, and over this all is placed with the feeling.
And the restoration of it is in such a way that what is broken of its parts is aligned with the fingers until it is joined and connected according to what is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
And then place plaster and place on it a round splint, if you deem it necessary; and tighten it with a splint as convenient.
And consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in the other fractures, as well as abscess cauterization and similar things, so that it opposes to all accidents to what is convenient to it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick, and is called by the name of the leg; and the other is thin, and is called the fibula.
And it happens in some species of fracture that it happens to both bones of the leg, and therefore the restoration of it is done as the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
And if two bones are broken together, the leg is converted to all parts.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg is converted to the parts in front.
And if the thicker bone is broken, it stands that way, and it is of those causes that are not to your liking.
And then administer extension and equation and ligation of the splints according to that same manner.
However, if the fracture of the leg is recent and has many stages, that the extension be less and lighter, and alleviate with your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you align the splints and that completes your entire operation, then you will take pieces of wood from the palm tree, which is placed below the causes which are placed in their soles, and are made by branches of palm; some of those to which is a small thickness, and not be too thick of the wood, and the length of them according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the farthest.
And then envelope over each strip in two wrappings according to the length of it, and place one on the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and be from the knee to the lowest part of the foot.
And then tie the two splints in three places of two extremities and to the middle place, for with this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left part, and it stands for good position.
And already it is administered a splint of wood according to the length of the leg; and be placed in it the leg so that it conserve that of movement.
And mostly it is that you do this in a fracture, and when with that it is properly cured.
And then consider in each day the leg and study with that by posterior study, and you guard it from abscess and from inflammation or other causes similar; and when it happens any cause of those, then oppose yourself to it with what you must within that it be healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the heel and the bones of the foot and of the digits.
To the heel, a fracture does not happen to all; but to the bones of the foot, a fracture happens sometimes; and to the digits of the foot, a fracture happens rarely, and it does not happen to them but attrition in the middle of their disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot, it happens a fracture, and those bones be elevated over each other, then the patient lays his foot on the prepared earth as if he were going.
And then place one foot over that which is elevated of those bones, and then step on those, and press, and align them until they return to their places.
And then place plaster and stoppings above, and place below the belly of the foot a small table to which there are two plastic caps.
And then strengthen that with the foot with the structure descent, because you have enveloped that with cloths and other causes of which you have said.
And when three days or four have passed, then you untie the ligament, because you have found the bones aligned, or they are broken or they are dislocated, and the operation in those is as if you know.
But if some digits are broken, then restore those, and align them as I have and recounted to you in the restoration of the digits of the hand. And then place on the broken digit a splint according to the length of the digit, and let it be a little wider than it; and below the foot, this table which I have recounted to you, and strengthen that with a decent structure.
But if that which is broken of the bones is two or three or more, then you place on each digit a splint of its quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table in the lowest part of the foot, and let it stand on one of the caps of the table, the belly of the foot, so that it keeps with good retention.
And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which you have been told to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and oppose yourself to every accident with what you must.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the hip of the woman and the bone of the pubic bone and of the groin of the man.
When the hip of the woman is broken, then make that cease in a cradle fallen, and then incline that to the part of the back a little, and let it be held behind.
And then the matron impales the hip of the cot, and let it be done in the hip of it as if you were hoping; and then the woman be comforted, and elevate the back of her little by little, because all that is cast out until it is before the part of the hip as if you were hoping and the broken bone returns.
And then place pillows on their back, and when he wants to urinate, gently move the buttocks with ease and urine, and reduce and return it in the same way as you first positioned it, and then return to the first pillow.
And do so for seven days or thereabouts, for that is restored.
And if you wish, take a sheep bladder and strengthen it over the wound with a cane tube; and introduce the whole bladder into the wound, and then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated within the wound, so that the fracture returns.
And then it shall be filled with buttocks and stay for several days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bones of the thigh of a man or a woman are broken, then administer in the restoration and healing of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these proper fractures and that little is understood, especially for him who has some study and use and understands this my book well; for that fracture means to you in the greatest dispositions the right way in the restoration and the stricture of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the thigh of a man when it is broken, take a poultice of hawk, and put the thigh in it; and then place on it a wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and let it be left for three days or thereabouts, and it shall be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the restoration of fractures of bones when it is with a plague.
It is convenient for him to whom a fracture occurs with a plague, and especially if the bone is large as is the bone of the hip or of the leg, or similar to that, that you take care and lance it immediately if the conditions of lancing to you or testify as we have said above.
And if the plague flows blood, then you must take care to its retention as much as you pulverize on it zegi thrice, if to you another cause is not present.
And then begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it, if you do not encounter an abscess.
But if an abscess occurs, then you let go of the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is yielded, and do not approach it on the third and fourth of all, for you will cause bad accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered joint, then you must take care to reduce it and align it with your hands with as much ease as possible and with little extension.
But if extension is not to your prepared and the equation of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands with this instrument; and the instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is of seven digits or eight, and the width of which is according to the quantity of the plague; and for that it is necessary to the physician that he prepares of those three or four according to the quantity that you indicate to it in the cure in all species of fracture.
And let it be rounded, and let it be in it little thickness so that it not be bent of the compression upon it in the hour of the operation.
And let it be of sharp extremity to which let be margin in its extremities; and let the bottom of it be of tending thickness, and of the majority of it within to the parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek “labre volentz atelarem”, so it is a little palette.
For that it must be placed the extremity of it acuda elevated upon the extremity of the bone prominent.
And impel it in a single thrust until the bone returns, and it be aligned with some equation.
And therefore strive to align the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of it broken is subtle, and does not take that the instrument for good acceptance, then you must insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power of it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone of all with what we have recommended, then incise it with what you convey to it of the incisors which we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in any way that it be to you possible.
And then smooth those that remain in the bone of asperities and of small scraps.
And as the bone is reduced, and then the reduction the patient suffers vehement pain, then know that the bone is not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer to the patient great help.
As it is completed your restoration which you make to the bone, and then immerse cloth in black stiptic wine, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place upon the plague cerot nor other cause in which there is oil, so that it not cause in it to occur putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer stelas in the hour of your compliment of the restoration of the bone, and let the plague be uncovered as much as you incise the wound with forceps and uses of wrappings according to the quantity of the plague.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not bring the plague to the fracture, for many times have done this the foolish physicians, and have caused to occur upon their patients death or sickness corrupting or utterly, so it is healed. And if your stricture is lighter, softer, different from the stricture of other fractures.
And if the plague is large or bad, and you fear about that, the bad accidents that we have recounted, and you feel pain in the area, then you should not just place a poultice on that area, but make a wrap of hard cloth in that place instead of the poultice and strengthen it with those.
And when, after a day or two, the plague begins to start, that in it there be generated a brac, then you remove from above the cloth which you had placed on that with you, and apply calx, with which of our custom is that we medicate the plagues, such as calx tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
And it is convenient for you that you untie the bandage and consider the plague every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and that the limb be prepared in such a manner that the pus runs from it to the parts below with ease facilitated.
If after many days the plague is not consolidated and the brac is not separated from it, then you know that here are satagias of the small ones for which you must inquire the plague with a probe. And of those satagias, those that are separated remove and extract, those that from them are not separated and put the limb and cause to happen pain, pierce you to incise those according to as to you it is possible.
And if it happens to the plague, a  zuchem or eluchen, it is stiomenios, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you must place on it one of those with which it is convenient to you of the cure of which is preceded narration in its chapter.
And of this in which it is convenient that you should know the best way and you make present your  pessa: when the bone is broken, set it on the limb as the bone of the thigh and the bone of the arm and similar to those of the large limbs, and that you do not presume traction of it, nor the extraction of it for many times happens by this the death; have left it until it can be healed, for very soon it will fall by itself after twenty days or thirty. And then cure the plague if to you it is seen, and if not leave that.
Chapter .xx.
Of the cure of a nodule that happens in the trace of any fracture.
Many times happens this nodule in the trace of healing of a fracture, and mostly that it is near the joints, and it is disfigured by it the figure of the limb; and very soon prohibits the limb of its natural operation.
Therefore consider if the nodule is recent and administer in that medicines that have stipulated as such as aloen, and incense, and mira, and cercacollo, and acrassia, and similar to those; in this way that you take from that some or all, and combine those with wine, or with album of egg, or with vinegar, and place that on the nodule in linen, and constrict those on it by good constriction.
And leave the constriction that you do not untie that for many days; and then untie that and iterate another, until the nodule is removed; or strengthen on that a lamina of lead descentment, for lead has the property of removing all that is inflated in the limbs.
But if the nodule already is in a worse converted and stretched is and necessity provokes to remove that, and then cut that by the part sovereign of it, and incise that the superfluity and eminent, or rat that with some remedies until it is removed; and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .xxi.
Of restoration of fracture when it is restored and then that which remains of the limb subtle and frail does not follow its nature.
When a fracture of bone is restored, and then that which remains of the limb subtle and frail, then that is not done but for many causes: of which one is the multitude of solution of the ligament and of the ligament of it made not according to what it should; or by superfluity of constriction of the ligaments until the nourishment be prohibited to run to the limb; or by multitude of superfluous embrocation; or by superfluous movement not in its hour; or by paucity of blood in the body of the patient and by weakness of it.
And the cure of this is to give to eat to the patient and make the heart of him tender until the blood be multiplied in him; and administer baths; and introduce joy and cheerfulness over him.
And then place poultice on the limb, so that the poultice draws to it much nourishment, or continue embrocation of it with tepid water, until the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter .xxii.
Of the cure of the broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibits the operation of them of that which it should.
When it happens to the limb already restored during the healing of it from crookedness and eminence of the broken bone and nodule, and it is for that feeded in form of the limb, but however the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you must not receive the word of that one who exists that member be of new broken.
But already are statz many foolish physicians and restorers the ones who have done that in our land; and this operation is very vituperable and loses to great fear the sign of which is mortal.
But if the lameness and swelling are recent, then they should be bandaged with tepid water in which are steeped softening herbs, such as the leaves of aloe and roots of marshmallow, and comfrey, and similar to those; and a poultice should be made with a softening poultice, such as well-made diacolla; or that which is made with a gruel of marshmallow root and is mixed with the grease of guinea fowl or with oil of camomile, and is poulticed with that; or that which are ripe figs and are mashed with pigeon's dung, and similar to those of the medicines that are called consolidators of healing.
And sometimes it is dissolved with gentle and assiduous friction, and it is administered movement of the limb in every part at all hours.
But if the curvature has already been added and is made strong and converted into a bone, and necessity arises for its cure with iron, then it should be the most underneath and the continuation of the bone should be dissolved, and it should be incised with what superflous of swelling of that part with the bone with subtle scissors, and it should be administered facilitation in that with diligence and study.
Chapter XXIII.
Of the speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of its place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the limb is distorted, and it causes great pains and injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when an accident happens to a dislocation, then it should be immediately reduced, and that reduction should not be delayed, because if it is delayed, the place is suppurated and very sore, and with water it is made difficult the reduction of the dislocation.
And for that reason, it should not be bad or stretched at the time of suppuration, because many times it brings on spasms and intense pains.
But when this happens, then it should be that you take care of the patient's  flambotomy, and then let it rest until the suppuration rests; and then the limb should be bandaged with warm water and oil, and then it should be reduced with ease.
And every limb should be cured with that which the remembrance will come back to its place.
And you have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body most sovereign to the part most below.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So the two jaws are dislocated if not tart; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: that they are remaugged from their places by little movement, and they are softened a little; or they are dislocated by entire dislocation and complicated, until they are softened at the junction where the saliva of the patient flows and that it cannot hold that nor can it close its mouth, and the tongue of it is enveloped in its word.
But when the dislocation of it is little, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself with little cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and complicated, then it should be administered reduction of it lightly, and not be delayed at all.
And it is that the minister has the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts his two fingers of his hand into the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw from inside his mouth, if the dislocation is of one part; or that he inserts his two fingers together, if the dislocation is of two parts, and the other said of the others of him are outside with which he pulls; and commands the patient to cease his jaws and absolves those to go from any part; and the doctor pulls the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
And if it is difficult the reduction of it, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, until it is made lightly the reduction of both and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And therefore, as they return and are pulled together, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then pause on those powders of cloth with cerot, and be made of wax and oil rubbed; and then be tied with ease with soft liaments.
And let the patient's sleep on his back, and his head be standing between two pillows, so that he does not hurt that to the right or left part; and do not make him by force to chew any cause; having his food be forbidden to him, until when the pains are remaugged and the jaws are nozzled, then hurt that which he wants.
And that which should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth of the patient, the eating and drinking and recitation, until the jaw is nozzled and healed.
And if it is difficult the reduction of two jaws when they are dislocated at any hour and are not converted to their places, then many times it happens that fevers and assiduous soda, and very sore is alerted the belly of the patient, and very sore and vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is pernicious; and many times dies that one to whom this happens in 10 days.
Chapter XXV.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the place where it is joined by the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and this is declared by the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then grasp the place with your palm with strong grasping, so that it will return.
And then place on that plaster and powders and strengthen that.
But the extremity of that which joins the shoulder and is continued with it, is not dislocated in any day; therefore, when it is reduced and healed according to what we have said and according to what is at your disposal.
And then place on that plaster, and powders, and a splint, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And in this same cure is reduced the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the part of the shoulder to the part below.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the part above the muscle, and this is done quickly; and it is not dislocated at the parts behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the parts in front of the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and outside, at the parts below the shoulder, and mostly in those whose flesh is little, it is easily dislocated; but in those in which there is much flesh, it is brought out with difficulty.
And often it happens to some men by percussion or a blow, and the muscle of them is suppurated by a cautery abscess, and it is cured by that which it is already dislocated.
Therefore, when you know this, and you are over-certain of it, then proceed in the cure of it.
And it is known the dislocation of it when it is at the parts below the shoulder; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound muscle, for you find between those a manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and below the shoulder, the touch of the head of the muscle thus as if a hoop, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move that by all movements.
If it is dislocated below the feet or above, and you then find a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And of this dislocation is made a light reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the minister elevates the hand of him to the parts above; and then places his thumbs below the shoulder of him, and elevates the joint with strength upwards to its place, and the minister elevates the hand of him, and extends that upwards; and then places that below as it returns slightly.
But if for what we have said it does not return, and it is from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days, then when the patient is bathed in lukewarm water and is administered a broth that softens and liniments as if it were the roots of althea, and fennel, and marshmallow in water, and it is administered.
And then the patient is laid on his back and is placed below the shoulder of him, waiting for it to be healed between elevation and constriction, and the physician places his hand over the sphere, and elevates the head of the muscle upwards, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it is not moved to the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not moved to the parts below, for that instantly returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and it is that you make be present a man who is longer than the patient, and stands on the part of that side, and interweaves his muscle below the shoulder of the patient and elevates the shoulder of him to the parts above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below his belly. But if the patient is light, then when he is with another cause suspended, so that he is heavy, for the dislocation returns instantly.
And it is reduced easily in another manner: and it is that a long pole is laid on the ground, the head of which is round in figure, as if it were a mortar, that it is not thick nor thin, and then it is placed below the patient; because, when it is placed on the head of the pole, a sheet of linen, and the patient is standing according to the length of the pole, and then the hand of him is extended to the parts below the other side; and the body of him is extended from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if it is a difficult reduction of it for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a pole the quantity of which is in the length of two arms, and the width of it is of four digits, and the thickness of it is alleviated in the preon of the shoulder according to this form:
And then upon the head place a red cloth to prevent the patient from feeling the cold.
And then place the patient's head on the pillow, and extend your hand or arm over the staff between the parts below, and tie the staff to the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm upon a step of a ladder according to the latitude, and the hand be extended to the parts below, and the other body be suspended from the other part, so that the junction may be as close as possible.
And when the introduction of him is complete according to whichever manner that is possible to you, then cover that which you placed below the pillow with wool of equal quantity; and then place a plaster prepared of powder of ground herbs and album of egg over the whole muscle, so that it is rolled over, and then strengthen that which you placed below the pillow with a decent constriction; and the bandage be rolled over the plaster, and the hand of him be attached to the neck of him, and be left, and do not touch the hand of him for seven days.
And cover that which is the food of the patient little, until the member is comforted, for it is lighter to the healing of him.
And then the food be given more after seven or five and be exercised a movement; and therefore if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the junction is dislocated many times by humidity that happens to it or by another cause, then cover that in that place be administered cautery with three tracts, according to that which is said before in the chapter of cautery.
And if all that is done and after seven days the bandage is loosened and the junction is not fixed, and the plaster and constriction are reduced over it several times, and it is not fixed and catz and cannot elevate that arm to the parts above, then know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, are already severed or extended or softened, and know that the junction never will be fixed in its place.
Of the dislocation of that which is done of the feet and the nipple or the parts behind, the reduction is done with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And be administered in that the other constriction, and care that until it is healed.
And if it happens that near the healing gravity falls in the member and tardiness in the movement of it, then the patient uses baths many times until that gravity is alleviated and that it returns to the nature of it first.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Know that the junction of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and seemingly returns with difficulty; and that is dislocated to all parts, and mostly to the part in front to the part behind, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you for it is caught below the vessel or below the touch according to whichever figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip with the right, that is declared to you manifestly, for the junction is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that one its muscle.
And cover that your hips, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to you abscess caut, for if it comes to you abscess caut, difficult is the reduction of it, and fort leu it is not healed of all; and mostly when it is in the parts behind, for pus worse of all the other species of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many times leave to it the death.
And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it be extended with two hands, and the arm of it be expanded, and the hands of the physician be upon the hip and below it, and he pushes the junction with the knuckles of his hands at once, or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns as if it doubles the hand with its hand, until it strikes the hip with the root of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that raising of the two ministers so that it not be remaugut from below the extension.
And then be rolled the arm from below all parts, because it is enveloped cloth doubled long over the hand of it, or bandage.
And when the physician touches the junction with his hand, anoint that with some oil so that that be those causes which help in lubrication of the junction with facility; and then pushes the junction with impulse vehement until it returns.
And after the reduction of it cover that it be placed upon that plaster in which there is sticking and excretion with album of egg, and be extended with constriction decent, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and be left for some days.
And then be loosened; and therefore if the junction is formed in its place, then you loosen the bandage of it and leave that.
And if sometimes the junction does not be strengthened, then you iterate the plaster and the bandage, and leave that for some days until it be extended; and then loosen that.
But if it happens to him gravity and then the reduction of the joint, and the disposition of him is in movement, then administer moisture in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or put a cushion over the joint alleviated, so is a cushion of fat movement; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone during the day and night. And then remove that, and put it in bath; and when it dries, then you rub the joint with temperate friction, and put it again over that alleviated, so is a cushion of fat, once, and the second, and the third. Corruption has already come upon the tooth inside the mouth, while it is still living.
And if you want, put a piece of wet and scraped cowhide on that; and do this several times, because that is moist and reduce it to its disposition.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Shoulder dislocation sometimes occurs, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is easier, and the opposite is of the other joints, but however, as long as there is speed in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place is suppurated or that happens in it suppuration caut.
And the reduction of the dislocation of it is that you put the shoulder joint of the patient on a table and the minister extends the arm of that one, and the physician puts his hand or his palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
But however, as long as it is considered if the palm is already put on the belly of the hand, then the patient puts the back of his hand on a table, despite the extension and the reduction; and if the dislocation is previous, then the position of the hand of that one intrinsically on the table, so that the hand of the physician lies on that prominence of the joint.
And therefore, if it returns quickly, it is good; and if not, then push it with a poultice, letting the suppuration and leave it; and do not repeat this, because if not, do not suffer nor can you over the reduction of it more than passing to it days.
But however, the joint remains according to its tortuosity; and do not at night to the patient any cause, unless the hand is softened and cannot push any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then it is not generated in it unless it is pushed with a cautery near the place of it and strongly do you confer any cause.
Therefore, when the shoulder is returned, then put on it the poultice which you have recommended, and let it be left and pushed for 5 days; and then remove it and let it be left and the hand of it be exercised.
But if the movement of it is stayed and happens in it any gravity, then gently that with warm water and friction several times, until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the said.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated in all parts.
And when it is dislocated some finger of those at the back of the palm or on the belly of it, then stretch the finger and push the dislocation of it with your thumbs, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that of the part which is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that and extend that until straight it is aligned in that day.
And when it is night, tie that according to that narration, and do not cease to untie that in the day and exercise with movement, and tie that at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And do seeming with this, if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and tie that to that part and do with this your first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do with this when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When it happens to any of the vertebrae of the back or of the neck a complicated dislocation, and so removed motz vertebrae from their places, then in that there is no cure, because death takes hold of the patient.
And a sign of this is that the digestion of the patient is outside its will, and it cannot retain it; and many times are softened some limbs of it or both legs of it or both arms of it, or one of those; or is removed a vertebra from its place, because many times it is removed and many times is made the removal of those in four parts.
Therefore that is already removed to the parts behind and is named gelbozitat.
But the cure of it is that then consider if the gelbozitat happens of puerility, because then in that there is no cure nor of that is healing of all.
But in that which comes by accident or by percussion or seeming to those, already said the Ancients the manners of cure with sermons prolixs, of which the most returns with prophecy; but I already and shortened of that of which the little excuse of the too much of it, for the my proximity to the my better understanding exposition, with which I have here exposed and formatted ex instrument divers of that with which I show this and expose that.
And of those, it is not cured except that which occurs in the two properly with what I recommend.
And that the patient be extended on his back, as close to the wall as possible, and be placed under him a soft pillow so that the feet of him are not lifted.
And then a straight stick be placed, fixed in the ground at the extremity of the arm around his head, and another stick in front of his feet at the other extremity of the arm.
And the minister hold the stick, and not be fixed in the ditch; and another minister hold the other according to that form.
And then envelop over the head of the patient and below the limbs firmly; and extend the extremity of the limb to the stick which is opposite his head, and tie that in it; and then strengthen the other ligament over the hips of him the thighs, and opposite the legs; and then adjust all the ligaments and tie those in the other stick which is opposite the feet of him.
And then the minister carefully extends the ligament to the part of the stick, and not be removed the two sticks and the ligaments from their places in which they are fixed, but however not be fixed as we have said.
And the physician places his palms on the spine with strength while returning, or what places upon that a table, and then that adjusts upon the table his feet while returning.
But if it does not return by this form, then take a table of which the width or length is opposite of three arms, and carve in the wall of which we have said that is near the patient a place in which enters the extremity of the table. And then places the majority of the table upon the spine, the physician places his feet upon the other extremity, and tightens well while the spine is contracted and that it returns to its place.
And if you want, open with a turn which is revolved with the hand; and it is that you fix in the ground opposite the head of the patient in the back of the arm two sticks, the length of which is of an arm, and opposite his head in the back of the arm also two sticks; and be the length that is between each stick a palm, and already is made in each stick a hole in which runs the turn, and each one be moved fixed in the ground so that it not be moved.
And be also a round stick in which is the turn, and be revolved in the two holes of the two sticks.
And in the extremity of it is a hole in which is formed the stick, the length of which is a palm with what is revolved; and in the two other sticks is similar to that.
And then strengthen the ligaments that you have stretched in the feet of the patient in the hole which is opposite his head, and the ligaments that you have stretched in the thighs of him in the turn which is opposite the feet of him.
And then each turn and stay a minister that twists the turn with his hand, and the physician tightens the spine according to what we have said.
And as soon as the spine is returned, and the place is tightened, then cover that you pause plaster exsiccative with album of egg, and then tow; and then place upon the plaster a board of the table of which the width is three fingers or about those, and the length of it is the quantity that embraces the place of the hernia, and upon the part of the spine say.
And then be tied with the ligament which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment while it is healing.
And if there remain any prominence in the place at the end of the healing, then cover that medicines be administered which soften and cleanse with administration of the table for long time, which we have recommended; and already is administered in that place a sheet of lead.
And some times there occur prominence in the back of the spines of the two, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already protrudes for that cover not be made presumption to it with this medicine, for very strong evil will it do to you to happen death.
Chapter .XXXI.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle ought not to be dislocated only, and that which occurs to those that occurs to the other joints of small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four manners, for it is dislocated to the front parts, or to the back parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the outward parts, and few to the front parts or to the back parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it to the outward parts is that, when you adjust the thigh of the healthy patient with the patient, it is longer and the thigh is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his foot opposite the knee, and it is the place that the knee is inflamed of abscess caut, so that the head of the thigh has already arrived here.
The sign of the one to whom dislocation happens is in the outside parts, that the accidents of him are contrary to this accident.
The sign of the one to whom dislocation happens in the front parts is that he expands his leg according to compliance, but however, he does not double that pain that is in the thigh, and if it is pierced to go and cannot above that in the front parts; and the urine of him is retained and the groin of him is suppurated, and he must the ambulation of him on the crutch.
The sign of the one to whom dislocation happens in the back parts is that he does not expand the thigh, nor can he bend that in front which bends the groin, and the leg of him is shorter than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is that place.
But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, therefore, if the dislocation is old and antique, that it is already anchored with that, then you administer reduction of it and it remains according to its disposition, then it is not in that cure of all; and therefore, no cove that in that be made presumption.
But in that one whose dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you take hold of it so that you turn the joint and extend it to the front parts and the back parts, and move it to the right and left, for it returns strongly and does not need other cure.
But, if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of him from the farthest part, or with his hands, or with a bandage which is tied over the leg below the thigh; and another minister extends the hand of him below so that he puts his hands below the armpits of him; and then tighten with a bandage on the root of the thigh, and hold another minister the extremity of the bandage.
And that extension of him or from the front part to the groin to the furcula, or from the back part to the part of the loins.
And that extension of all those in one go while the patient is elevated with his body from the ground and that remains hanging.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to all species what I will say of the proper cure.
In the reduction of it proper, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the front parts, it is necessary that the patient be laid on his side; and then place the bandages on the root of the thigh in that place which is between the head of the thigh and the place that is below the groin; and then extend the bandage from above the part of the groin to the highest part of the furcula.
And then another minister strongly presses the arms of him, and embrace the thick part of the thigh of the patient and extend to the front parts by vehement extension, for that returns to its place.
And this species is of the lightest cure with which this member is reduced than the others.
But if it is excused on you and you do not obey the entrance with this species of cure of all, then it is necessary that the two legs of the patient are tied together with a strong, light bandage, on both the crutches and both the thighs.
And the length of each of them by the quantity of four fingers, and the leg of the patient extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient be suspended over the head of the pole, and that be in the middle; and the length of him from the ground the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong young man to press down on the head of the thigh, and that be suspended with the patient another young man, and the other young man pressing the thigh with strength compels, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in the proper reduction, when the dislocation is in the front part, it is necessary that the patient lie on his back as we have recommended in the having flexibility; and be tightened the bandage on the thigh of the patient properly and on his feet.
And then two poles be placed, one at his feet, and the other at the head; and then be placed poles adjusted in the middle of the neck laid on which wet cloths be enveloped, so that the patient not be damaged for that the pole be between his thighs, for that the extension to the back parts not be pulled.
And then each minister extends his part, and the physician with his hand engulfs the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary that the leg be extended slightly, and it is according to this same narration about the neck; and the physician places the palm of his right hand on the groin of the patient, and then forces that with the other hand, and with that force places that extended to the back parts to the part of the thigh.
And if the dislocation is in the back, then the patient should not be stretched to the front, and it should be raised above the ground; it should be placed on a hard surface, just as it should be placed on a hard surface if the joint is dislocated outwards, according to what we have said about the placement of the joint on two widths; and it should be on its face and the ligaments should be stretched, according to what we have said, there is no harm.
And it should be administered compression with a board over the area where the joint is.
Therefore, as the reduction is complicated according to what is said — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend the patient's two legs, and when you see those equal and the patient extends his leg and expands that excuse, then you know that the limb according to what is said is returned — and then you adjust two cushions and place a poultice and extend with a bandage so that the joint is not damaged in any part; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or for four.
And then unwrap the ligaments and the poultice, and compare one leg to the other.
Then, if you see those equal in alignment, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and plaster that, and extend that according to your first structure, and let it be in three days.
And then unwrap that, and make that delay in walking for some days, until it is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways, which is dislocated outwards, inwards, and forwards to the back; and forwards it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply his leg to the thigh; then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the ways of it is that you make the patient straight, so that he already extends his leg, if he can over that; adhere your two hands to the face of him, and place his foot between your feet; and then make adhere the knee of him to your palms, and keep those between your fingers on the knee of him with strength, and another minister extends his leg while the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction of it is that his leg adheres to the thigh with light no-labor.
And then plaster that and make adhere the leg to the thigh, and then tie those together at once with a bandage for three days or four, and then unwrap those.
And do not use the patient for walking for some days, until it is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension with ligaments of which in the cure of the joint preceding narration.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle some times is sprained by slight motion, and some times is dislocated according to complement, and the dislocation of it is made either inwards or outwards.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the ankle inflated proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of the sprain of it is of slight reduction, and it is that it be extended with ease with the hands and be aligned while it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to complement, it is necessary that you make the patient straight, and have that one minister strong and valiant from the back of the two of that in the middle place of it.
And then you with your right hand the foot of the most sovereign part, and with your left hand of the part most below of the foot in the place of the ankle.
And then you pull the foot to you with your right hand, and with your left hand for two times, and then extend with your left; and push the heel of the foot with your right to the leg's work.
And do this two times according to what we have counted.
And then push the heel of the foot to the leg the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Therefore if it returns in one time or in two according to this manner, and if you see the foot aligned, it is good; and if not, then over it iterate the operation, for that returns.
But if to you is prohibited the reduction of it with that we have recounted, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and stretch a piece of cloth on the ground firmly, and that it lies between the thighs of him, and you have already enveloped over him cloth so that it does not scratch the patient.
And then the minister of him holds his thighs, and another minister extends the leg with his hands or with ligaments that lie over the neck of the foot; and then extend that each minister against extension of his part, and the cloth be extant between the thighs of the patient retaining that, so that the body of him not be pulled to the front according to its extension.
And then the doctor grasps the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy limb aside, because the dislocation returns with ease.
And therefore, when the dislocation returns and you declare the health of its reduction, then apply a plaster and bind that firmly with strong bandages, and tie the leg to the bed.
And be careful of the nerves which are behind on the heel, so that the bandage on that area is not too strong and damages it.
And leave that for two or three days; and if the bandage is softened, remove it.
And then unwrap it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from exercising for 40 days. But if he is forced to go before that time, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted on him, and then that it will not receive healing.
And if an abscess occurs to him, then you must administer in the treatment of it what I have previously narrated in another place of healing and ointment, until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toes.
Take care that the one who is dislocated be grasped with little extension of his work; and that which is not difficult, do it gently.
But if the dislocation is in some joints of the foot, then you must make the patient place his foot on a level surface of the ground or table, and be standing as if he were going.
And then you stand on your feet, and place your foot on what you feel of the joints, and then press that with your foot with force until it returns, and that you see it already aligned and does not appear in the place prominence.
And then place under the foot of him a board that supports the whole foot, which has two ends, and then bind that with a decent and firm structure for three days; and then unwrap it and make him rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its return is assured.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the kinds of dislocations that are made with plague or with fracture or with each one together.
When any of those causes occurs, and you engage in the cure of it and in the restoration of it, many times death occurs.
And for this reason, you must not presume on the cure of it, but rather that one who is wise in the art, of long usage, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not rash nor presumptuous; and that he uses in the beginning of medicines that cause abscesses, only so much, and leave the patient to the divine judgment, but rather to him whom you hope for salvation from destruction, with the alleviation of the illness, and in which appears some hope. And therefore, strive as soon as possible to make the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before it develops into a dangerous abscess.
And therefore, if the limb returns as we want, then administer the regimen that causes a dangerous abscess and cures the plague with what is convenient for it of the dried herbs.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and occurs in the bone shattered and separated, then you must pierce the stem of them, and do in that what we have said in the simple ailments of this which is preceded in those places.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the treatment in the ways of fear according to what has preceded my preaching to you; for this is better to you, you owe your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true body those in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly of which may God be the benefit. Amen.
