Oh, sons, because I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by the fulfillment of it, its end is achieved in it, and by its expositions and declarations, it is my view that you complete it with this treatise, which is a part of the operation with me, so it is surgery.
Because the operation with me is spread in our region and in our time completely private, while many risk the science of it, and its vestiges are held hostage; and there remain of it only some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddle the most and lead to those errors and uncertainties because their clauses are understood and the force of it and the art are lengthened.
And it is seen to me that you bring to life that with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for that it may come with the forms of the tools of cautery and the other instruments of the work as it is for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the cause for which no good artificer with his hand is found in this our time, is that the art of medicine is long, and that it compels its actor to be exercised before that in the science of anatomy, which reconciles Gualia because it knows the movements of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and to have the knowledge of the bones, nerves and arteries, the number of them, and the egress of them; and of the pulsatile and quiet veins, and the places of the emission of them.
And for that reason, Hippocrates says that in a name is little, but in the work much, and most of all in the art of the hand.
But now we have already said that in the introduction of this book; because whoever is not aware of what we have said of anatomy, is not evacuated that he does not fall into error for which many men die, so as I have seen many of those, some are formed in this science and cast themselves away from that science and their experiments.
Because I saw a foolish and inexperienced physician who had incised a scrophulous abscess in the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed while the woman died among the hands of him.
And I saw another physician who prescribed that the patient swallow a stone from a man who had processed in his state, and the stone was large, and it came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that the man on the third day died.
And I had already been called to extract that, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient, I knew above him that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was taking a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he was given a black crutch who was broken in his thigh; and prepared the physician with his ignorance, I extracted the fracture, on the wound, with splints and splints with strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And then he set it according to his desires, and he reattached it, and then he left it for some days and commanded that we untie the ligament; and it was so that the thigh and the foot became festered, and it came to ruin.
And I was called to him, and I appeased him to untie the ligament, and achieved tranquility and then eased his pains.
But however, the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb, so that I could not restrain it, and it did not cease to wander the corruption in the limb until the patient perished.
And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after some days, until the malice of it was magnified to its lord.
The cause of which is that the cancerous caut is pure of melancholic humor, so that it does not come to it with iron of all, but that it be in a limb the one which suffers that of all it be held hostage.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with me be devised in two divisions: so it is in the operation which is associated with health, and in the work with which there is peril in the major dispositions.
And I have already established this in every place of this book in which I present an operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard this and leave that, so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and to dishonor you.
And therefore, take your arms with diligence and with the protection of God, and your patients with facility and with firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God, pursuing health and praiseworthy success, and leave the terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and hold your arms from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: because more remains to your glory, and more in the world and in the end to your sanctities.
Gualia already says in some of his monitions: "Do not treat a bad illness, so that you are not called bad physicians."
And I have already divided this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and the first of the first part. The first chapter, ordered by the head, about the forms of instruments and the tools of cauteries, and what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of suction and perforation, and of cupping glasses, and of poultices, and of the extraction of arrows and of things similar to those, all chaptered and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of the cure of sprains and things similar to those; chapter ordered by the head, and of the forms of the instruments.
Know that you should say the quality of the judgments of that cautery and its harms, and in what completion cauterization should be prohibited.
Therefore I say that the sermon of the quality of the judgment of cauterization and its harm is a long and prolix sermon, and subtle by science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken of it, and they have disagreed about it, and to me a little of their sermons suffices, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I say that cauterization agrees with every universal composition, whether it is of matter or of its matter, except for two compositions, which are compositions of matter that is cauda.
In the composition that is dry and of matter, they disagree; because some say that cauterization is beneficial to that, and others say the contrary, that cauterization is not convenient in illness that is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that illness that is dry and by dryness, with that which is caut and dry, be cured.
And I say to those who say the contrary, that by cauterization is done benefit in all dry and  illnesses that come in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man and its humors to the composition of fire, you find the body of man to be cold.
And I say for the sermon of this, that experience has already revealed to me on some occasions.
But however, it should not come upon this that which is already exploited and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by the previous exercise, and who has known the diversity of the composition of men and the disposition of the illnesses in their own bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the duration of those.
But in the other compositions, there is no fear over you, and most of all in the cold and humid illnesses, because all the physicians have agreed upon those, and they are not disagreed about the judgment with cauterization in those.
And know, sons, that of the secret of cure by cauterization with fire and of its goodness, it is because fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member that is cauterized and not to the other member attached to it, except for a small harm.
But the action of burning medicine reaches that in the members that are far from it, and forcefully makes them bring illness of difficult healing and forcefully a great pain.
But fire, by its sublimity and of its substance goodness, does not do so except that it is superfluous. And already it is known to us by experience and by the length of service of study in the art about the truth of the causes; and for that reason, I am excused for the length of the sermon, and if it were not that it is not written in my book in this pause to you, the secret hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies, and its expulsion by which it expels the illnesses, with a philosophical and demonstrative sermon, which would be acute in your minds.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to do cauterization and they pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, because so that the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of that which is cauterized, and most of all if the cauterization is for pains or of necessary pains, strong and fistulous, which do not suffer delay because it is feared that those that come malice, which is greater than a small harm entering by time.
And therefore do not catch in your minds, or, sons, that this is not esteemed by the vulgar people and the foolish physicians, so it is that to that illness that is cured by cauterization is not reduced at all times, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not at all so as they care about that, because cauterization is nothing more than in place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause for which pains come.
But however, cauterization is superfluous over medicine by the will of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that its illness may return at any time, according to the composition of the patient and the location of their illness, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of it of the aggregation of superfluities in it, and what has been received to it in its acquisition in foods and things similar to those causes; unless that illness in which cauterization is administered is a subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and humors, as cauterization of teeth for pain and things similar to that, it is possible that in it that pain does not return, but that it is made in small amounts.
And more commonly it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is rightly said, for those who understand it, because they believe that it is not a cure that benefits with medicine nor with any other cause except cautery.
And the cause is the opposite of that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when they administer the ways of healing in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause they administer cautery, and it benefits to that. And therefore, it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which the common people and many foolish doctors understand.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen that and I have found that this does not do so except in some bodies, and cautery with this is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you do cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want by the roar of the gold, and that it prepares to receive the burning; and if you adjust over it, the gold melts by the fire, and in the fire some plates so that the artisan catches for the occupation of that.
And for this reason, cautery with iron must be done more lightly and more carefully to the rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that later the demander asks for what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers to the humidity and coldness over the nerves affected by the cause of which there are two, so it is the cause of soda and multitude of rheumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the ears and the auricles flow, and multitude of sleep, and pain of teeth and of the throat, and universally of all illness that comes by coldness, as well as paralytically, soda and apoplexy, and similar in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is this, that first you command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine the head modifying, for three or for four nights, according to that you require the virtue of the illness and the age of him and his custom.
And then command him to shave his head, and then do that seizure between your hands on a low bench and that he place his hands on his feet.
And then place the razor of your palm near the nose between his eyebrows. But however, as the tie of the middle place has been reached, sign that place with a tenta, and then ignite the cautery olive of which this is the form:
And then place that upon the spot marked with the tenta, in the manner that descends, with which your hand be constricted little by little, and you revolve that.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see already of the bone being discovered some quantity of the head, as well as the quantity of a grain of errs, then elevate your hand, and if not turn your hand with that iron, with another of that, if it is cooled, until that which I have told you is seen of the bone.
And then take a little salt and dissolve that on the place and leave that for three days.
And then place on it a cloth soaked in butter and leave that on it until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with anguent tetrafarmacon until it is healed.
And already they said that when the plague remains open, so much better it gets the scar, for that it is better and more useful.
And they said some of them that it be cauterized the spine within the bone, and it be held the cautery until it is burned any part of the appearance of the bone.
And then be scraped that which is burned of the bone, and then be cured.
And they said others that with the cautery arrive to the back, until it presses in the bone strongly until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati small: And they estimate of that place expire the vapors of the head.
And it be kept the wound open for long time, and then be cured until it is consolidated.
But to me, these two kinds of cautery have not been seen at all, except in some men according to way of fear; and leaving that, to me, it is better for health, when it is; because the head is devitalized by solution of continuity of it as we have testified in the other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of a cold nature.
And the species of cautery first is more safe and better to me; and of that I use and with that work with health.
Second chapter.
Of the cautery of the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and it is prolonged in the patient, and they use herbs, and potions, and purgatives, and plasters, and guats, and cadels, and gualinas, and semblants, and mostly if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that they recount and does not benefit them in any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frail and finds a great deal of heat, then cauterize it with another cautery besides that one a little. Then cauterize that one on the horn of their head with a cautery until the bone is parted. Incise the bone and uncover the quantity which we have recounted, and cauterize that one with a cautery in the back part of the head in the location which is called vas, — and that is the location in which a cupping glass is placed. And alleviate your hand in this, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient through this finds a great deal of pain different from the pain of all the other cauterizations of the head.
And you say this cautery in its location, because whoever cauterizes with the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occiput are cauterized is more subtle cautery than that with which the middle location of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
Of cauterization of old-fashioned migraine.
When pain is felt in the side of the head, or pain is extended into the eye, it should be evacuated with medications that modify the head, and another cure should be administered, which I have said in the divisions of the illnesses; and if nothing benefits, then cauterization in it is in two ways: either cauterization with acute and burning medicine, or with iron.
But cauterization with burning medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and you cut and separate the extremities of it from both ends. And then you incise the location of the pain in the temple with a lancet until there is a location made there below the bone, until it is hidden.
And then you strengthen over it with a stopper by descending constriction, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then you untie it and take out the alum, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then you place over it a poultice submerged in butter until the location makes a scab.
And then cure this with an enema until it is healed.
And if you want to, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the two treatises of burning medicines.
But the cauterization with iron according to this manner: ignite a cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a clavilh cautery, because the head of it is as the form of a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle location of it is a small eminence.
And then place it over the location of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery which is below is not burned — and revolve the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it which is burned by the proximity of the bone is so much that the majority of it, then lift your hand so that the artery which is below is not burned, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
And then imbibe a poultice in salt water and place that over the location, and leave it for three days; and then place a poultice mashed with butter, and then cure with an enema until it is healed.
And if you want to, cauterize with the extremity of the knife-like cautery, and guard yourself from incision of the artery in this migraine properly old-fashioned.
Chapter Four.
Of cauterization of old migraine.
When you cure migraine with what we have said of the previous cure, and what we have said in the divisions of the illnesses, and if it does not benefit the cure, and sometimes because of the illness that does not suffice to it what we have said of the first cauterization with medicine or of the cauterization with fire, then you must ignite the knife-like cautery until it is white-hot, because you signify over the location of the pain with a line of length of which the majority of it is said, or that which it is; and hold your hand for one time and strengthen it until you incise the artery and it reaches into the bone.
However, it is necessary to you that you guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is bad for chewing, and that the lacert is not burned and the nerve which feels that, and that it does not become a spasm.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is incised, because in the incision of it there is fear, and mostly to that one who ignores what it does and is not studious and experienced; and leaves the operation in it at the beginning.
And I will come with remembrance of the regiment of the flow of blood accident of the artery according to its manner, in its location of this book.
And if you see of this illness that this cauterization does not suffice and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle location of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you are going to administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the cauterization of the artery, use a cautery with two handles, and this is a better cauterization and more convenient.
Chapter V.
Of cauterization of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain due to heat and it is cured with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then apply the cautery, and this is the one which has a point, of which this is the form:
And when you point it to the ignition, and it is moved around the entire ear like a wheel is rotated, or in the circuit of whichever side if the pain is on whichever side. Lengthen the cautery from the root of the ear little by little as much as you feel the location with your finger.
And if the cautery of ten points in the whole ear, and that one, and then cure the places while they are healing.
Chapter VI.
Of cauterization of tumors.
The tumor which is cured and by cauterization is only of the kinds which come from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the kind that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that kind of tumor with poultices and purges and washings, and if you do not find your cure convenient, then you must cauterize the tumor with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little below its temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery for the opposite of the diseased part, because softening does not come except in the part that is healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with the cautery in the right of the extremity of the ear, as sovereign a little above the corner of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger, and pause your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the species of the cord is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a kind of cutlery, the form of which is shown opposite. But however more subtle is that one a little as you see; and where the handle in it of superfluous thickness a little.
And then cure the place with that which is shown opposite until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of cauterization of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you cure that with the water which we have said and you do not find your medication convenient and the ailment does not have fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: over all the horns of its head; and with the cautery and the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with the cautery in the cheekbone. And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said before.
And it is already cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then it is cured with the water which proceeds.
Chapter VIII.
Of cauterization of oblivion made by phlegm.
When it is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large poultices and pills of the kind that are modified.
And then shave the head of the patient and place on the cheekbone of him a plaster of the kind described in the treatise of plasters.
And place that several times, for that is the manner of cauterization. And do that according to that same order which I have already said.
And therefore if by those he is healed, well; and if not, then make to him three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which are descending from the most sovereign part of the head into the part more below the neck. And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cautery with the water which proceeds.
But if you add it and the ailment is water tolerant, then make to him a cautery in the middle place; and if you want more addition, then cauterize that over the two horns.
Then cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive according to the form given before.
Chapter IX.
Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of the whole body.
When you must process in softening of the head with poultices and with the water which we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle place of the head, and with a cautery over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over the rear part of him, and with three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the ailment of softening of the body of too much that and the ailments tolerant and the ailment is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries over the vertebrae of the loins, and carefully with the cautery until it is burned of the cord of him, and raise your hand. And then carefully treat the one who is being healed, and this cautery olive.
Chapter X.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized, unless that epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, if you modify the brain of him at the beginning with years and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is great and tolerates the excess of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer guarguarissmes and mastiguatoris to the brain, before that for a few days, with the blessing of the foods.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize him with a cautery in the middle location of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery in the occiput of him, and on each horn of his head cauterize. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize him with the cauteries which I have said, having paralytically and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And this olive cautery according to what has been preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then pause a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter XI.
Of cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are humidities corrupted and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we have said in the having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink water that purifies the brain of him according to what has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a decent tortiora of him over the circle, and then place that in the middle location of the head.
And the patient be sitting straight, and be held from all parts.
And then apply liniment; and it is more worthy to border with wool fat of sheep. And warm that over the fire for temperate heating by measure, which the said one suffers when it is most in him. And then put that in the middle location of the head of him in the circle, and let him inside that it be cooled.
And do this water with the patient every week once, with the other regimen of him well inside that he be healed; or if you will, cauterize this making small points according to the most of him, unless you have the hand with a cautery so ordered: this is a species of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
And then apply that coated in wool fat or in grease of quail.
Chapter XII.
Of cauterization of water descending in the heel.
When to you is declared the beginning of water in the heel by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that purifies the head of him, and guard that from all humidities.
And make that to sweat in a bath in some days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize him with a cautery in the middle location of the head; and then cauterize him with two cauteries over two temples if it is the beginning of the ailment of water in two heels, or of one side if it is the beginning of the water in one heel.
Incise with cautery all the veins and arteries which are left in the codena; and let the cauteries be in that length in the latitude of the temples.
And guard yourself from blood flow when it is cauterized; and if you see blood flow from him, stop it with some medicine, which is to you possible.
And you will come with the wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the abscessing of those and caution of blood flow.
And some times it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries deliberately produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of cauterization of old tears.
When tears of the heels are old by accumulation and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluous phlegmatic, then cauterize him with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water ailment in the heels, and with a cautery in the middle location of the head and with two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below two bones. And if you are in need of addition, then cauterize him in all the length of the heel's tail above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of cauterization of nasal stench.
When you medicate him with the water which we have said in the division and it does not profit your medication, then you equip and give to drink to the patient the concoctions for three nights; and then shave the head of him, and cauterize him with a middle cautery with olive cautery. And then cauterize that with a pointed cautery with two cauteries on the two eyebrows leaving the hair a little.
And guard yourself from the arc that you do not burn that.
And of the pointed cautery this is the form.
Chapter .xv.
Of cautery for softening eyelids of the wheels.
When the eyelid of the wheel is softened by sickness or by humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in all part, and they are elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid be cauterized.
Chapter .xvi.
Of cautery of the eyelid of the wheel when the hairs are converted to the parts of it and prick the wheel.
When the hairs of the wheel are converted to the parts of it so that prick the wheel, cauterize in those in two manners, whether cauterize or is with burning or is with medicine burning.
If with cautery of it with fire, command the patient in front of it that he pluck his hairs as those which they pluck them, until they are prolonged and equal; and if prick that, then you strengthen the wheels of it with a bandage so that it not be bad until the hairs are born.
Therefore, as soon as they are born and equal, then pause the head of the patient in your self, and then send over the eyelid of the wheels of it with tent, with a sign which be according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the sign near the hairs.
And then pause a poultice embedded in album of how or in a mucilage of ptilli on the wheel.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it.
And then cauterize over the figure which you have senhaled, little by little, in many times, until it be burned the surface of the codena which is as fuelha of myrtle, all apparent properly.
And sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the wheel already be contracted and the hairs of it be elevated above the puncture of the wheel.
And therefore elevate your hand and leave it for three days, and then pause over it a poultice with border until it be healed the scabra. And then cure that with an enguent until it be healed.
But if return for the hairs any cause to their prickling and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery over that as well as you had done first.
But if the hairs so in the eyelid, then cauterize that until it be elevated to its natural place and be equal and that the hairs do not prick the wheel.
But the cautery with burning medicine this is that you command the patient that he pluck the hairs until they are prolonged and equal, and then be made of cloth the form of a myrtle leaf.
And then take of known soap and of live cause one. i., that is,
And pause the said over the medicine and press it a little and not the bads until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for biting is in it as of fire.
And therefore as it will perceive that the other biting, then leave the medicine and wash it with your said; therefore as it ceases the biting, then remove the medicine and wash the wheel with water; and then consider if times the eyelid already is lifted as it is washed above the constriction with fire or with incision, for then it is well; and if not return over that of the medicine over the place in which it has not used the medicine and do not degrade until it be equal your operation and be contracted the wheel.
And then pause over it a poultice with border until it be eradicated the scabra of the adhustio, and then cure that with an enguent deafinicon or with another until it be healed.
And it is necessary to you, above your operation that you guard with pervigil diligence that in the wheel does not fall re of the medicine, and if the eyelid aprop some days is softened and any cause of the hairs prick in the wheel, then iterate your medicine over that place the which of the eyelid is softened, and properly as you have done at the beginning, and then enaviro it until it be healed.
And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
And know that the wheels of men are diversified according to the magnitude and the smallness, and therefore according to that is made your constriction.
And no one will be able to hide the path of rectum to him who is studying this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of cauterization of fistula that is in the lacrimal of the heel.
When you cure a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of the diseases and do not confer your cure, then you must cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head on your knee, and hold the head of him some minister between your hands in such a manner that it is not disturbed nor agitated with his head.
And then place a cloth infused in oil or in a poultice of ptilli on the heel of him.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
Which is concave, as is the shape of a reed or a vulture's feather, from one extremity of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other extremity. And if you wish, it should be shaped as a tentacle.
But however, the one that is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it pus and dry it out. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold it with your hand a little from the cautery of the heel to the part of the nose, so that it does not burn your hand or the patient be agitated, and then place the cautery in the grooves of the heel and corrupt it.
And therefore if at the beginning of your cauterizing it penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then iterate the cautery once or twice, if it is necessary; and leave it so for three days, and then place on it a cloth with border and envelop it with an exsiccating enguent until it is healed.
But if ten days had passed and it is not healed, then place on it an acute corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and scraped according to what you have ordained in your chapter.
And there is another manner of cauterizing a fistula which some first said:  Enter into the place of the fistula and cut it, and then place in that fissure a fine thread of which is the shape of it: And put into it the quantity of one ounce of molten lead; and hold your hand with a good grip, and do not disturb the patient so that the molten lead does not reach the heel of him; and cover the heel of the patient with a cloth infused in oil or in water, for the lead will burn the place of the fistula and heal it by a marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said of the cauterization and the cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a traction of the nose and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose according to what will come in its place proper.
Chapter XVIII.
Of cauterization of the fissure of the anus.
Many times fissures happen in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
Therefore, as you cure those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and do not profit from your cure, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form which is:
And let its concavity be according to the fineness of a needle.
Then place that init carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then cure that with cerotz until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there happens an abscess and then it breaks, and then it is ancient, and pus flows and a fistula is made, and then you cure that and your cure does not profit, then you must ignite the cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then put that ignited into the tract of the fistula, and hold your hand so that it reaches the iron ignited to the bottom of it, and at the back of it make it so once or twice; and then cure that with the water that we have said of the cure until it is healed.
And therefore if the pus is abscindita and is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and host the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
Of cauterization of the teeth and of softening of the blood vessels.
When the blood vessels are softened by humidity and the teeth are bad, and you cure those with medicines and do not confer, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and then ignite the cautery the shape of which will come soon, so that you place the nozzle on the tooth and introduce into it the ignited cautery quickly, and hold your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth to be reached.
And then remove your hand, and then iterate the cautery several times according to what you want.
And then the patient gargles with salt water and keeps it in their mouth for an hour, and then spits it out, because the bad tooth is stopped, the softened gums are tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Chapter XXI.
Of cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to cold, or a worm is in it, or it does not respond to treatment with medicine, then cauterization is done in that tooth in two ways: cauterization with a cow's horn, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with horn is that you take a cow's horn and heat it in a blacksmith's forge, and then take a handle and wrap it around the tip of the horn, and then dip that in the heated horn, and place it on the painful tooth firmly while it is heated.
And then repeat this several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip wool or a stick in the heated horn below, and place it on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron over it until the iron reaches the bottom of the tooth's cavity.
But however, cauterization with fire is that you attend to the channel of iron or of fire, and it be in the heart of it some thickness and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cauterizer, the shape of which will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it while the cauterizer is heated; and do this several times because the pain will be relieved either that day or the next.
And because of the impression of that cauterizer, the patient gargles with good broth and keeps it in their mouth for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the shape of the cauterizer.
And cauterize with whichever extremity you wish according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
Of cauterization of fistulas.
When fistulas are of phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion by medicines and you wish to digest those slightly, then you ignite the cauterizer whose shape is this following, having two open extremities so that the smoke of the cauterizer escapes from the other extremity, and place it on that abscess once, and another if you judge it necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cauterizer according to the amount of the abscess, and then leave it for three days and place a stick soaked in broth over it until that which the fire has burned is healed.
And then cure this with gargles and compresses and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
Of cauterization of throat ailments and constriction of the neck.
When the humors come upon the canal of the lung, and especially when that is with cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that below the root of the larynx in the depressed area.
And guard yourself that you do not reach with the cauterizer to the larynx nor burn the cartilage of it except a little.
And cauterize that with another cauterizer below the junction of the neck in the last vertebra of it. And the cauterizer of it be  shaped like the one before.
And then cure this with water that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
Of cauterization of lung ailments and cough.
When cough and lung ailments are of cold humors and the patient has no fever or phlegm and it is an old ailment, then cauterize that with two cauterizers on the breastbone in the depressed areas of the left and right; and with another cauterizer in the middle of the foot between the two malleoli; and let the cauterizers be shaped like the one before.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cauterizers that are called points, the shape of which you have seen before in the cauterization of ear pain.
And make points within those; and then cure this with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
And let the cauterizer have three ramps because cauterization is done with it: in one time you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
Of cauterization of the tic that is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated because of lubric humors and it is not fixed at the time of its return to its place, and because of a slight movement it is dislocated again as we have testified, then it is necessary that first you reduce the dislocation, and then the patient lie on his back or on his side; and then elevate the cartilage which is in the front part of the tic to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated to the front part.
And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the groin so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will then be of four cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and for that reason are the cauteries eight.
And then place on the cautery porys cuytz am sal, and then make adhere the patient to tranquility, and the limb not be harmed for any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is at the parts above and tart is done, then cauterize above the muscle with a cautery clavilh or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of cauterization of the stomach.
When there comes in the stomach burning and many humidities that that extract from its complexion and so multiply sores to it, and if you continue the ways of cure and do not confirm it, then when the patient is upon his two sides, and extends his arms and his legs, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one cautery is left the foot for the quantity of a finger with a cautery clavilh, and with two cauteries left the two sides of the cautery, until the triangular figure of cauterization comes; and elongate between those that are not adjusted that they will make a poyredura.
And if the depth of the cautery the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the groin.
And be the figure of the cautery according to this form addition, And if you will, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And be cauterized the stomach punctan ad that one who of this cautery is frightened: and it is that you senses upon the stomach point according to the quantity that you want with tension, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the points; and then cure it with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
Of cauterization of the liver.
When it comes in the liver pain for coldness or for humidity or for great windiness that from its normal complexion be cast by superfluous egress, and it is cured the patient with that which we have said and do not confirm it, then when the patient is upon his back upon his neck, and senses with tension three cauteries according to this form and this quantity placed upon the liver below the ipocondres, the honor perceives the decubit of man.
And be the space which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and be the cautery according to the length of the straight body.
And do not compress your with the cautery mot.
And if the quantity of that which is adhered the quantity of the majority of the species of the groin, and there not be more adjusted; and if the patient standing upon his feet of him; and if it is not standing, then be lying, the one which already has extended his legs, and elevate his arms.
And it is to you possible that cauterize these cauteries with a cautery cutellar, when it is with your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself that too much you process in the cauterization, and be adhered the species of all the groin for that it be adhered all the body and reach within to the bowels, for the groin here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of perforation of abscess of the liver with a cautery.
When it comes an abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient atrobo gravity and pain its acuteness.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with the pain is acuteness great and times that already fatigued the physicians the cure of it.
Therefore, when the patient is turned upon his neck; and then senses the location of the abscess with tension; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled to rag, the form of which precedes in the other page. And cauterize with that i cautery until all the groin be cauterized, until it reaches the ciphrac, until in yesca sania.
And then cure it with the cure of the other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not cove that of this form of cautery use sino that of which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the most of which many diseases have been known; mays this with experiment some times be ardit upon this operation, mays however leyssa that deves nos, and is miels.
Chapter XXIX.
Of cauterization of pleurisy.
They said the ancients cauteries of the roots of aristologia to pleurisy burning according to this manner esser fazedor, and is this that you prenguas of the roots of aristologia long dry a root pun long that is found, and be of the thickness of the finger.
And then submerge that in oil and put it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries, let them guide, one slightly sloping towards the side that is below the beard, and with two cauteries in that which is sloping between the fifth rib and the shoulder blade, sloping a little towards the back; and another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries on the back; and one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulder blades, and two cauteries on the two sides of the foot, besides the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
And no cover that which you understand your hand with the cautery, unless it is in the manifest of the chain in work.
And already some ancients said that some of the men who use a cautery of iron similar to a ray and ignite that, and put that in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and it be healed, thus as we have said in the abscess of the thigh.
But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, because it soon happens in the place fistula to which there is no healing.
Chapter .xxx.
Of the cauterization of the spleen.
When you cure the illness of the spleen with what we have said of the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize in it is according to three manners, all of which are right, of which one is that you make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the thigh, the figure of which has preceded.
And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the thigh equally.
And do not cover your hand with the cautery; and the patient be raised on their two.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, so it is that you ignite the cautery having two verticents, the cause of which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the chain which is in the right of the spleen, the one that reaches the lying of the left patient.
And let your elevation be with which you elevate the chain according to the length of the body, so that cauteries be made according to the width of the body.
And then, having entered the two verticents, ignite them, in that place where with those you penetrate the chain from the other part.
And then, having extracted the cautery; and then four cauteries are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three verticents.
And then you cure the cautery as if it had been laid aside for too many days, because it is more convenient than the other causes preceding in the cure.
Chapter .xxx.i.
Of cauterization of hydrops.
Cauterize not in hydrops but in alcinte3 properly.
When you cure the hydrops with the manners of cure which we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then cover that which you cauterize with four cauteries in the circuit of the umbilicus and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the thigh, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the right of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the chain.
And then leave the cautery open so that it gets laid aside for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from cure after the cautery with what cover so that two understandings be added to it, and it be festinated to it with auxiliary healing.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized be clave as according to the form of that is used precedent, and it is that with which the back is cauterized olive as it is precedent to its form.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of cauterization of feet and of the thighs.
When the feet are festering in hydrops and are full of pus, cover that you cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in nocrati that is between the auricular and the annular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist that; and then elevate your hand, and do not return that of all, because the pus will remain.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on the two thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh be made cauteries with the extremity of the cautery cutellar. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh; and one below and the other below the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
And leave the wound open after cure for a long time so that no water remains from it.
And then take care of those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of cauterization of the belly.
When the belly is due to coldness and humidity that infiltrates the viscera, so it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured by these ways of healing and not by confusions, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization to exhibit virtue, then cauterize it with a large cautery on the belly according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries in the circuit of the navel subtle, with a subtle cautery; and with cauteries on the skin above the navel large, or with two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humors are exuberant and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize it on the peritoneum and on the intestines, and firmly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal regions, for it is a perfect cure of benefit of which you will not err.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors cold or of corrupted humors, and they are cured by what we have said in the division and not by confusions of your cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus left spongy of the small and small triangular spine, and with a cautery below the navel, cuts for two fingers.
And if you suppose that the stomach of him be cold and his food not digested, and the face of him sometimes pale, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery according to what precedes; and with a cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the spleen with a subtle cautery, and leave the cautery for some time open, and then take care of him while he is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of cauterization of the boil near the abscess of it.
When you abscess a boil, then you ignite the cautery that is assembled to a ray. And put that ignited one in that abscessed boil, and end your hand until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if the boils are too many, then cauterize each one according to what we have recounted, and then take care of them with what you confer to them of the ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more beneficial in benefit.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature of those in the parts of him.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, he is healed with a cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the nature of those, and it is old, corrodes with pus and corrupted humors, and therefore that which is most worthy that cove is that probes it with a subtle tentacle, and then knows the quantity of the depth of it with the aforementioned tentacle.
Then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. And put that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the tenta enters.
And iterate over that cautery until those corrupted humors are burned once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And guard yourself from burning of nerves and of veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.
And then take care of the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the materials are abscessed from it, and remain so for a long time, then you know that it is healed entirely.
And if the materials are not from it, then you know that it is penetrating or in the preon of it the corrupted, or falls that from those causes of which will come remembrance in its place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of cauterization of the boils.
When in the boils it is necessary to have pain due to cold or thick wind, and therefore the patient's body is inflamed, then it is necessary that you cauterize it over the boils with a cautery on each boil with a subtle cautery of which I have previously mentioned the remembrance.
And firmly you cauterize with the second one a little, so that they will come three cauteries lined, and then they are more beneficial in benefit.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of cauterization of the bladder.
When there is weakness and softening in the bladder due to cold and humidity so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize it in the part below the bladder, the one that begins the hairs of the peritoneum, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left side of him.
And the length of each cautery shall be according to the quantity of the knots of the thread; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And the cautery shall be shaped according to what is being processed.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of the cauterization of the uterus.
When there comes in the uterus heat and humidity, and therefore pregnancy is prohibited, and the menses of her are corrupted, and the bringing on of them is delayed, and pain occurs in the region of their coming, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circle of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery over the place below the back, or with two cauteries, and the cautery shall be shaped like a club.
Chapter XL.
Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip.
When moist humors are poured into the region of the hip, and are caused by the swelling of their place, and the sign of it is that the thigh is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is felt in that which is boyt.
Therefore, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the region of the hip with a cautery in a circle shape, as you will have felt with your finger in the circuit of the region as it is turned, and so that the region falls in the middle of the circle.
And the cautery of which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize that with three cauteries with a large olive cautery.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the whole bone; and take care of that so that it be healed.
Chapter XLI.
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the region of the hip, and it is caused by heat and humidity, the patient is cured with that which we have said and do not confer, and this is ancient, therefore when you lance the patient of gross humors with fetid pills or with artificial pills or similar, and then cauterize that.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: the cautery with burning medicines, or the cautery with fire.
It is according to two scientific manners, of which one is that you cauterize that on the region of the hip of him with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make with those a good depth. And be the spaces the which is between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the olive cautery or great.
Sometimes, however, the cautery is on the middle of the top of the hip so that there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which the form is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, that is, a circle containing and burning the thickness of the whole bone.
And this is the manner of cauterizing in sciatica when pain is adherent to the hip and is not extended into the thigh.
But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh on the location where you feel the pain of the patient; and with one cautery on the groin for four fingers a little below the pubic region.
And if the cautery is a knife-like one, and the depth of the cautery is according to the quantity of the thickness of the bone.
And if the patient feels that the pain is extended into the location near the toes, then cauterize that here where you feel it with a cautery for three points or four or more if it is necessary of that.
And if the patient feels pain being below the groin and the thigh, then cauterize that here with a knife-like cautery.
And guard yourself in all cauterizations that you do not end with the cautery as much as you burn nerves or large arteries, and that by this to you is upon the patient no harm or contraction.
And I have already seen one and another of those who cauterized on the groin and ended in the cauterization, and the leg fire inflated until the tumor reached the foot, and fire pierced and corrupted the whole foot. And then strong acid solution of the belly, and by that death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise said in the cauterization of the hip, the cautery of which this is the manner: make it like a circle of iron, of which the circuit is the majority of a palm; and be its orifice according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
And from within that circle, make another third; and be the spaces the which is between them the quantity of the thread of the needle; and be those circles opened in two parts; and be the length of those cais one thread or two threads, and make in those marks of iron decently adorned in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then it should be ignited in the fire until it glows red and throws sparks, and then it should be placed on the patient's back, the patient lying on his side. And therefore cauterize that with three round cauteries at once.
And then leave that for three days; then plaster that with a poultice and leave the wound open for too many days; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Says Albucasis: or, children, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the terror of looking at it, and because we have found few who guard over it.
May the cautery be to him who suffers it, and may it be found in that place of him.
May cauteries with medicinal ointments be that you make two circles having a perforated arm in which they put the iron handle of the door; let the length of the sides in the navy be two hazelnuts or as those.
And if the spaces which are between each one are the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and they be open below and above, and they contain themselves between each other according to this form:
And then place upon the patient's back, the patient lying on his side, and comprehend your hand over the area of the back; and then take some water and pour it between the two circles, and the quality of that be with the small fire little by little, and keep that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the bite and the adhesion of it — for that biting is as if of fire — until the bite ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all of the back with sweet water.
And then leave that for three days and place on that poultice until the blackness of the adhesion is removed, and leave that for some days, and it will run from it pus; this is called in healing.
And then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or the leg, make to him a statue in it that contains water as it is made in the back equally.
And this is the manner of hot water, and you already have I written that in the treatise of the rectification of medicines. Take of alkali and of quicklime of both a half part, and mix them and place them in a new pot of which the lower part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it ray.
And place below the bottom of the pot another pot inverted, and pour over that alkali and quicklime hot water which takes those by a finger, and as soon as you comprehend those with your hand by good compression, and leave the pot that descends from it hot water in the lower part to the inverted pot.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over other quicklime and other alkali renewed, for that which is then called a strong heat, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for operation does of fire.
And so of the medicines some with which is cauterized much, as tezixic and honey anacrat and quicklime with sabio in such a way that they are mixed.
And Gualia recounts of an ancient man the operation and cure with which is cured pain of back and sciatica, and magnifies much to be of that, and says that there is no need of other cure, and that it is healed by one time as he recounts, for fort leu that entrec in bath and eysic already knows of that.
And it is that it be taken of green fig, and if it is not found green, be taken recent fig; and much be trissada with a little of gray and be placed upon the back in which is the pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and be tied.
And be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels cessation of the adhesion.
And then put that in a bath and when the body of him be red, introduce that in the sun, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
And know that it is not good that anyone use cauteries with these medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
May already Escorides diysec that when with the fenda of goat the sciatic vein is cauterized, it profits to him very well; and be the cautery with him according to this manner: be taken wool and be soaked in old oil, and be placed between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
And then take dried goat's fenda and inflame that with fire until it be made charcoal; and place it upon the wool and leave it until it is extended. And then iterate that, and do not cease to do that until the feeling of the bite reaches into the back and repauses the pain.
And this manner of cautery is called cautery of goats.
Chapter .xlii.
Of cauterization of pain of the two.
Sometimes pain is in the two for many causes, such as by blows or by percussion or by superfluous evacuation, and for causes ad those similar, by infusion of matter cold and humid.
And cauterize not except in this single species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the patient with pills and similar to them, which are made on the two sides where the pain is, three lines according to the width of the patient, because you have to cauterize each line with the cautery or more, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of him.
And make cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a medial cautery, according to this form:
Chapter .xliii.
Of cauterization at the beginning of redness.
Many times this disease happens to small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that they ache on their structure in the leg and the elevation and movement of it.
And it hurts in the last vertebra of the back and the nerves of it that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize it with a cautery that is circular according to this form: which presses the cautery over the whole part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with the pointed cautery two or three lines. And let the points be close to each other.
And after curing the place until it is healed with what we have said.
But beware that cauterization is not administered in redness that is made by spasm of a nerve.
Chapter .xliv.
Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
And therefore, since gout caused by cold is cured with this method of cure and not only the pains are removed, then the pains are removed by cauterizing.
And it is that you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And let it be an olive cautery, of which this is the form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the ankles or to the other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize that over each joint with three or four cauteries of the whole part with this olive cautery.
And if many cauteries are necessary, then cauterize that and do not press too hard your hand with the cautery beforehand, let it be only around the outline of the bone.
And if the pains rise into the ankle and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the toes only, and it is called bunions, then puncture in the circuit of the bones as it revolves, puncture in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the toes, then puncture in the circuit of the bones over each nerve and over the pin of the hand.
And if the pains rise near the joints in the elbows or to the muscles, then cauterize the joints of the whole part of the helpers.
And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done with good regimen and the flux is evacuated with this cautery it will be healed, God help.
Chapter .xlv.
Of cauterization of fractures.
When a fracture occurs in the joints and the intestines are protruding in front of the hernia, and this is beginning to happen, then you command the patient to leave his food in his day and to use of gentle causes so that the wound descends from his belly.
And after, follow the patient between your hands over his back, and command him to keep his leg inside until it is thrown or the hernia or intestines appear.
And after, return that with your fingers and feel with your hand the rupture over the bones of the penile with a sign that the extremity of it is similar to the majority of the circle in the upper parts of the body.
And after ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it:
Until it is hot and throws sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And after, pause the cautery over that sign with your hand with the cautery standing straight, and take that inside so that with it you can feel the bones of the penis inside the middle of the wound; and iterate with that another time if with that you have not achieved in the first time inside the bone.
And observe carefully the position of the intestine during the cauterization, so that you do not burn that intestine so that on the patient does not come death or another great evil.
And know that when you have the cautery do not touch the bone, do not interfere with your operation.
And know that the cautery of children should be subtle according to the size and measure of them.
And after care the location of the cautery for three days with a border until the scar of the fire is healed.
And after care that with the other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient be lying on their back for 40 days until the location and the plague are sealed.
And know that you pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time of the cure of him the one that lines his belly, and that the intestine does not come out because of the effort of healing.
And after when he wants to rise, after 40 days, then administer him decent food, and keep that for another 40 days.
And be moderate of work and repletion of food and drink, and of voice vehemently, for when he uses this regimen of healing entirely he will be healed.
And you say the cure of ruptures in the other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want that they do not pull, then cauterize the rupture of that with a round cautery according to the quantity of it, and it is that which is exhumed from the code as if the third part of it; and after care that with what we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And already some first ones say that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with a tent:
And it is placed a line that goes by the latitude in the widest part of the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter .xlvi.
Of cauterization of torsion.
When in some members by chance or by percussion pain and that pain persists for a long time and does not confer to the cure with medicines, then know that you cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And be the cautery of every member according to the magnitude and smallness of it, and virtue and weakness of it, and location of torsion and pain of it.
Therefore if it is healed by the first cautery, well is; and if not, then repeat over it the cautery; for of custom of those pains is that they are pointed of member to that member the one that approaches to it, for that know that you cauterize those within that the patient is healed.
Chapter .xlvii.
Of cauterization of leprosy.
Leprosy some times with cautery for great help, and more so if the kind of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And therefore as you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and has that cured with what we have said in the division and no say, nor is, and fears over the patient that the corruption comprehends the whole body of it and the whole complexion of it, then cauterize that over the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle location of the head, and the second further below it, even the front to the end of the hairs; and two on two horns; and one behind, on the nape of the neck or service.
And lastly your hand with the cautery a little while before it presses in the bone a small impression, and from it the scabs be displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors be relieved from it; and cauterize over the flesh according to what is necessary.
And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then know that you cauterize that with those cauteries the ones that we have said in the head; and with a cautery over the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries over the two cheekbones, and with two cauteries over two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries over the vertebrae of the back, and one great one over the vertebrae near the hip, and one over the rib, and with two over the knees, and one over each knee, and with two over the elbows, and with two over the muscles, and with two over the toes of his feet; and cauterize that over all the joints of the fingers of the hands and of the feet, and over each heel of his feet, and over the hollows of his hands.
And guard yourself from the nerves the ones that are over the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery over the bone of the palate and with another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the liver.
And know that as more you adjust cauteries, so much is more helpful and more conferrable; and know that the patient does not have in the cautery pain, as if they have their own, for that the body of it already is stupefied.
And know that the cauteries be great or few according to the members and the joints according to what is preceded of the kinds of the instruments.
And then carefully apply the cautery with flour of wormwood mixed with honey and the other cure while it is healing.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of the Cauterization of Stupor.
When some member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then you cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to what merits the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the thickness of the  bone a little. And then carefully treat it with an enema while it is healing.
And sometimes, some stupor is cauterized which extends to the legs and feet, and to the vertebrae of the lower back, and by cauterizing the nerves which lead to that member, the stupor is removed.
Do not presume about this, but only he who is wise in the anatomy of the members and the egress of the nerves throughout the whole body moving.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the Cauterization of  Ulcers That Are Morbid.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal enema, then you cauterize over it with a cautery, a little one, according to the quantity of the thickness of the bone, until the whiteness and color of it are removed, and its color is changed.
And then carefully treat it with flour of wormwood and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a dove or the blood of a round, of each one a part, and all mixed together, and then put a linen cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Chapter L.
Of the Cauterization of  Cancer.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is revolted.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle location; but to me, this is not seen, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is more right that it be cauterized in its circumference with a circle as we have said, or with moving cauteries.
Chapter LI.
Of the Cauterization of  Abscesses.
When some abscess is delayed in maturation, and thus it is due to the superfluity of making it, or due to the state of the patient, because he is old or decrepit, of little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize it in its circumference with small moving cauteries; and then let it be released as it hastens in maturation.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form: and pause it in the middle location of the abscess until it penetrates the bone.
And if the cautery in that location that is farthest, so that the body of the arm be relieved; and then carefully treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LII.
Of the Cauterization of  Corrosion.
Corrosion is a walking corruption in the member, which corrodes it as a fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corrosion in a place that suffers cauterization with fire, then you ignite small, moving cauteries, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion is.
And then cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate all the corrosion and no cause of it remains.
And then let it be released for three days, and place over the cauterized places a poultice mixed with oil until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption.
And then treat it with enema flesh-generating.
But if after three days you see that the flesh grows healthy in which there is no corruption, good; but if not, then repeat the cautery over what is raw in the corrupted places.
And corrosion is medicated some times with sharp medicine, because that is placed in the place of cautery. But however, cauterization with fire is of more light help.
And I have already said the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have need of it.
Chapter LIII.
Of the Cauterization of Claws and of Other Similar Things.
Many times there is a disease in the parts of the foot that is called a claw, and it is a large, deep cause, which bends the foot; and cauterize them in two ways, so it is cauterization with fire and cauterization with boiling water.
But cauterization with fire is that you ignite the concave cautery resembling a vulture's beak, which is made of iron according to the quantity which contains the claw from all sides, and be of subtle margins.
And then pause that ignited one on the claw, and then revolve your hand with the cautery in the circuit of the claw until the cautery reaches the depth of the claw. And let him rest for three days before he begins to wear a brace. And apply a plaster to it with wild herbs crushed with salt, and leave the plaster on it for one night, for this will be eradicated from its roots.
And treat the area with a rinse of generative meat until it is healed.
And if it is not converted, and many times it happens on the surface of the body, mostly in the arms and feet, then you must administer a cautery to those with water, and you take a small piece of lead or iron or a vulture's bone, and place it over the wound; and then pour a small quantity of water into the piece, and hold your hand, and you turn that with a compression of your hand, and press the edge of the piece into the root of the wound, and the water will flow slowly to the bottom of the root of the wound; and wait for the patient a little while for the bite of the water for an hour, and then remove that, for the wound with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do it to those and the other until you come upon all of those on their body.
And treat those pus that the roots of the wounds are eradicated with this of the rinses which the flesh generates.
Chapter .liiii.
Of cauterization of tremor.
When someone has a tremor due to a fire in the nerve or from a fever of fiery cause, or from another similar cause, then you must cauterize that with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with a cautery; and with a cautery on the feet of him, and on his stomach, with an olive cautery.
And the tremor of him is rested and hastened the health of the fiery sickness.
Chapter .lv.
Of cauterization of white accidents on the body.
When on the body are spots white, and are pustules that are made of coarse corrupted materials; therefore, at the beginning when it appears, it must be cauterized over all the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with myrtle twigs, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of erestologia long; or with a lentil cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized additionally at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and they are not believed, and the superfluity is broken and those, and they heal from those.
But however, this must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter lvi.
Of cauterization of flux of blood accident by incision of artery.
Often times there is a flux of artery that is incised, the plague which must be for, or from the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the member, and then similar, and it is difficult to remove that.
Therefore, when it happens to someone, then you must cover with your hand the orifice of the artery, and place over that your finger, and press that many times until it stops the flux of the blood from your finger, and that it does not come out.
And place in the fire the olive cauteries few and large, by number few, and exhale over those while they are hot.
And then take from those one small or one large according to the place and the plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein, quickly press that which you have removed your finger, and put the cautery until it is abcised and restricted that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery well covered with the cauteries which in the fire are prepared, and then do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is restricted.
And guard yourself that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it comes upon the patient another malice.
And know that when from the artery flows blood, then it is not possible in those to restrict the blood, and especially when the artery is large, if not with one of four ways: or with cautery as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities of him are much burned and the blood is restricted, or that it be tied with a rope or with a ligature for strong structure, or that medicines be placed upon him of which the virtue is to restrict the blood; and be strengthened with a cushion with decent constriction.
But that one who administers decent constriction of him with a ligature and with structure with cloths or by position of causes comburents and similar, do not confer but briefly.
But if this happens to someone and the physician is not present nor medicine, then open with the placement of the finger indicated on the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it until the blood is stopped from the sovereign part of the plague, and over the artery the finger is not removed; and over the artery be sprinkled with cold water of much great coldness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and more, sew in which one must cauterize or of medicine necessity.
Of incisions and perforations and ventoses and of phlebotomy and of poultices and of their likenesses.
We have already said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which the cauterization with fire is convenient and with medicine comburent, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in those necessary with the forms of the cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters of the subordination of the head within the feet.
And I proceed in this chapter in that same manner, so that the one who wants it may be helped, for that which he will have demanded.
And before that you begin this, know, son, that in this chapter is terror that is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for that, know that there should be great caution in it, because in the operation which is in this chapter, many times the evacuation of blood occurs, which is with the blood which is the life of the body, the sprinkling of the vein or incision on the abscess or opening of the wound or purification of the ulcer or extraction of the arrow or incision of the stone and their likenesses. And of all those, fear and tremor accompany, and in the hands of them, the death.
And I admonish you that upon you may not fall that in which you are situated, because sometimes it befalls you manners of men with many manners of illnesses. And of them there are some who will go away with their illness and it will be easier for them death, and thus because of the vehemence of that which they find of their illness, and because of the length of their illness, and with the illness is fear which signifies death.
And of those is the one who gives to you his trust and said, you expecting with that health, and his illness is pernicious.
And therefore, know that you should not consent to that one who comes to you of whom is this manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and your greed; and do not presume any cause on that except with certain knowledge which verifies that to you, and to which by the succession praiseworthy.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses of prognosis and indication of them to which is health converted, because in that is to you an assistant over the acquisition of fame and of memory, of the praise and of glory.
O, sons, God in you inspire his understanding and no os to direction and protection, because that is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters second as that which preceded in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head within the feet, so that it may be to you alleviated that which you demand of that and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
Of the cure of the water which is contained in the head of the children.
Know that this illness many times befalls the children of the childbirth and when the nurse tightens the head of the child, his vitality.
And sometimes it befalls because of a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this illness except in children; and to all those whom I have seen, the death has come, and thus it is to me seen laid work in those.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always thus magnified until he could not cease upon himself for the greatness of his head, and more than the humidity increased until fire death.
And this humidity or is added between the bone and the bone, or is added below the bone upon the skull.
Because the operation in that if the humidity is between the bone and the bone and the abscess is small, then know that you should do in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and be the length of the fissure two nights until the humidity runs, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore if the humidity is more augmented and the abscess is major, then are here two fissures according to this manner:
And if the humidity is below the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open from all parts and the water is squeezed when you compress that with your hand to the parts of the head and it is not that to you hidden. Know that you should do in the middle of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
And then the incision extrates all the humidity; and then strengthen the fissures with cloths and feathers; and then embroca that over with wine and oil within the fifth day, and then untie the ligature and cure the wound with tents and unguents, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member be comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, that you consider honor to appear the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, because sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or in the right, or in the left; and therefore attend to the incision where appears the abscess and the repletion of the water, and do that according to what is best to you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause blood to flow and the patient die by that flow of blood by evacuation of humidity.
Chapter Second.
When a catarrh or wound occurs in the nostrils or foot, and it does not improve with treatment, and the cure does not come from medicines, then the posterior cure in this is the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to cut those arteries, the patient raises their head, and you press the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and you tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and consider where the vein lies; and the places of each on the places which are near the ears are depressed, and they are so hidden unless in some men.
And then, you press on the artery with your finger, and you cut each one with the sharp edge of the spatula, making the incision go into the bone, and this is by the width of the head.
And if you want, you put the spatula under the artery and break it at the incisions on the upper parts.
And the length of the incision is two fingers wide, because when any vein is cut, the blood is released with a pulsating exit, which jumps out for frequent jumping.
But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then you measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then press with your finger, and make it into the bone.
And this that you must get out of the blood is the quantity of one ounce. And for less or more, and all of this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and the repletion of the artery of him.
And then consider the plague, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the chip, then cut it so that it does not cause a cautery abscess.
And then strengthen the wound with cotton and bandages of cloth, and cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter Third.
Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When a certain acute migraine or catarrh occurs, due to humors of the body and the quality in the temples, or a sudden violent headache and similar to those, and it is treated with the ways of medical treatment and this does not improve, then we have resorted to these ailments the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the way of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises their hair where they are in the temples; and understand the artery appears in the temple because it is shown by its pulse, and it is hidden unless in few men by the vehemence of the flesh.
And if it is hidden from you, then the patient's neck is tightened with some cloth; and then press the area with rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly. And then you take the spatula which this shape is: And then you cut the bone with that with ease until you reach the artery; and then you put it on and extract that at the sovereign parts until you extract that from the bone and discover that of the tunics which are below that, of all parts.
But if the artery is subtle, then you wrap that with the end of the onion, and then cut it from that one part according to the quantity by which the extremities of it are elongated and contracted, and it will not cause a flow of blood, because if it is not cut it will not raise the blood at all.
And then evacuate the blood of one ounce. within three.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie that in two places with a double strong thread of each or with long cords, and do not allow it to putrefy before the consolidation of the wound and cause a flow of blood.
And then cut the superfluity which is between the two ligaments; and do this in that hour or another hour.
And if you want, cauterize that with a cauterizer into the bone with a cauter knife until the extremities of it are cut, and stay in the place of that same work.
And it is better work if the patient has a fever or is of a hot complexion; because cauterization is of those causes that help the final humors, and therefore it is better in judgment.
And cover after the extraction of the arteries that you have made the place of the incision, and have placed on it poultices decently made, and then cure it with dry medicines that make the flesh grow and with ointments until it is healed.
And if while you are working another bleeding occurs from the artery, then you must take care to stop that blood, either with cauterization, or by placing a poultice on the wound, and tighten your hand until the blood is stopped. And if for any of those causes it is not at your present, then pause your finger on the wound until the blood is coagulated, and soak the wound with water of vehement coldness until the sharpness rests, and tighten it according to what is needed.
And that which is lighter in the extraction of artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, because you have marked the two places with the probe, and after a pause, a little, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it may be elongated that which is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated altogether with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two handles is at the same time. However, if it is less sharp than two handles, it is better, because if it is sharp with two handles, it approaches each burn, and does not cut the flesh with velocity.
Therefore, as in those, there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in those, and the flesh is slightly cut off.
And this work is better than all works and lighter.
And the spaces which are between the two handles are the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Chapter Four.
Of the cure of the bodies of acute and sour rheums of the heels.
When the rheums are sour, and are the bodies of those veins which are on the test of the head, and do not confer in that any cause of the cure of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already reddens and feels in his forehead a walking as if it were walking of ants, and the heels of that are exhausted, humid so that already the hairs of them are known, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient agro mixed in the cure of those of this operation, and numbered that cure with space.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hairs which are on his forehead, and then cut three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little of the movement of the lachrymals which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other part.
And guard yourself from the incision of the arteries which are in two places, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both the mandibles. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
And if you a piece of sponge apparelled or cloths dried well with which you dry the blood.
And then insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: which is from the part of the temples into the second incision. Excoriate with that all the flesh which is between the two incisions with the ciph, which is on the bone, and then make that of the middle incision into the second incision. And then straz in this spatula and insert into the first incision another time an instrument which is called a cutellar, sharp on one part and on the other not sharp.
And pause the side of that sharp deves the flesh annexed deves the flesh, and the side of it lean between the bone, and push that until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But that the incision be continued to that which appears of the flesh, and then make that in the middle fissure into the other fissure.
And because it runs of the blood quantity equal, express the places of the pieces of the coagulated blood.
And then pause in each fissure calgua of old cloth, and pause on those powders steeped in wine and oil and wine vinegar, and vegas that it does not become an abscess caut.
And on the third day untie the bandage and administer a great infusion of boiled water or tea, and then cure that with an enguent of basilicon with rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of rheums by catartz and in the heels descending from the parts between the head.
When there comes to some vein catartz sharp and continuous, and sometimes the heels of the patient exhausted small, and already the regard of them is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and of their case the hairs, and in the preon of the head is acute pain leading and exhaustion consequent, then you know by these accidents that the matters and catartz do not come but of many veins of the parts between the head.
And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to shave his forehead, and then cut into it a fissure in the middle of the forehead, a little by the latitude (and begin with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and be incision into the bone; and lengthen your hand from the lachrymals of the temples which are bad deves the mastication), until it be the bone uncovered.
Exsicca all the blood with sponge or with dry cloth and then repleys between the two lips of the fissure with old cloth or with cloths of linen. And then strengthen it above with powders steeped in wine and oil so that it does not become an abscess caut.
And when you untie it and see that the abscess has already decreased, then cover the bone that begins to grow flesh there, and then take care of it with a drying regimen that makes the flesh grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix it, and make a poultice of it and administer it on these wounds at the birth of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
Of the cure of that which catches in the ears.
Every cause that catches in the ears is one of four species, for it is either mineral or a cause similar to mineral, such as iron and lead, or it is of plant, such as celery or bean, or it is a fluid cause such as water and sour wine and their likes, or some beast.
And therefore when lead catches in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit nor grow in the ear, and put the ear in the sun, and if you see the lead, then distill in it some cause of violet oil or sesame, and then administer the extract of it, and make the patient swallow it with a condiment, and plug the nostrils to prevent the occurrence of vomiting. And then put in the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the parts above, for many times it is cured with these causes.
And if it is not cured, then administer the extract of it with the instrument called the "gesti epicicarios subtil" of which this is the form:
And if it is cured with the gesti, well is it; and if not, then administer the extract of it with a fine onci of little duplication.
And therefore if it is not cured by this, then make a cannula of silver and insert the extremity of the cannula into the tract of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that it is not open except the cannula. And then extract with your wind with a strong traction, for many times like the water that we have recounted.
But if it is not cured in this manner, then take of a halka illuminated or of a vecz apparelled with which birds are taken a small quantity, and put that on the extremity of a ray, and then envelop over that well-placed cot. And then insert that into the tract of the ear with facility, and then dry the ear of the humidity.
And therefore if it is not cured with all the causes which we have recounted, then you ought to cut that before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the manner of cutting that is that you at the beginning lances the patient from the cephalic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make that cezure between your hands and turn the ear to the parts above, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear, leaving the grey of it in the place well pressed of it. And let the fissure be of a lunar figure until it reaches the lead, and, the lead being found, remove it with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure in that hour with velocity, and cure that while it is healing.
And if the cause catching in the ear is one of the fats that grows and swells, then administer the cure and the extract of it; but if it does not obey your advice and thus, then you take a spatula thin and subtle according to this form: and administer with that the abscess of that fat which is caught in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put that in many pieces, and prop extract them with the onces or with a subtle gesti, or with the incision as we have said, for the extraction of it is alleviated.
But in the water which is introduced into the ear, cover that the patient uses of sneezing with a condiment at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cot, and pour over that ear in which is the water, and if by this it is cured, well is it; and if not, then take many leaden and leaden weights according to the length of the finger, and calve those in the fire a little, and the patient inserts one of those into the tract of his ear and jumps on one foot of that part and percussion with another leaden weight on the leaden weight which is inside the ear. Therefore do not cease this with lead until all the water is cured.
Therefore do not cease this with lead until all the water is cured. And already the water is cured, so that you take paper or of gonc, i., and put one extremity of it in the ear and extend the other extremity with fire until it is burned most of it.
And then put another gonc and do this so many times until all the water is cured, and strach that with a cannula as it is said of the lead extractor.
But in the extraction of beasts entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, as big as it seems, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of a large thing which causes the appearance in the part of the vessel, then administer the extract of it with gesti and oncis, and the cause of it is lighter of all the other causes that catch in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you cure that with what we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not compare your cure, then you must watch the ear in the sun.
And therefore if there is any cause of worms here, then extract them with a gesture or with a subtle instrument, but if there is no cause, then take a cannula that is narrow at the top and wide at the bottom, which is the shape of it: And introduce the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can suffer; and then suck with it by strong suction, and do this many times, until all the worms are expelled.
But if you do not obey in this way, then you plug and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been proven in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise of distillations.
And this is the effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the shape: And make it of silver or of brass, narrow at the top, with a small hole, and flat at the bottom.
And therefore it is as if it were in the concavity of the cannula of which we are speaking here where it is necessary. And if you want, take the ray and wrap it in the extremity of it decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the concavity of the hearing, or juice of some herb, or water that you want of these medicines into the cannula — and that is in the ear — and then introduce the ray with cotton underneath and express with your hand that with moderate compression of it until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
And what is infused in the ear is already scalded with fire a little. And guard yourself that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too cold, because the medicines of the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
Of the cure of ear opacities.
Sometimes babies are born from the wombs of their mothers unperforated, and this happens to some men, opacity in the flesh of the ear due to plague or to flesh that has nothing to do with it; and this opacity sometimes is made in the preon of the tragus of the ear which does not allow the vision, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the preon of it, which does not allow the vision, is in the greatest dispositions of difficult healing.
And in that one in which you can see, then you must place the ear of the patient in the sun and watch it. And therefore if you see opacity appearing, open it with a subtle spatula of which this is the shape:
If the extremity of it in which there is little width, of which one part is sharp and the other not; and the spatula is of two lengths so that it does not make a hole in the ear.
And therefore if the opacity is due to flesh born in the ear or in the flesh of it, then take that with subtle instruments and incision it with great facility until all the flesh is removed.
And if the opacity is in the preon of the ear, then take a subtle ray long and scalded that with fire a little, and then put that in the flesh of the ear.
And therefore if you have felt opacity with the water that the patient finds with facility, by the gravity of the auscultation, you will increase the oppression of it with facility; and guard yourself that you do not plague the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a cloth according to the quantity of the width of the tragus which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or that you take some and put it in water and pulverize it on it, following the tristis, and use it; and if you see the ear already being suppurated, then you must extract the pus and replace it with another one which you wrap in cerot that is made with rose oil, until the pus cauterizes; and then cure it until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure which you restrict the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise of distillations.
Chapter VIII.
Of the cure of atheroma which develops in the eyelids.
Atheroma which develops in the eyelids of men sometimes is humid, sometimes it is dry.
Therefore, when you have those with tweezers or with a scalpel, and incision them with a spatula of their roots, and then place on the places according to the trissatis.
But if there is pain with a flow of blood, then you cauterize those with a subtle lancet cauter.
And the best cauterization is to the incisions and several times return when there is some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Cure of a large swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Many ailments happen in the eyelids of the eyes, some cause a swelling which is assembled to greatness in its firmness and hardness, and by its greatness it is called.
And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid below and above.
Therefore, the operation on them is that you consider if the swelling is coming from there, that is, apart from the eyelid and is bad to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, make a cut on it along its width, and then drain it entirely as easily as possible, and then suspend it with a bandage and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and cure it until it is healed.
And if it is small, it will not harm you for that, because the ointment of it restores it and heals it.
And if the swelling is declining to the inner parts of the eyelid, you must scrape the surface of the inner parts, then you will see the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage, which you did not make an incision for, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, you will not notice it in any way.
And after the incision, wash the eyes with salt water; and cure the place with water that heals until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the cure of the abscess in the upper eyelid of the eye.
An abscess is a boil that is generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and mostly happens to children, it aggravates the eyes of those and accedes to their cataracts the most; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears are collected in those.
And because of this, those times they rub on their faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; and on the eyelids of their below the eyebrows are humid, those which already have covered inflammation, and the imminence of a boil appears in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the boil within those.
And some manner of operation is in that one who the patient puts their head in your lap, and then put a cloth on them and make a poultice, and make of it a circle according to the quantity which contains the boil entirely, and then put that on it and press with your fingers from all sides so that it may be pressed into the middle of the circle, and then make in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incision along its width, and the incision is not larger than the incision made in a flap.
But in the pressing cover that you make the incision entirely until you reach the boil, because in the most favorable processes the boil is processed by incision according to the form of a white boil.
Therefore, extract it with cloths which you have enveloped between your fingers to the sides of the boil and roll between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And guard yourself that you do not adjust in the incision so that with the spatula you do not reach the eye and scrape it.
But if you do not see the boil at the beginning of the incision, but rather that you adjust in the incision a little with ease until it processes the boil; and then extract it as we have said; and then submerge cloths of it in water and honey and put them on the place and tighten them with powders.
And if some that put salt and put it in the cavity of the incision so that what is left of that humidity.
And then cure it until it is healed.
But if it happens in the place abscess caut, then cure it with cauterized plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
Of manners of touching the eye.
When in the eyelids of the eyes there are hairs that are natural and are antiquated by the adjustment below the hairs, then those annoy the eye and make become manners of illnesses such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelids and film until that is a cause of destruction of the eye that is called touching of the eye, and cure is done in four manners: or by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine according to what was said before in the chapter of cauterization; or it is done touching by incision and suture; or by canes according to what I have said.
And therefore, when you put the head of the patient in your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, it is good; and if not, insert a needle into it where it is thickest from the bottom of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread below, and that be— near the edge of the eyelid where there grow the hairs— near the hairs, and pull the thread to the bottom with the eyelid, and turn it with the ray.
And then make in the inner part of the eyelid below the hairs adjusted with a spatula incision from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and then extract the thread and put below the eyelid small powders of cotton or of cloth, and then send over the eyelid with a tent, and be as such as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
But however, the figure must be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because this is already diversified in men, because some are those who are indigenous that it should be incised of the eyelid a large quantity according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then bring the spatula over the two lines which you have drawn, and begin from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller lacrimal duct. And if your fissure is near the natural hairs as well as the thickness of the king.
And then put the ounce in one of the two angles of the chain, and then scrape that whole thing, and then adjust with the incision the two lips with a wool or silk thread, and wipe away the blood, and make it adhere what superflues of the threads on two eyebrows with some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and otherwise, don't worry.
And then remove the suture of the threads within three days or four, and then take care of it.
And if you want, leave the patch with its suture, and take care of it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated, it needs the sealing of the patch and its adhesion; but suturing is better, and therefore I say this as the ancients did.
But however, there should be solicitude over the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another way in taxmir, and it is that you shape on the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separate and congregated hooks according to this form:
But if it is not possible to do this, take the hooks, and this is not equal, then take a needle which has thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and introduce the other thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the other thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between your fingers the threads with equality, and then with those elevate your hand with equal elevation, elevate the whole chain on which it is drawn as we have recounted.
And then adjust the two lips of the patch with suture, and take care of it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs because of your incision or your fissure,  treat that abscess with cerot and similar things, and with poultices.
And some times it becomes necessary to the eyelid that its hairs are converted, then it is necessary to use in that what we have said of incision; but suturing in some is more artificial.
To taxinir with canes is according to this form: And it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure which is described according to what I have recounted; and then by art make two canes or two subtle splints of which length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them is less than the width of the spatula. And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
And then add each one subtly over what superflues of the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canes of each part with a strong stricture, and leave it for some days, because the chain by the stricture will die and be denied and will be able to return within itself.
But if it is delayed, then break it with the pliers, and then take care of the patch until it is healed.
Therefore, as it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not poke.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this form: And have the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
Of elevation of poking hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are non-natural, hard and rough and poking the eyes, then the operation in it is that you take a subtle needle and put in it a subtle thread of cedar and linen, and then you adjust the extremities of it and knot it in a way most subtle. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of a palm.
And then you compose another subtle thread from it in short, and knot the extremities of it if you want to.
And then place the patient their head in your lap, and be near the sun so that your work be declared, because it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the hair that has need of engineering, and make it penetrate the eyelid carefully until you extract it out of the natural hair.
And then pull the hair out and introduce it into the alixati, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand with it so that the hair be soaked with alixati in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if the alixalati is thrown and the hair is not soaked, you will throw alixati to the parts below with the thread which you have composed with it, until it be soaked with the alixati from the top.
And keep that with the vision of the eye, because then you will throw alixati and the thread, and groat some and close the eye, and leave the closures for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place and grows on that good flesh.
And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a long skin from the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that, or that you let it enter so that it is lengthened to a certain space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter .xiii.
Of the cure of the cataract which comes in the eyelid above.
When it comes in the eye cataract, and is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted above, or on the right or left side, by bad consolidation of plague or of cautery, and is called leporina, and this cataract or is natural or accidental, and is made by consolidation of plague or of cautery, or by resemblance to their malcuratz.
The manner of the operation in it is that you make that consolidation and that you separate the lips of it, and you put in it in that which is between those a piece of cloth of linen, and you tie those together until they are healed.
And no cover that you use of cure of it of the causes the ones which exsiccate, constrict; because if you do that return cataract worse than no time no have you.
Use in that of causes that mollify as is fenugreek, and embroca with the water in which they are cooked  altea and seed of it, or enguent dyaquilon, the one which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submergeys in that the cloth, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all engine that is not consolidated according to the form that you have at the beginning.
And this operation the one which we have said, is not sino any rectification of cataract that does not return the form of the place according to that you had before.
Chapter .xiv.
Of the cure of cataract which is made in the eyelid below.
This cataract which is made in the eyelid below, the one which is named truly cataract; and it is of it some natural, other accidental.
More accidental is made by plague or by scissura or by cautery or by other resemblances.
And the way of the operation of it is that you take a needle in which make double thread, and fix that in the flesh, and that you make it pass from the lacrimal of left into the lacrimal right, until that the thread arrives in the two extremities of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the parts above with the needle and sew that with the needle, and insciseys with spatula ample. And therefore if it returns the figure of the eyelid according to that cover, good is; and if not, take the ray and pause that in the figure wounded, and with that converteys the eyelid, and finish the two fissures in the latz of the eyelid below.
And be the extremities of the two fissures of two angles of the incision, the one which you have made until they concur, and be of their fayt angle until when they congregate be made figure of their.
And this figure is Greek letter: the lambda.
And then oppose the flesh that for the quantity that is the latz of it acute below of it, that which seizes the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew those with the thread of wool; and then cure those with that which we have said of the mollifying medicines and of the poultices until that it be healed.
And if cataract must be due to fissure or suture or cautery, then cover that you make with fissure plane over the hairs of the eyelid according to that is preceded. And then separate with the poultice between two lips according to that we have said.
In the sum of the sermon of the cure of cataract when it is above or below, that run in it the operation, according to that is prepared of the form of cataract, and that is in form of motas diversity.
And the artificers wise all times prepare engine in each manner the one which is possible to it until that make return the figure to the natural form, or near that, and that patient according to that to him convenes of the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter .xv.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When accidies this consolidation to many men in such a way that be solidified the eyelid more above with the album of the eye, and be prohibited of the facility of the movement and of its natural works, therefore cover that you enter the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and elevate in up that, or extend that with the unci.
And then you insciseys the adhesion with spatula subtle, the one which not be with acuteness of the incisions, have obtus a little for so that the patient not be inquietated during the operation, and remove the spatula that not lead the eye with its acuteness.
And be your incision that excorjan that adhesion with facility until that be returned the eyelid according to its natural form and that be healed all the adhesion.
And then you put in the eye salted water with which you wash it; or distill in it of zunia dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of it, and pause over the eye wool infused in album of egg, and then the third day use of consolidative causes until that be healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the incision of the nail and of the prominence of flesh of the lacrimals.
Know that the nail is of two manners, whether it is nervous, and is like a hard, fine cypress; or it is non-nervous, resembling white moisture congealed, which when you touch it, or it is forced to take on a form, it is cut off and the form is not put back in.
And both kinds do not begin except from the larger lacrimal within which goes little by little that it covers the sight and prohibits the light and the movement of the eye.
But the manner of working in the incision of it is that the patient places his head in the low place, and then opens his eyes, and elevates the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail with a pointed instrument of little duplication and extend it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and introduce into it a thread of horse, or of bull, or of water, or of similar, or of strong thread, or duplicate the extremity of the needle little by little and put it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with thread the nail; and extend it to the upper parts, and excoriate with the thread the side of the nail which sees the pupil. And thus you follow it with the thread into the back of it.
And then you incise the remnant in the root of the lacrimal with a subtle spatula or with small scissors, and let the flesh of the lacrimal be natural so that by incision of it there does not become a continuous flow of tears.
And at some times the nail with the sole thread extended or tied, as we have said, and then it is excoriated with a lion's spatula of which this is the form of it:
And guard yourself that with the spatula you do not touch the cornea tunic and that there comes a rupture in it, and that the pupil be perforated.
Then the incision gets in the eye a little of salt triturated or of a head made of cedar, and let it in for another day; and then cure it with water that covers it until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle, nor is it put in it the form, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as I and recommend in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a subtle lion spatula of finely sharpened steel according to this form: With subtlety. And if you see that it is rarified and is confused and embraced in that root, then distill of your hour in the eye of cedar head made or with cedar wood or with salt triturated, and close the eye for another day.
And then repeat over that the operation until it is removed all that is of it, so that the contrary abscess may not be in the eye, for then you let it, and cure at the beginning the abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation over it with reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it is noticed in the eye for great nuisance, be suspended with thread; and incise it from that one part, and do not complete the incision so that it does not incise the flow of tears.
And then distill in the lacrimal cedar wood and made of cedar until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the incision of the albuginea and of the water that is born of flesh adjusted in the eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some, flesh red is born, and it is over-laid so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the sides before and it is assembled like a rose of balustrade.
But the operation in it is that the patient places his head in the low place; and then opens the eyes of that one and collect all that flesh with convenient threads to water, and hold water with a forceps or with a basket; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until all is finished with the scissors, and guard yourself of the eye that you do not damage it with the course of your operation.
And let your incision be with which you incise those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which is collected asclepius according to what will come the form of it in this chapter.
Therefore, as the incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the eye with salt triturated, or distill in it cedar wood powder and similar to it of the corrosive medicines, and put on the eye before a bandage of linen with album of egg until it is assured of abscess caut.
And if there remain any cause of albuginea and it is dominated by a dangerous abscess, and you fear abscess caut, then let the eye and cure that abscess with water that reduces that abscess, and then repeat over it with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which happens in the eye of this kind.
But however you cover that all cure of the eye steel by natural way or by accidental way, operate with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is suffering that operation.
Chapter xviii.
Of the collection of pus in the groin.
Pus veins are seen, which are swollen on the groin and forbidden to the clothing its operation, and it dilates the groin with length of days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the groin in which is pus is strong and in it there is no other ailment that pus, then you collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a bandage or with two according to your prudence; and let that bandage be of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two bandages gradually in one body according to this form:
And then they are collected those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and abstergeys the blood hour by hour, while those veins are being remaugulated from the groin and are being rolled up.
And guard yourself that you do not lead the groin with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation in the afternoon before the sun, and be firm in your operation that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you will have finished, then you distill in the groin chief green or red for that with its acuity corrodes that which is remaugulated from the pus.
But if that is not possible for you collect everything in that hour, then you plaster everything with that which yields the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is sedated and that it is assured of a caut apostema.
And then repeat over it according to the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter xix.
Of the reduction of arizati to the nose.
When you cure arisati with cautery or with acute medicine according to what is preceded the narration of it and it is not healed, then it is not engendered in it but that you make on the abscess of you the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the power until it is uncovered the bone.
And therefore cum is uncovered the bone and sees in it corruption or blackness, then you root it with a instrument of which this is the form:
And it is called aspre cap, and it is made of iron, and it is the cap rounded as to grasp the one which is made pointed by the point of a file or aliskalfati by subtle point (as it is in the following form).
And pause that upon the corrupted place of the bone, and then revolves that between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped.
And that be done several times, and then restores the place with exsiccative and styptic causes.
Therefore if the place is consolidated and there is born good flesh in it and is abscindit the body of the sania and remains for forty days, and it is not renewed and it is not apostemat and it does not happen in it accident, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is not in it engendered but reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover of second bone with iron or with acute medicine, and cum sira uncovered the bone, then you take tribo according to this form:
Let the extremity of it iron be triangular, and the shaft of it be prime attenuated into the extremity as it sometimes is so.
And then pause that upon the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little of the groin, and then revolve your hand with the tribo until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient for as soon as it finds wind issuing from it when you the his hand.
Therefore then restore the place with styptic and exsiccant medicines as you have been taught.
Therefore, as the flesh grows and the place is endured, then the matter which effused to the foreparts returns to the nose, therefore that is pus lighter upon the patient.
Chapter xx.
Of the reduction of the eminence of the groin.
When the groin emines with its totality and it does not happen in the garment harm nor diminution, then cove that relaxes the patient, and then that you follow, and then that you pause windy in the neck its scarification and suck for good succaccio; and then pause upon the groin liniment the one which is made of acatra and aloe and enses and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster upon the groin with motz polvils.
And the manner of the polvils is that you take cloths of lions motz, and each cloth be duplicated in four pleats; and make of those motz.
And then pause those one upon the other according to the quantity of which the groin has need. And then strengthen upon those with hard cloth with strong strictura; and iterate the ventosas with succio ses scarification; and then oust the ventosas and leave the groin streyt the day and the night.
But if meanwhile the ligament is softened, then cove that it be mot streyt.
And then oust the ligament about the day and the night as we have said.
And if you see the hernia already reduced, it is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the constriction and the leeches until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of the incision of the eminence of the tunic uvea.
When there is a rupture in the tunic uvea, and it is prominent and proceeds out from the eyelids like a grain of rasim, and the shape of a man is formed by it, and you want to cut it, then the operation in it is as we have recounted, that you introduce the needle into the root of the uvea from the part below in the part above, and then put the other needle which has a double thread from the part of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then cut the place of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that movement.
And then extract the needle and place it over the wool soaked in egg white and leave it until the thread falls into the uvea.
And then cure the wound with water that comforts it until the plague is healed.
And sometimes, in addition to all parts with a circle of cloth around the wound, adjust the prominent eminence, and then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes to the edge of the wound, and run the albuminous moisture, and descend the wound and enter quickly.
And then strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of alconati.
This illness which is called alconati is nothing but a swelling which is adjusted in the wound resembling descending water and it is not that.
But the manner of working in it is that you make the patient lie on the saddle arranged and straight, and then take its head in your hands of two parts and hold it so that you see the swelling coming to the parts below, and then let it dry and not descend, and stay the light, and the patient sees the causes as he sees.
And if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared the descent of the swelling with the water that we have said, then make the patient lie between your hands and then take a subtle spatula and finish it on that over the panniculus, carefully the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea tunic in the crown (in the place void), until the swelling is expelled.
Therefore, as it is expelled, then you distill into the wound water cauda in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey.
And then cure it with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
Of the cure of the descending water from the wound.
We have already said the kinds of water in the division and which ones it is convenient to pierce with a sermo, declaring, then according to the health.
Now, it is necessary that you make the patient lie between your hands on a crate and tie his wound shut, tightening it.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his wound if the wound in which is the water is the left one; or with your right hand, if the wound is the right one.
And then with your right hand take the almond, if the wound is left; or with your left hand, if the wound is right.
And then place the end of the almond near the crown for the thickness of the ray in the album of the wound from the part of the lower lacrimal, and then press the almond with virtue and roll your hand with it.
And then penetrate into the album of the wound and feel that the almond has already arrived at the void cause.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of the almond to the edge is the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the wound; because you will see with that pupil the vision of the wound through the clarity of the cornea tunic.
And then place the almond into the place where is the water, and then you throw it down once, then another, and therefore if the water descends quickly, then wet the wound with water over which he has his sight quickly, and almond in his wound.
And then rest for a little; therefore if the water has descended, then you remove that other time before the almond is thrown.
And therefore when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the almond with ease, and roll it with your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a little clear salt of gemma and with that wash the wound carefully; and then place outside the wound cotton or stopper or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white and lick the wound with water.
But now in those who are of our time place on that commi trissat with egg white.
And if you do not obey your almond to the entrance of the wound because of its hardness — because it is some of the men whose wound is very hard — then it is necessary that you take the spatula which is called alberid of which this is the form:
And therefore pierce with that that juncture, and do not end your hand in the track, and it is not if you do not make a way for the almond to a subtle place.
And then introduce the almond according to what we have said.
And you must complete the work, have the patient prepared to sleep comfortably in a dark room, where he sleeps on his back, and be prohibited from all movement.
And keep him in nature so that his nature is cleansed, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
And bind him according to his disposition on the third day.
And then unbind him in that dark room and expose him to the fresh air, and make him see some causes, and then return the bandage on the seventh day.
And do not allow him to do this during the hours of healing or as soon as the infusion. You must however abstain from this because the water can leak slightly through a great and vehement regard.
But if an abscess occurs, then you must unbind the wound before the seventh day, and rectify it with water that will cause the abscess to drain.
Then you unbind his sight and place a cloth over his face so that his movement is regulated, leaving him in the dark room for several days.
And then gradually remove him from that room and converse with him about his causes.
And know that in alchemy the disciple is not excused from vision some times, and then you should be bold about the operation.
And we have now arrived at some of those who are in the Artach, and some say that they make fire in the Ayrac magdaam perforated with which the water is sucked.
But however, I have not seen any in our land who has perfected water, nor is water mentioned in some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is novel.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that it may be on those who ignore those:
And they are made of copper or iron properly, and their extremities are with this triangular subtlety, the acute extremity thus as it is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose various fleshy growths appear, of which some are caused by a thing resembling a scorpion of small weight, or a polyp; and this ailment is called a polyp because it resembles that weight represented. And of this flesh is cancerous, pale, of a dark color; and of this flesh is the lion no of a dark color.
Therefore, in that which is in these fleshy growths lion not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must have the patient sit between your hands and put in the sunlight, and dry his nostrils, and pick your own on those flesh. And then extract that to the outside parts, and then incise that which you have comprehended of those with a sharp, subtle spatula from one side, so that you know that all the flesh has already been removed; if any cause of which the excision is possible remains of it, then you root that with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that nothing of it remains. But if the bleeding should worsen or an abscess occurs, then you pause to him what you must; or if it is of the malignant abscesses, then you cut and cauterize that so that it may be excised, and all the cavities are removed.
And then be careful to put in the nose after the incision a mixture of wine and water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that deep within it is flesh wound in the pus that soars bones of the nose to which the excision has not reached.
Therefore, then you must introduce a needle of lead into which there is some thickness, and sew in it small nuts, and place between each nut the quantity of the finger or less, and engage the patient and introduce one extremity of the needle into the nose with the ray or with another cause which is possible to it.
And as soon as that is done, that it may have its odor reach into the channels of the nose, and be spit onto his throat, for many times the children in schools do this action, and it is easier cause to him who wants to do it.
And then place the two extremities of the needle, one extremity that sticks out over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a lock of flesh with the nuts that are in the needle, and do this so that you know that the flesh is already with the nuts of the needle.
And then extract the needle, and place in the nose after the abstraction of blood a poultice, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that is remaining of the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
But if you find any cure that requires it, use that.
And this is the form of the instrument a capipurge maker with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make it of silver or copper, which is similar to a small open lamp, as a small conch, and the meat similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a tube, and the cannula of the instrument to be used for purging should be flat, uncovered; to which handle at the back of him, with which you hold that when you warm in him oil or water that you want of the suckable causes.
Chapter XXV.
Of the ills of the nose in the extremities.
Many times the ailment of the nose in the extremities is magnified and mentioned on certain days when it is not even worth looking at.
And for that reason, you should investigate that at the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all of it. And then place on the spot a cautery or medicine that is burning, which was in the place of it.
But if its incision is delayed until it is magnified, then consider if it is hardened, dry, of a dark color and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron for it is a foul abscess; for many times to him who incisions this abscess, great malice comes upon him who had it.
And if the abscess is of a light touch and not of a dark color, and sometimes when incisions is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and incision it without fear, and cure the spot with water that is warm and compresses until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of the suturing of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by likenesses.
Know that when accidents of dissolution of continuity occur in one of these cartilages, few confer in that operation unless in some men.
Therefore, when it is necessary to do so, consider if it is fresh plague with its blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and then care for it until it is healed.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then you should excise each part of its exposed edge until blood comes out. And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen them, and over the powder, place a piece of diaphano plaster, or some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave this tied for two or three days, and then untie it and change the plaster and leave it until the threads are by themselves abscinditz, and then care with a rinse until it is healed.
But the manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you have been taught.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts of the mouth.
Many times there must be in the mouths of men in the parts of their lips some abscesses hard like fat of worms, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you should convert the lips and make incisions each one of those hardnesses from all sides, and then the abscess, fill the place with powdered sage until the blood is restrained, and then wash it with vinegar and cure the place with water that is astringent, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Greatly often there is on the gum flesh adjusted, which the ancients called an albulus, therefore, you should suspend that with tweezers or what you have with the forceps and incision that, you should remove its root, and let the blood run.
And then place on the spot powdered sage or other astringent or drying powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incision that secondarily, and cauterize that, for the cautery will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the reason of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the parts of the mouth and of the front and between the gums are adjusted rough, jagged, and some times black scabs, and are made yellowish or green as the gums are affected by this corruption and the teeth become jagged.
And therefore, you should make the patient sit between your hands and place the head of him in your lap, and scrape the teeth where those scabs and causes appear like sand until none of them remain, and this do of the blackness and the yellowishness and of the others until they are modified.
Therefore, if that is what is in the beginning of the root, it is good; and if not, then you repeat the root over those the next day and the second and the third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have need of various forms and figures of mortars according to how it is prepared for your operation. And because the razors which the tooth is razored from the root are different from the razors which are razored between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you shall prepare as you shall see forthwith:
Chapter .xxx.
Of the eradication of teeth.
Know that you cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and take your time in the eradication of it, for there is no cause that should supplant the healing of it when it is eradicated, for it is substance sublimated within that the excuse in the eradication of it.
But know when the patient is forced to have that tooth eradicated, that firmly you must certify which tooth is the painful one, for often the pain deceives the patient and makes him think it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this by the operation of the barbers.
Therefore, as you must certify which tooth is the painful one, and that you know well, then know that you must scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gum of all parts, and then move that with your fingers, or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that you loosen it.
And then, with a strong hold, grasp it firmly with your fingers or with a strong grip, and place the head of the patient between your teeth that you well hold so that it does not hurt him, and then pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and put that one below it from all parts with facility and exert the removal of it as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then know that you must compress with cloth that broken piece and tighten that with the extremity of a subtle ray so that it is not broken in the hour of your constriction upon it with your fingers.
And know that you must operate exquisitely with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard much your strength that you do not break that and remain a part of it, and return upon the patient with malice that is greater than the first pain of it.
And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their fisting and audacity over the eradication of theirs, because they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they make come upon the men maladies great ones which are more difficult to be extracted, and the roots of them remaugulated all, or some of those, or what you extract that with some bones of the mandible as many times as we have testified.
And after the eradication of it, the mouth be washed with wine caut or wine agre with salt.
And if it should flow of blood thereby, as many times it should, then take some quantity of zegi and sprinkle it upon the wound, and if you do not confer that zegi, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and subtle fingers with which the tooth is pulled at the beginning should be of long extremity, of short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you must operate with them.
And be so as sometimes of thick handle so that when you tighten with them they are not bent, be short extremities.
And be made of Indian iron, descentment made of straight extremities, and in the extremities of those be teeth of which some introne in the others and tighten by strong constriction descent, and some times the extremities of those be the form of the beak of a bird which has the name ciconia, so it is guanta, and are of strong constriction.
Chapter .xxx i.
Of the eradication of teeth and of the extraction of the bones of the mandibulas broken.
When you must the eradication of a tooth which is broken remain some cause, then know that you must put upon the place a poultice with border for a day or for two until the place be mollified; and then introduce some algesti or fingers the extremities of which are assembled to the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
The extremities of them be made from the root as if it were a lime or an awl.
And if you do not obey to your assignment with these forceps or fingers, then know that you must cave upon the root and scrape all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has the name atali, so it is a small lever of which the form is this:
And be of short extremity thick a little, and not be embedded so that it is not broken.
Therefore, if by this the root is forgotten, well is it; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is of triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and of more subtle extremity.
And already so helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form near the following: And other instruments which I will describe in the scraping of teeth; for the help is done with this instrument which is assembled to a large onion, and this is the shape:
Of the triangular, twisted or short extremity, which is some thickness, and not enclosed so that it is not twisted.
And another thing you know that the instruments of the teeth are moving and similarly the other instruments.
But the wise and subtle artificer in the art, finds for himself according to what to him signifies the operation and the diverse ailments; for they are of the ailments to which the ancients did not say nor placed proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is twisted, or if you can, then it is cured on that in its place with what is convenient to it of the instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help gives with the gesture of which this is the shape:
And if there is any thickness little by little, and it is inserted or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is set; and then restore the place with medicines convenient to that.
But if in the bone is a small puncture, then root that of that puncture and of its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of the prominent teeth above the others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course, for those the shape is gone, and mostly when it happens to women, and mostly to the venerable old ladies; therefore, since you consider: if a tooth is nothing near another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or liniment of it, then root that; but that it is not annexed to another tooth, then you incise that with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to a pig's snout, and it is made of Indian iron of a sharp moving extremity.
And let your incision be with which you incise that in too many days for the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not damaged another of the teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed to filing, then file that with a file of Indian iron of which this is the shape:
And let it all be of Indian iron and the margin well-made; and be of small pointed points as a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth be filed little by little in many days with facility, so that no other tooth is damaged and broken. And then line that at the end, and root that with scalpels.
And if the tooth of which one part is twisted and it is hurting the tongue, then when you file that until the sharpness of that fraction is stayed and smoothed, and it is filled so that the tongue does not hurt it and the word does not corrupt.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the restoration of damaged teeth with a filling of gold or silver.
When accidents happen to the teeth in front with concussion and removal by percussion or by fall, and the patient cannot strengthen on what it manages, and you have cured that with styptic medicines, and it has not been of any use your cure, then for so that it does not break is made in those that are strengthened with a filling of gold and not of silver, because silver becomes green and soon you can see it after a few days, but gold at no time is changed.
And let the filling be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is that you take the filling and take the double of it between two healthy teeth, and then that you increase with two tortuosities of the filling between two damaged ones, or if one or many, until the filling reaches the healthy tooth of the other side. And then iterate the tamping within the part of which you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and skill so that it is not damaged.
And let your squeezing with which you strengthen the filling be of the roots of the teeth that it does not escape.
And then incise the extremities of the superfluous filling with forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place with gesture, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then smooth that as tightly as a Roman.
But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another filling in such a manner in all its time.
And this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the rectification of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as well as these tied:
And when it is done that a tooth or two are returned to their places after the fall of each one, and they are grown back as we have recounted, and that they are remaugged.
And this is done only by good artificers and wise men.
And sometimes it is fitted some cause of the bones of the cow, and it is made of them as the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and it is strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves with that for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which comes from under the tongue sometimes is natural with which man is born, or accidental and caused by a plague which is already consolidated.
And the operation in it is that men open the mouth of the patient, his head existing in the tieu se; and elevates his tongue, and then incisions that ligament nerve according to the latitude within which the tongue is freed from its recess.
But if in that there is some hardness or knot, and this is due to the consolidation of plague, then you throw oil and split that by the latitude within which you have incised the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And guard yourself that no fissure is made in the skin of the flesh and that you split here the artery and blood comes.
And then wash the vestiges of the incision with water or with wine or with warm water; and then place the tongue in the mouth; so it is the way which holds the patient's tongue in each night so that it is not consolidated again.
But if blood flows, place on the location vitriol trissat; but if the blood flows, then cauterize the location with a cautery of tin, which is suitable for this. And this cure with the other causes within which it is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the extraction of a ranula from under the tongue.
Sometimes an abscess occurs under the tongue, resembling a small lump, which prohibits the tongue from its natural operation; and often it is magnified within which the mouth is filled.
And the operation in it is that men open the mouth of the patient, seeing in front of the sun and considers the abscess.
And if you see it of dark color or of black, hard, to which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that because it is gangrenous.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put the oil in it, and incisions it with a subtle spatula, and incisions it from all parts; and if blood comes to you during the hour of your operation, then you place above the zegi trissat, that is vitriol, within which the blood is restrained.
And then return to your work within which you had treated it with compliment of it, within which it is washed with wine and salt; and cure this with the other cure with water within which it is healed.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of the extraction of an abscess of the ears and of that which is nothing in the throat and of the other abscesses.
When in the throat it hurts, so are the glands which are assembled with a lump, which sometimes occur outside and are called boils, which when you cure them with water as we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; let it rest within which it is matured, and then either you will remove it, or it will burst by itself.
And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of it is subtle, then that is the one that should be incised.
And the operation in it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess of it has already rested with a complete rest or if it is diminished with any diminution; and then do so that the patient stands before the sun, and his head be in the tieu se, and open the mouth of him, and the servant takes between his hands, pressing the tongue of him from below with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it is made of silver or of brass, and it is subtle like a knife.
Therefore, as you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and gaze upon that with your eyesight, then take oil and put it in the wound, and pull that to the parts outside as much as you can. Other water that you pull some cause from the tunics, and then incision that with the instrument of which this is the form:
Other water that you pull some cause from the tunics, and then incision that with the instrument of which this is the form: And it is assembled like forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the straight of the other, very sharp, the one which is of iron indi embedded.
But if this instrument is not present to you, then incision that with a spatula of which this is the form of it: And it is sharp on one part, not sharp on the other part.
And since you have incised one well, incision the other according to this same manner of incision, and then the incision the patient wash with warm water
But if there is a flow of blood, wash with water of decoction of the bark of millefolium or of myrtle leaf and similar to those of the stiptic causes within which the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure this within which it is healed.
And sometimes there are born in the throat other abscesses other than those boils, and incision those according to what I have said in the incision of two wells equally.
And I had already treated a woman of an abscess which was located in the throat of her, which abscess had a brownish color, of little feeling, which had already closed the throat of her, and the woman breathed with tight meat, and had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and she had already arrived at death if it had not been for a day or two.
And the abscess had already grown so much that it had two openings through which it exited.
Therefore, I treated her fistularly and stayed in one of the openings, and I pulled out that one, and a large portion of it was thrown out of it, and then I incised that one where it understood from the other opening, and then I opened the mouth of it, and I compressed its tongue, and then I stayed the opening in that abscess.
And then I abscised a large portion of it, and it did not flow from it except a little blood. Therefore, the throat of that woman was absolutely closed, and she began to drink water immediately, and then I ate food, so I did not stop inciding that abscess many times for a long time, and abscesses succeeded in place of that one, which incision entered while it was prolonged.
Therefore, I made a needle and cauterized the throat of her, so as to add nothing more; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done to her from then on.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of incision of a boil when it is abscesses.
When catarr arises in the boil, and it is abscesses and is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the part below thick and round, and then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and it does not compare its cure, and it is seen many times that the abscess cauterized is already gone from it and it is subtle, then you should incisions that which is aggregated round; and if it is to that length, and it is bloody, of brownish color or black, and it is not felt in it, then you should attempt the incision of it, because in that there is fear over the patient.
And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you should make the patient lie down and press the tongue of him with an instrument of which you process its form, and then place the opening in the navel, and pull that down and incise it with one of the two instruments which are said in the incision of two wells.
And you should not incise that one but that which is adjusted over the natural term its addition, because if you incise it more, you will lead to its speaking.
And after the incision, use that which has been recommended in the incision of two wells, and cure that until it is healed.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision of it, then you should use a needle in the cauterization of it its fear, and the manner of the cautery in it is nothing but with sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient in your hand, and then press the tongue of him with the instrument which we have said, and then take from the water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and compare it with that living cause, and place that one not thick nor subtle, and from that one fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the shape:
Let the extramitat of its concavity in which the medicine is placed be as the concavity of a spoon of ray, and place the instrument with the medicine on the boil, and the patient yawns on his side so that saliva or mucus of the mouth of that one flows through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend from that one for any cause over the throat of him and that it leads to that.
And then with your hand on the medicine, and express that on the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see that one being darkened and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cotton and envelop that over the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and introduce the ray with the cotton into a tube of about, until the cotton adheres in that tube, and do this as many times as you can achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then remove that one as it dries and falls about three days or four.
And if you were to say that you repeat the medicine, repeat that one, and after the cauterization abstergeys in the circuit of the uvula with cotton immersed in border, and modify with that which is in the circuit of it of the medicine, and be washed with cold water, and be cured for the moment with embrocation, and dedicate with gargles until it is healed.
And this kind of cure is more saving than incision and more long of fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with that which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with fumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origan, rue, siccated arabic, chamomile, borage and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in an olla, and be submerged with hot water, and boil; and the olla be well washed with decent lut, and be in the middle of the olla a hole, on which be placed an instrument concavity of ram according to this manner; be made of silver or of ram.
And the extremity is introduced into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula above the palate, until the uvula is moved and obscured.
And then iterate over those moved veins until it is dry, and guard yourself that you do not do this cure at the beginning of the emergence of abscesses, because it would too much tighten in the abscess, and in the case that you do this, you must declare the abscess of it caut.
But if this instrument is not present to you, then take a cane and compose in the extremity of it a hood of wood, so that the mouth of the patient be covered, because the hood of wood prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good with health.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat and of the other causes.
Many veins adhere in the throat or a thorn of flesh or any other cause.
Therefore, it is necessary that you extract what of those appears, on which you cast the sight, because you press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it is declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is to you hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because a strong force the cause annexed the throat is thrown-up by vomit; or that the patient swallows a piece of bread or a root of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or press a piece of dry sea sponge, and tie it tightly with thread, and then the patient swallows it, because it comes to the place in which the thorns and are extracted, then it is thrown-up. And more, take an eel and tie it with thread, and its end is placed and its tail is extracted; or take a worm and suck its head and suck its tail.
But if it is not thrown-up with those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it is thicker than a small ray, and in the extremity of it is concavity which you introduce into its throat with ease.
And hold its head elevated upwards, and guard yourself that the touching of its bone of the throat, so that it is elongated to its body and with that which pushes the bone or the thorn, or that the physician with his hand.
But however, that the patient that is introduced is better, for his science of the place of the cause annexed and pushes in down, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is to him prepared before it is thrown-up.
Chapter .xxxix.
Of the extraction of bloodsucker annexed to the throat.
When it is medicated bloodsucker with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and does not confer, consider then in the throat of the patient to the sun, because you have compressed the tongue of it with the instrument which to you we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the bloodsucker, extract it with a small pin or with a subtle gesture decently.
And if it is not to you possible to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and introduce that into the throat of the patient, and then place in the concavity of the cannula a burning iron, and do this as many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and is removed from the throat) and abstain the patient all day of water.
And then press a vessel full of cold water, and work the mouth of it in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow of that any cause and evil the water one hour after another with its hand, because the bloodsucker as soon as it feels the water catz.
But if it is not thrown-up with what we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with cymice or with asafoetida by the instrument which we have recommended in the subfumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so in that it falls.
And it is another way of operation in the subfumigation of that, is that you take a bowl in which there are burning embers and the bowl is covered with a cover in the middle of which there is a hole, and it is composed in that hole the extremity of the instrument; and then let go downwards the subfumigation; and place the patient his mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the subfumigation is not thrown-up until you know that the subfumigation has arrived at the bloodsucker, because the bloodsucker as soon as it falls.
And if it does not catch, then you iterate the subfumigation many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and eat causes salty and alhs, and do not drink water, and thus necessary is that with this regimen it be thrown-up.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker of the throat is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, except that in it there is some curvature: which is placed in the throat, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is gaunt, in which it is sharpened with a file, so that, when compressing any cause, that does not leave it.
Chapter .xl.
In which is the sum of the sermon in the opening of abscesses and in their section.
Abscesses are special sores, of many kinds, according to what we remember of them, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in their perforation and section by two ways, of which one is by the species of abscesses in themselves; and by what we understand of the humidities.
And the second way is according to the places where they occur in the body, for the abscess that occurs in the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the buttock; and the abscess in the fleshy place is different from the abscess that occurs in the joint; and to each of them is its own treatment by operation.
And more than abscesses there are some that ought not to be perforated but rather when the pus is ripe in them or the completion of them.
There are other abscesses that ought to be drained when they are ripe, and not when they are fully matured according to their completion, just as abscesses that are near the joints, for when an abscess occurs near a joint, its being is prolonged until it can be drained, and then it is often corrupted the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it causes contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is fully ripe, it will spread to the principal member; or it is near the buttock, therefore perforate it before it is ripe; and you ought not to perforate it crude, of non-completed digestion, but the one that is near the buttock, so that you can prevent the protrusion of it and its elongation to the parts behind the buttock, and a fistula is made, or that it is done in the term of it that it is not healed. But more than that, you ought to know the hour of the perforation of the abscess, and thus it is when it is ripe.
And you ought to know that it is ripe when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, and according to the diminution of the heat and of the pulse, and the acuteness of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And that you ought to know the perforation to be done in the place pus after the abscess and pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
And the perforation always be done along the length of the flesh or of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or of the feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, lastly, in all places equal in which there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use of perforation according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is better that you let the perforation of it until it is confirmed the digestion of it according to completion, as we have said; for if you perforate that before it is ripe, it is prolonged the course of the pus of it and of much filth, and often the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it.
But some abscesses are perforated according to the width of the flesh or of the body, according to the necessity, or according to what the member requires.
And you ought to administer a small perforation, and in large abscesses a large perforation and many sections according to the diversity of the greatness of the abscesses.
And others are of abscesses in which the incision ought to be concave and be incised, when it is done so that bread is made and it is done in a term that it already follows, just as the one that occurs in trops of boils and buboes.
And of those are those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those is the one in which it is incised as the figure of a myrtle leaf, just as the abscesses of the angles.
And of them are those in which a round incision and a lunar incision, and similar to those are administered.
But that one in which there is no such as their abscesses are superficial, you ought to perforate that with a superficial perforation, or flat only.
And you ought when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, that you perforate it and do not take that you extract all the pus in that hour; have extracted from it one part, and then close the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and then do this many times according to gradation until it is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is of a weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the egress of the pus, and often the patient dies, and you operate on them.
And guard this chapter with great care, and in the way you perforate these abscesses, you ought to abstain from the plagues and consider therefore if the plague of the abscess is few, or is a flat section, then you administer the poultices of it or of a counter-poultice; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you ought to put a piece of cloth in each tract until they come together.
And if in the abscess is incised a part of the incision or has concaved it in the circuit, then you ought to cover it with old cloth or with a thread made of linen of it, as when you have treated poultices or dressings, its moisture; and strengthen that in the third day; and then process this and cure it with what is due of the dressings until it is healed.
But if blood flows during the operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar to which you have placed a cloth, and place that over the area of the blood flow many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer regimen and cure as I have recommended in many places in this book and elsewhere.
But if it is in winter, and the location of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you must enfund pulvils in wine and oil caut, and place those on the area.
And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all that be cold until the third day, as we have said, and then you must open the abscess and cleanse it and administer in its care what is appropriate until it is healed.
And thus is what is necessary of the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said of all abscesses in what manner is the way of its cure by chapters individually.
Chapter .xli.
Of the section of abscesses that come in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck small abscesses, and so of kinds of nodes which contain tunicas that are to their making; and the kinds of them are many.
And of them are pimples, and of those are those which contain humidity similar to lime. And of those are those which contain humidity similar to powder, and resembling to them; and of those are those which are stony, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must the exterior of those does not make contrary artery.
And the operation in section of those is that you probe those with an instrument the form of which comes near thus, the which is called entromes, until you know that it contains.
Because if that which contains is humidity, then you split that with a section according to the length by superficial section according to this form:
And begins in the section of the line of .B. within to the line of .G. Therefore, as the humidity is evacuated, then you excoriate that skin that contains that humidity, and do not leave of that any cause of all, because troops many times returns, if there remain of that any cause.
And then you submerge the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with that the wound and leave it in until the next day, because with that you corrode all that is rotten of that skin.
And then repeat on that wound with Egyptian ointment second and third times if you need it, until you trust that there is no rotten any cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise that according to this form: with a section having the form of a cross, and get oncis between two lips of the section and scrape that from all parts, and exert your virtue in extraction of the tunic which contains that.
But if your artery makes contrariety, then do what I have told you first.
And similarly do in the stony abscess of section and cure according to what I have told you; and section over stony abscess is easier, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
And sometimes there are some of these abscesses which are in the head in some men with which of all there is no humidity; the cause of which is because I incised upon an abscess in the head of an old woman and retrieved the abscess as if it were a deaf, rough, white one, which could not be drunk, and if anyone was with that struck, it would plague him.
But in the other abscesses accidents in the head other this is not this chapter, as the abscesses that come to the heads of children and you have the roots of the ears, but the section of all these is superficial.
And pause the perforation of those from the part lower of them so that the body be relieved of the sania to the parts lower.
And then cure those with what is appropriate to that cure.
Chapter .xlii.
Of the section of scrophulas which happen in the neck.
Many times these abscesses develop in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they happen in the other parts of the body.
And those that happen in the neck, and so many that are generated among them, and all scrofula of those is within its proper tunic, and as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
And the kinds of these scrophulas are many, because of those some are stony, and of those some contain humidities, and of those are malignant those which do not obey to cure.
Therefore in that which you see of good disposition in the Touch, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the neck, and is mauguda to all parts, and is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not pre-occupied, then you must incise that with superficial siccio from the part below to the part above of the body of the line of .G. within the line of .B., and scrape that from all parts, and extend the lips of the neck with onci, or with many oncis if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more caution that the vein or nerve be not incised.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, that it does not wound your hand in cutting, or that it disturbs the patient, and that you cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from your operation, then you would pause in the wound, and put vitriol or other powders in it, which cause the flow of blood, and tighten the wound, and leave that within which the sharpness of the abscess rests, and the wound is softened, and begins to be pus-filled. When the blood is cut.
Therefore, return to your operation while you have completed it.
And then inquire with your little finger if there is any cause of the other small abscesses, therefore cut those and cleanse them.
And if it is at the root of the large abscess, cover it then that you do not cut that abscess from its root. Cover it then with a strong double cloth and let it fall by itself, so that it does not harm itself.
And then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that.
And if you cut that abscess entirely, then cover it so that you adjust the two lips of the wound and sew them so quickly that there is no remaining superfluity.
But if you see that there is superfluity due to the greatness of the abscess, cover it so that you understand to cut the root of it, and extract it and administer suture and what is said.
And those of the abscesses that contain humidity, perforate it with a superficial perforation where you see the place of maturation of it, and pause the perforation of that which seizes the pus from the bottom of the body, as we have said.
And then administer perforation, poultices with ointments and similar things to those, so that it corrodes what is remaining of the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleansed, then you cure it with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
Of the section of the pile of the abscess that happens within the throat.
The ancients said this section in the throat, and no one in our land has done it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men having a squint, cover that the extraction of the throat be avoided, as for that it is not done well for that all the veins and major arteries of the body are here.
But in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the disease is not in the canal, cover to use the section of the throat to avoid the damage which is done by perforation.
Therefore, cover when we want this, that they cut the throat below three circles of the circles of the throat, or four with a small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles by quantity, that the section be in cartilage, not in the flesh, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the blood vessels of it are there.
And if the doctor is fearful, cover then that he extends the tendon of the throat with an incision, and then make the incision until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if he sees any cause of them.
And then cut the cartilage as we have recommended; and it is significant over the section of the canal by the flame which is of that which is emitted with that which is discolored of it and by the abscess of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, as the hour is renewed in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the tendon of the wound, and sew that alone if it is cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause the flesh to grow until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, exposure is not sino that you see that some of these abscesses have already opened the throat of the patient, and the patient has come into death, and the vein of it is separated, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound by any respiration, and be saved from death.
And for that reason command to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and the malice of it is for three days; and then command so the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and thrust it into his throat and cut with it a part of the canal of the lung, and I was called to the cure of him, and I returned the woman as it is mooed of the dead, and uncovered the wound and returned the blood which was emitted from the wound small.
Therefore, I was confessed that she had not cut a vein nor guidegi, and the wind was emitted from the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
And no harm came to the servant if not for a rawness in the voice, and after some days returned to improvement of his dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epilepsy there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the incision over the abscess which happens in the throat outside, and is called a hernia of the throat.
This abscess called a hernia of the throat is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it moves in women.
And it is according to two manners, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one it is not a matter of curing.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that is made by a blockage of an artery, and in that one there is fear. And no cove that it be presumed to him as iron, but in that one which is small. And you probe that one and investigate it with the finger, and if you find that it resembles a fatty node, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise it as you would the nodes, and extract it with what contains it from the skin and bursa; and if not, then you scrutinize its whole being, and then cure the area with what is necessary for healing before it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of the incision of the species of nodes.
Of nodes there are many species and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
And I want to recount thus the difference between a node and an excrescence as if there were doubt.
Therefore I say that in an excrescence there is heat and fever and violent pain until the boiling of the superfluity subsides; and it is complicated by putrefaction that at that time the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But in a node there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that hard lump which is in the sac properly.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a cheese and is made so as a vessel, whether it is larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, whether they are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, that you explore it and inquire about it at the beginning with the instrument which is called an intromes, according to what will come its form in the chapter which is next to this.
And the manner of inquiry of abscesses and of all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid place which you find in the abscess, and you will revolve your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the core.
And then finally your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and you extract the intromes and consider what is emitted in the trace of it.
And if the humidity is flowing out, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial incision according to what I have said in the other abscesses.
And if from the trace of the intromes there is no humidity, then you know that it is fatty.
And cut over it with an incision having the form of a cross according to this form: as you have been taught, and suspend it with tweezers, and excise the core from every part with ease, and guard the skin or sac, if you can, over it and extract that pus with the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times it is necessary to do so, and then you extract it with pieces until there is no cause of it remaining.
For if from it there remains any cause, little or much, the node returns according to the most.
And if you see that from it remains any small part, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place on top of it a cautery and cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you sew the two lips of it and cure it with what is necessary for healing.
But if a pulsating vein is against it, or not pulsating, then you cut and cauterize the place of zig-zag that is vitriol and leave that straight for two or three days until you can stitch the wound and that the boiling of the blood has subsided; and then return to incise what is broken from the node.
Chapter XLVI.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary in incision and perforation.
Of those there are the forms of the intromes, and they are of three species, of which one is large, and of those one is medium, and of those one is small.
The form of the large introme is this:
The form of the small introme is this:
They are made of iron, of lead, of extremities that are decently rounded, so that they fit the entrance into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the probes, and they are called probes, and one of those is called a berid.
And there are three kinds, for some are large, medium, and small.
The form of the large one, the form of it:
The form of the medium one, the form of it:
The form of the small one, the form of it:
It is convenient that they be for those abscesses and fistulas and buboes so that among those are of the bones and of other causes.
And they are made round, large, like needles, as well as large stitches with which the wounds are sewn, and they are made of citric metal, or of lead or of iron, or of silver, And the best are when they are made of citric metal.
And they are made the instruments of black feather, the ones that are agreed upon that for those ones be openings the fistulas in the concavity of which are reflections, that be reflected with their lightness with those reflections.
And they are of three species, for some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its stricture.
Form of the large lead instrument:
Form of the medium lead instrument:
Form of the small lead instrument:
The forms of the probes are of many species, for some of them are simple, to which there is only one curvature, and they are of three species: large, small and medium.
And of them are  curved probes, and they are of three species.
And of those are probes having two curvatures, and they are of three species.
And of them are having three curvatures, and they are of three species.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Form of a simple small probe, the form of it:
Form of a large probe having two curvatures: Form of a medium probe having two curvatures: Form of a small probe having two curvatures:
Form of a large probe having three curvatures:
Form of a medium probe having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three species, for some of them are large, medium, and small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of the medium scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which the incision is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but that the incision of the nodes be made carefully, for fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and so that the disease may be healed and tranquility be restored a little by the burning which destroys the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of spatulas, and they are of three species: large, medium and small, as you see.
They are made of metal and are similar to a ray with which and alcohol is made.
And it is in the lateral extremity pointed with a spatula hidden and in that one it runs to the inside and outside parts, when you want, as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden among the fingers during the perforation of abscesses and are not perceived by the patients, and they are of three species: large, medium and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of cupping glasses with which the flow of blood is removed, and they are of three species; large, medium and small; the forms of them:
They are made of citric metal, round with some length, and they are subtle.
And so that these species of cupping glasses, large, medium and small, be so that by those you remove the flow of blood with speed in need, and then when to you first it is not medicine.
However, do not use those to remove blood in every location of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places, such as in the folds of the arms and thighs, and in the folds of the breasts, and of the belly and of the groins, and similar to their fleshy, moist folds.
And sometimes these instruments are made of other small ones, similar to small scorpions, according to this form; by which the blood is removed when it is done by phlebotomy, or by incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Chapter .xlvii.
Of the cure of the nipples of men which are assembled from women.
Sometimes the nipples of some men are inflamed as they begin to be hairy, and then the nipples are inflamed and assembled like the nipples of women, and far away, pus.
And to him who has this, it is necessary to cut those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B. into the line of G., and then scrape the whole thickness, and then fill the wound with a medicament of carnation, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and take care of it until it is healed.
But if the nipple inclines to the sides and is softened by its magnitude as it should in women, then it is cut in two halves, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, of which each one contains the other, until that the major line contains the minor one according to this form of the line of B. and the line of G. And then scrape the groove which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said of the suture and the poultices, that which is necessary in the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not comply with the incision of this which is to be incised because of the restlessness of the patient, and because of the flow of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with a cloth submerged in corrosive wash and leave it until that corrodes which is the gray matter, and take care of it until it is healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
Of the perforation of abscesses that come from the nipple.
These abscesses that come from the nipple are of the species of scrophulas, hard, those which contain a skin that is sac.
And of those there are some that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G. to the line of B. And as everything is evacuated that is in the abscess of the healthy, then you fill it with old cloth and leave it until the next day.
And then the cloth is removed and it is cured with a convenient wash to it, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the species of nodes and of the scrophulas, then you divide it as we have said in the section about the scrophulas equally.
But if the wound is extended in such a way that it is a pockmark, then administer cauterization to it according to what we have said before.
Chapter .xlix.
Of the section of abscesses that occur because of an artery or vein.
When an artery is ruptured, and the groove that is above it is consolidated, then many times abscesses occur. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are by the artery or vein: because when the abscess is by artery it is long aggregated in the front of the body; and that when you pierce the abscess with your fingers, you feel in it a kind of stridor.
And that which is by vein is red around the manifest of the body.
And the section on this abscess is an error, and most of all in that which is from the armpits, and in the corners, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, therefore it is necessary that its cure with iron be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or in the head, it must be avoided.
But on that which is of them by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, divide in the groove a long section; and then open the section with hooks and then the artery, and deliver from the tunics until it is uncovered.
And then put on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which cause you to see in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then prick the place which is between the two ligaments with a spatula until there is all the blood that is in it, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer a cure in which it is engendered power until the ligaments fall; and take care of it with convenient washes to water until it is healed.
And if the abscess is by the section of a vein, then it is necessary that you have with your hand that which is possible of the abscess with the groove, and then introduce the needle from the place which you have had from your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract that from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a good ligament according to what I have told you in the ligament of the grape of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that they will extract the thread, then introduce the thread with that needle from all the abscess, by the incision of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle place of it until when it is issued that which is in it, then you cut the superfluity of the groove, and leave that which of it is tied.
And then place on it the powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with poultices and washes until it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess which happens by twisting of nerves.
Thus as abscesses happen in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses happen in the nerves when they are struck or happen by excessive work, and by similar means.
And it is made the most in the places of the auxiliary bones or the talus, or in every place where the joints are bad.
And it is a serious abscess, and it is assembled to the color of the other body, and in the major of its dispositions it is of its own and when it is tightened with violence, it feels in the patient a semblance of stupor.
And it is not abscesses joined in the front of the body, and for this it is left the chain, and it is bad to all parts and does not go to the parts ahead or behind.
Therefore those that are in the joints should not be filled with iron, because very quickly they will become inflamed.
But the one that is in the head or in the front, end the chain with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then take it with the forceps and cut it from the roots.
And if it is large, then you suspend it with an anchor, and excoriate it, and then close it; and adjust the plate with suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter .li.
Of the section of abscess which happens from a boil that happens to the belly.
And it happens to some men growths in the bellies of those and in other parts of the body of those, the ones that are called fungals for similarity to those with fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head of it is thick; and already the lips of those are converses, and it is of those that is small, and it is of those that is very magnified.
And I have already seen one, and in the belly of him were two parts which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white, of fine root.
And already the lips of those were turned inwards and were splitting, and humidity was running from it all the time.
Therefore I incised those and brought out in one of them a weight of about eighteen ounces. And the other about six ounces.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the boil is white, humid, of subtle root; then you should cut it with a spatula wide, and be in your presence cauterize in the fire, because many times the secretion of it is expelled a lot of blood; and if you see the blood, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient pale and fearful, guard yourself from incision with iron; but then take a leaden weight recently made, and strengthen it with that boil, the manner of which is that we have said; and leave it for two days.
And then adjust in the stricture of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead more and more in the boil, until it is cut and falls by itself its work.
But if the boil is of thick root, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and of terror, and more so in the one that is in the belly.
But possibly it is that you should incise the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure it until the wound is healed.
And guard yourself that you do not presume to incise those that are of dusky color, of little feeling, of light regard, because those are cancerous abscesses.
And I will come with a remembrance of cancer to that.
Chapter .lii.
Of the cure of the prominence of the umbilicus.
The prominence of the umbilicus is made by many causes; or by fissures of the fascia which is above the belly, and there comes out the web or intestine according to what it should be in the other ruptures; or by blood which flows from the vein or artery according to what is said before, or by contracted wind in it.
But if it is by fissure of the fascia and by the protrusion of the web, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is lion its pain, and then appears from various positions. And if it is by the egress of the intestine, then the situation of it with that which we have recounted, of more vehement diversity, and when you press it with your hands it is hidden, and then it returns; and very much is with it so, and it is magnified much by the introduction of bath and vehement work.
But if it is by humidity, then it is lion and is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it believed.
And if it is by blood, then with these signs appears the abscess to blackness declining.
But if it is by flesh nothing, then the abscess is serious, thick and hard, and it is placed according to a quantity.
But if it is by wind, then the touch of it is lion.
And the operation in it is that you consider then if the prominence of the umbilicus is by blood of artery, or of vein, or by wind; then you should be prohibited from the cure of it, because in that there is fear and terror as you have been taught in the chapter in which I have said the abscesses by artery and by vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the hernia or the fabric, then order the patient to hold his leg, and be standing extended; and then feel with your fingers around the entire navel, and then order him to lie between his hands on his back, and then surround it with a spatula broad around the navel on the spot which you have marked with the finger; and then extend the majority of the abscess to the upper parts with a large hook; and then tie it around with a strong thread or with a lead and the manner of tying decent.
And then cut the edge of the extended abscess over the ligament and introduce your finger into that incision and feel for the hernia; and if you have found it or kept it by the ligament, then you extract it and push the hernia to the sides of the belly.
And if you have found the fabric, then take it with a hook; and cut away the superfluities of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put in those two strong threads and introduce the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a manner of cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts on the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place until the stretched flesh can fall by itself; or cut it when it is subtle and can be, and then care for it with water that is customary of the ointments until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh nothing in it or by humidity, then order that you excavate the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or the humidity, which you find in it, and then care for it with water that is customary and that consolidates the place.
Chapter .liii.
Of the cure of cancer.
As we have said, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner is its cure with medicines, and that it is  avoidable in it the cure with iron because it is not ulcerated; and we have said cancer generated in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible the eradication of it, as of the cancer which is in the nipples or in the groin and their likeness of the limbs allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it is beginning small.
But when it is antiquated and is large, do not order to it, because I have not been able to heal from that ulcer nor have I seen another, nor that has come to it.
And the operation in it is when it is allocated as we have said, is that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black bile sometimes, and then bleed him, if a manifest repletion is found.
And then prepare the patient with the preparation in which he is located with the operation, and then prohibit in the tract hooks which order to it; and then concave from all parts with the good saw careful excavation until no remnant of the roots of it remains. And let the blood run, and do not cut it lightly, and express the places, and wipe away the thick blood all with your hand or with an instrument with which is at your disposal of the instruments.
But if to you makes contrariety of thick blood incision of vein or of artery, then cauterize that until the flow of the blood is ceased, and then care for it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .liv.
Of the cure of hydrops.
We have already recounted, in the division, of the species of hydrops of the water, and the signs of each species, of the cure of it with medicines.
And that one which is cured with iron is only the species of althitas alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanistres nor to the species of hypoarcha, because that is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of hydrops tympanistres with medicines and do not confer your medication, then consider, that if the patient already is achieved debility, or is with that other illness another hydrops, as if it is in his cough or body of belly and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not medicate him with iron, because fear is upon it.
But if you see the patient of exuberant virtue, and in him there is no other illness but hydrops so alone, and not a child nor old, then the manner of the operation of it is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister then expresses the belly of him with his hand, expelling the water to the side below the pubic bone, and then take a spatula spines according to this form:
be of two parts sharp long, of sharp extremity as a spatula; but however be in it some shortness little by little, so that in the operation with it you do not pass into the hernia, and that you lead it.
And then consider if the generation of hydrops is of part of the hernias, because then order that you with the section you stay away from the navel for the quantity of three digits to the sides below, in the right of him over the pubic bone.
But if the generation of hydrops is by illness of the liver, then your section be left of the navel for three digits.
And if the generation of him is by the measles, then his section shall be on the right side.
And do not make the incision on the side where the patient wants to lie, so that the superfluities do not flow to that place freely.
And then pierce with the instrument the whole bone, and then insert into that incision, and raise your hand with the spatula between the bone and the skin, and you exfoliate that; and if the quantity of a nail or thereabouts.
And then pierce the skin until the spatula reaches the desired location, and it is the place of the water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape: and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or brass or lead, to which in the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on the sides of it there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the end of it is made blunt according to the manner of a feather, as sometimes:
And at the end of it most sovereign is an armlet, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately rises over the instrument, therefore evacuates the water in the middle quantity, because if you evacuate more than that in the hour, very soon the patient will die by the resolution of his animal spirit, or you will bring him to the five-pi that is approaching death.
But evacuate from that according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what the dispositions of the patient signify to you from the virtue of its pulse and from the goodness of it.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is the cause because it is immediately retained by the bone which retains the hole that is on the skin of it and I recommend to you that you pierce that according to that manner.
And then repeat the instrument the other day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do water for some days with caution, and guard yourself from error so that there does not remain much water.
But if you fear about the patient, and let out a large quantity of water, then cure him with burial in hot sand, and bathe him in sweat, and in the sunlight wait for a long time; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the measles and the fig, approach the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in that which is preceding.
Chapter .lv.
Of the cure of children who are born with the places of the urine unpierced.
Sometimes some of the children are born from the womb of their mother and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it is straight hole or it is not in its place).
Therefore, it is necessary to repair with the perforation of it as soon as it is born with a very fine spatula according to this form:
And then place in the hole a fine lead nail and tie that, and keep it for three days or for four.
And when he wants to urinate, it will be re-opened and urinate; and then return that.
And if you do not place the lead, it is already possible that the urine which goes over the place, does not let this opening.
But that one of whom the hole is straight be medicated with a lead nail, as we have said, for too many days until it is amplified.
But those in which the hole is not in its place, are ledgers, the cause because of those, the one who is born and the hole is the end of the head of the vagina because he cannot urinate to the sides of his, until he elevates the vagina with his hand to the upper parts; and it is not to his generation, because his sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad illness.
And the manner of the operation in him is that the patient be turned on his back, and then extend the head of the vagina of him with your left hand with vehement extraction, and inscribe the head of the head of the vagina of the place of the perpucii with a sharp spatula, as it is inscribed of a feather, or that you do not scrape any part, so that the middle of him comes to resemble the head of the vagina and that the hole falls in the middle place according to what is necessary.
And guard yourself in your operation of flux of blood, because many times accidents happen in this; and pause yourself to him with the water that you have separated the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lvi.
Of albater which happens in the prepuce at the head of the vagina and of corruption and blackness and adherence of the prepuce of the head of the vagina.
Many times this albater happens in the vagina and it is a prominence of bad flesh.
And of that one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
The non-malignant, because you suspend it with a fine unci and cut that until that whole thing is gone; and then place on that a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then that, cure him with diaphicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the albater is malignant, of bad color, then because you administer cauterization to the incision of it and the base of it.
But if there is a tear in the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the tear is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must treat the tear that is inside first while it is still fresh; and then you treat the one outside, because when you treat the outside one at the same time as the inside one, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
And if there are accidents in the genitals and foreskin, blackness and corruption, then you must cleanse all that which is already corrupted and which is going to be corrupted or which is already corrupted; and then apply a poultice on that with honey, which is mixed with flour of the rind of millet and of herbs, well crushed and sifted.
And treat that with the other cure until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
Because a cautery is useful in two dispositions at once, so it is for a flow of blood and for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed all at once, then you must introduce into the flesh of the foreskin a lead pipe so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in the one whose foreskin is his, and on which circumcision is not required; and when adhesion happens because of plague or abscess) you must excoriate with a blunt spatula until it is dissolved the ligament and the head of the penis is freed from all sides.
And if it is difficult to separate them delicately, then you must excoriate with a spatula some cause of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is thin, easily perforates with its thinness.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thread of linen, the one which has already been soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then it should be treated with a styptic until it is consolidated.
Chapter .lvii.
Of the purification of children and the cure of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other plagues: however, since it is of our operation and our will, and it is done to those of our own, it is necessary that we assign in that better operation and easier way less loss to health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in some of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, the cause of which is that I have found the majority of the artificers and barbers use circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use ligatures with thread and incisions with the fingernail.
And I have already tried all these manners and have not found better purification with scissors, with a ligature with thread than with purification with the fingernail, because many times the cord escapes the lower part, because the foreskin has two tunics, and the tunic remains further down, and very easily it is forced to another incision and certain pain. And in purification which is done by alphecati, and is digital, of which the barbers use, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not guaranteed, because very easily it enters into the opening of it.
But in the operation with the fingernail, very easily it obscures iron and corrupts your operation. And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it appears in such a manner that there is no need for purification, and I have seen that.
But of the purification which is done with scissors and ligatures with thread, the goodness, experience has shown me, because the scissors are of proportional incision, because the sharpness that is below is as the sharpness that is above; and therefore as you press your hand so proportionally to two sharpnesses, and you incise according to a comparison in one time; and it is done compression of the thread with a figure containing the cord of the penis entirely, with which there is no error at all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie down mostly if it is of those that understand a little, that you do nothing but that you tie the thread in its penis only, and that you leave that in for another day.
And then do that to make him happy in all that manner that is possible to him according to what he receives in his understanding. And then make him lie down between your arms, prepared, and do not be seen by him; and hide the scissors in your hand or below your leg, that the child does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
And then introduce your hand into his penis and blow into the cord, and pull that until it is emerged the head of the penis, and then purify that of what is attached to it of dirt.
The shape of the forceps for modification, this is the shape:
Let one pair of limbs be blunt and the other sharp, so that the ram of the key does not come out, and the length of the two points be like the length of two equal hand spans.
But the error in modification is when too much of the intrinsic tendon is removed, or a part of it should be cut.
Therefore, as you extend that one with your fingernail in front of the abscess and cut it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that one with an instrument and cut it.
But if three days have passed, and that which is swollen remains, then you should let it go until the abscess softens, and excoriate it with ease, and cut it according to what you have prepared.
And guard yourself from the head of the abscess, for it would not be good for you.
And therefore cure it with that which the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise of powders.
And if it is cut from the tendon beyond measure, and it is swollen in the parts above, it will not be good for you.
But cure it with that which we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lviii.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction made by a stone or by a clot, or by a tumor or by a carbuncle, and similar to those of which we have said of the ways of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with what we have said and the cause is very vehement on the patient, then you should administer an extraction from him with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It should be of silver and be a subtle cone, as well as a pipe of bird bone with the subtlety of a ray long in the likeness of a palm and a half, to which there is a subtle pipe at the head of it.
And the manner of the emission of the urine by this is that you take the flexible tube and tie it in the middle with a thread or cord for a good binding; and insert the ends of the tube into the part below the syringe, and cut with the forceps if there is any superfluous cause of the thread, but introduce it into the pipe with vehemence, and then insert the syringe with border and with album of egg.
And make the patient lie on his back, and massage his bladder and the abscess with oil of roses, and olive oil, and water.
And then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and then double the abscess above at the level of the navel; and then push the syringe into it; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and that the patient should be made to feel the cause, and it is not done according to this order, but the meat in which it goes is tortuous.
And then extend the tube with the thread little by little, so that the urine moistens the thread.
Then extract it and do for the cure of urine, and use the syringe, do not cease to do this and use the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Chapter .lix.
Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with clampcedra and with similar instruments which are according to this.
When there occurs in the bladder ulceration or abscess, or a clot in it, or it is constricted by a tumor, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it is done with an instrument which is called a clampcedra, and this is the shape of it:
...but in the middle of it is closed, so it is closed. And in it there are three tubes: two on one side, as well as the other.
At the beginning is the concave place, in which the water is poured, and according to the quantity that it is poured, it is added, until when any cause is drawn from the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, it is drawn with water, and when it is expelled long, according to what the clampcedra does with which naphtha is poured into the battles of the sea.
Therefore, as you want to pour humidities into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw with it the water that is poured into the upper parts, so that the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the end of the clampcedra into the abscess as we have recommended in the syringe; and then push the humidity with the water that you push it with, so that that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Shape of the clyster subtle am which the bladder is clystered, and that is the form:
And it is made of silver or lead, of which the head must be like a small feather, and below it a tube is attached.
And then take the bladder by the mouth, and place in it the moisture that you want to clysterize into the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong double ligature, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then introduce the extremity of the clyster into the rectum.
And then tightly press your hand on the bladder with the moisture and structure descending until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that throughout its entirety; and then insert a strong thread into those holes, so that it is rolled; and then attach the circle so that it is attached to the sofat, because you place in that the water that you want of the humidities, and oils and waters.
And then you tie that onto the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter .lx.
Of the extraction of a stone.
We have already said in the division the species of stone and cure of it with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have said the stone in which catz operation with a hand, and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And I am narrating this with a manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly comes to children; and of the signs of it is that the urine that is issued from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels his rectum, and many times it pains, and then it is dressed; and with that you see the hole in the rectum in many of those.
And it is easier the healing of the children of that into which they have reached fourteen years; and it is difficult healing in the old. But in the young it is milder for that which is among those.
And of that from which the stone is larger and the healing is lighter; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore as we come to the healing of that, cove at the beginning of that which we modify the patient with the clyster which extracts all the wound which is in their bowels; because that wound sometimes prohibits the entrance of the stone and the inquiry of it.
And then place the patient on their feet and sit them and make them groan so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or which jumps from that place or sometimes.
And then make that cezer between your hands prepared, and the hands of it are left the things of it, so that the bladder is entirely made declining to the parts below.
And then pierce that and all of that through.
Therefore if you feel the stone in the space, then you take care immediately with a section over it.
And if you do not catch all of it from below your touch, then cove that you anoint with oil your said index of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the said middle if it is a young complete, and insert that into their rectum. And pierce of the stone until it stays below your said. And turn that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that with your said, and expel that to the parts outside ves the place of which you the section.
And command the minister that presses the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand extends the genitals to the parts above, and with his other hand restrains the groin which is below the genitals, in part of the place where the section is made.
And then insert a spatula well incident of which this is the form of it: And cut in it the water that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place,  leaning to the left side of the groin; and let the section be on that stone and your said be in the anus, and let it be a transverse section, so that the section outside be wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that is expelled of the stone be to it possible, and no greater, because very hard we compress your said which is in the anus the stone and it is thrown out of its faculty.
And know that of the stone there is some to which so angle and margins, so that the extraction of it is made difficult by that.
And of that one it is lion seeming to gland, and it is round, and it is made of it light extraction.
Therefore if it is that one to which so angles and margins, adjust in the fissure.
And if it is not thus thrown out, then cove that you engage upon that, or that you strengthen upon that with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is like a file with which you strengthen upon the stone, and do not escape from it; or that you insert below it a subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you cannot do it on that, then you enlarge the opening a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut it off with vitriol.
But if the bladder is more than one, at the beginning you push your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then cut into it; and then push a little bit in there; and similarly do so if there are more than two.
And if the bladder is very large, then ignorance is that you cut it open with a large incision, because it happens to the patient one of two causes: either it dies or it makes a continuous distillation of urine, because of which the place is not completely consolidated.
But administer expulsion of it while it is thrown out, or engineer in the fracture of it with the forceps while it extracts that in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointment of aloe and dragon's blood, and tighten that. And place on that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rubbed oil and water, so that the abscess may be yielded.
And then turn the patient onto their back, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when that you have untied it, embrocate the place with water and a little oil, and then cure that with an enguent diafinicon and an enguent diabazilicon until it is healed.
But if in the wound there happens a bad, putrid, and corrosive abscess, and of this sort as if the blood is in the bladder frozen, and because of it the urine is prohibited (and this is known by the egress of blood in urine), then therefore intervene your said in the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it provokes the bladder to corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and in opposition to every kind, with that which convenes to it of the cure until it is healed.
And cover during all the hours of the cure that you lie both things and adjust the medicines which are placed upon the place.
And if the bladder is small and is in the middle of the vagina, and it is put in it, and the emission of urine is prohibited, then cure that with water which I recommend before you arrive at the incision, because troops of times by this cure it is accused of incision; and already I have expressed this, and it is that you take a steel perforator, of which this is the shape of it:
of triangular extremity, sharp, put into a shaft.
And then take a thread, and tie with it the vagina below the bladder so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then intervene the iron in the vagina, perforating with ease until the perforator comes to that bladder. And revolve the perforator with your hand in that bladder little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it until you make that of the other part penetrate; because the urine is immediately released.
And then press your hand over that which is broken of the bladder from the side of the vagina, because that is broken, and is thrown out with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not to your liking for any cause which prohibits you from it, then tie a thread below the bladder, and another thread above the bladder. And then cut into the bladder in that vagina between two ligatures. And then extract that. And then untie the ligatures and modify the congealed blood, which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread below the bladder, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when the thread is untied, the bladder returns to its place and covers the wound.
And therefore it is necessary to you when you tie the thread above, that you elevate the bladder to the upper parts, or that you return to your compliment, and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter .lxi.
Of the extraction of the bladder from women.
Bladder in women is rarely generated.
But if a bladder is seen in any of those, then difficult is the cure of it, and it is prohibited by troops of manners.
One of them is that the woman is very much a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman well-knowing who describes herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or is of the women having husbands.
The third is that you do not find a woman well-knowing this art, especially the operation with hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the incision on the bladder in women is far from the place of the bladder, because you indigeys of pre-incision, and in that there is fear.
But if necessity provokes you to that, then cover that you take a woman midwife well-knowing, and few are found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek a midwife who is chaste and subtle, or present a woman matron well-versed in the deeds of women, or a woman who in this art has a share of the art.
Therefore, do that present, and command him to do everything that you tell him, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; the reason is that he should see if the woman is a virgin, then when she puts her finger in her anus and wants the stone.
Therefore, if you find that, force her to put her finger in, and then command him to insert it into her.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and inquire about the stone, because she puts her left hand on the bladder, and compresses it with good understanding.
Therefore, if you find that, then command her to gradually withdraw that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the sum of her virtue until it reaches the root of the vagina.
And then insert it into that position of the majority of the vagina, at the root of the vagina, from whatever part it is stopped and center the stone in that part, and the finger of her should not be removed from the stone, short of her.
And the section should be few at the beginning; and then insert the ray into that section, and if she feels the stone, then adjust in section according to the quantity which she knows the stone is thrown from that.
And know that the kinds of stone are many: for some are small and large, and lion and sharp, and long and round, and having ramps.
Therefore, you know how many species are of her by what you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust in the place vitriol trissated and put it there for an hour until the blood is absconded, and then return to your operation until the stone is thrown out.
And do that you prepare with you of the instruments which are said in the extraction of stone in men, so that you may be helped by those in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is incised, then you put powder on the place and tighten that with powders and constriction descends, and do not repeat that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for very soon the patient will die. And then cure the wound.
Therefore, when the sharpness of the blood is ceded after some days, and the place can be opened, then you return to your operation until the stone is thrown out.
Chapter lxii.
Of incision upon hernia.
Hernia is nothing but an accumulation of humidity in the white membrane which is below the chain of the genitals containing the bowel, and it is called the membrane.
And some times it is in the proper panniculus which has prepared nature in the part of the bowel, before that it is known that it is another bowel; and it is the chain of the genitals between the white membrane which we have said, and it is not that but a tart.
And the generation of this hernia is by weakness which happens to the genitals, for that those are poured into this matter, and sometimes it happens by percussion made upon the genitals.
And this humidity is having many colors, for the color of it or is declining to citrine or to sanguine, or red, or it is black feculent, or it is aqueous white, and that is what is most.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is: for if it is in the white membrane which we have said, then the abscess is round declining a little to length as if the figure of a bowel, and appear the genitals, for the humidity contains that from every part.
And if the humidity is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is round with a part of the bowel and by this man estimates that it is another bowel.
And if the humidity is between the chain of the genitals and the white membrane, then cats below the feeling.
And as you want the knowledge of the color of the humidity, then you probe the color of the humidity in the abscess with the entering catheter of which the form is preceded; and according to what is seen in the vestige of the catheter, judge of what is inside of it.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of it with iron, then command the patient to be flebotomized if that is possible to you, and times the body of him full.
And then be resuscitated upon his back upon some cause a little high, and put beneath him many cloths.
And then set yourself upon the left part of him, and command the minister to follow on the right of him, the one which extends his arm to one of two sides to the chain of the genitals and to the part of the miracle of the belly.
And then take a spatula late and split the chain of the genitals from the middle place by the length until near the penis.
And be made the section according to rectum equally distant from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white membrane comprehending.
And excoriate that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not insert that; and your excoriation with which you excoriate by a part just as it should be suspended with the bowel more and subtly scrutinize with the excoriation according to the quantity as much as possible.
And then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two labia of the section with hooks, and extend the bladder to the upper parts; and do not touch the cord that encompasses the genitals, and incise the bladder in that manner that is to you possible. And incise that [bladder] in its entirety or in pieces, and mostly its thin side, for if you do not scrutinize exquisitely the incision of it, it is not made safe that the water does not return.
But if the fluid proceeds from that outside of its cord during the time of your operation, then when you will have completed the section of the bladder, return it inside, and then adjust the two labia of the genitals with suture, and then care for it as well as the other ailments, until it is healed.
And if the fluid is corrupted by another ailment, then you must cut the vessels that are on the suspensory, and extract the fluid, and then care for it with the water that we have said.
But if the water is gathered in two parts simultaneously, then know that there are two hernias; therefore incise that part according to how you have done in the other, and if it seems to you that it is one operation, then you do it.
And then you cleanse the blood, and introduce into the sections wool submerged in oil or in rose oil; and place before another wool which you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread that over the genitals and the mirac of the belly; and place above cloths folded and powders, and tie those above with a bandage which is according to this form:
And then take two cloths and be them filled with carmine wool according to this likeness; and be made the extremities with which it is pressed of cloth or of wet wool, and be added with structure in the waistband of the breeches, and one of the extremities presses from the anus into the two, and the second presses at the part of the thigh, and two extremities over two cushions of the thighs and two other extremities over two angles, and all the structure be adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with cautery in place of section with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cautery knife and that you incise with that the cord of the genitals, and it is ignited according to how we have recounted until the white bladder containing the water is discovered, and then you take cautery according to this form: and it is assembled like a Greek letter.
And then pierce with that cautery, and it is ignited until all the humidity is expelled.
And then extend the bladder with hooks, and scrape with hooks, and scrape with a subtle cautery ignited; and incise that according to how it is possible to you until you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself that the fluid that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and farther from blood flow, and better than an operation with section.
But if to you makes contrariety abscess caut in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or blood flow, then you must cure that contrariety that makes to you by that, with cure which convenes to it according to what is said.
But if the patient is fearful, and does not expect the second operation because of its horror, then administer perforation according to how we have recounted this; and it is when it is certified you, by that which we have said of the significations, that that hernia is watery.
Then you must make the patient lie down on some elevated cushion, then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a broad spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the opening be wide until all the water runs out.
And then place over the location cloth and tie that and leave it, so that the remaining water runs out. And then care for it until the wound is healed.
But if contrariety is in the discharge of the water in that hour you pierce that: and this is not done except for that which the white panniculus in the orifice of the wound makes contrariety and prohibits the exit of the water, then you must put in the wound a probe or instrument with which it is extracted the water from the hydropitz, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the opening of the wound a small one.
And know that the water returns, and is gathered again about six months or around those; and as it is gathered, then it be pierced according to that same manner, that the patient thus passes his days.
Chapter .lxiii.
Of Section on a Carnous Hernia and Its Cure.
Know that in the section on this hernia there is fear of losing to harm in the major dispositions; because to me it is seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better.
And I remember the operation on that and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that the abscess arises in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and is done for many causes: or for acute superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or for percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain in it, and it is a serious abscess.
And a hard abscess is calcified, of which the color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it is made by the knotting of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those so that already the memory of it is perceived, or by the inflammation of veins.
But that which is by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your hands; and no cove that you touch.
But that which is made by the inflammation of veins is not dispersed by any cause of compression with the hands.
And it is possible that on this kind a section is made and on the other flesh; and that you insert the knife of the genitals, and then extend the bowel to the parts below, and extract that from the white sac, and deliver the suspensory of the vessels, and tie them, and incise the suspensory as much as you deliver that from all parts of the bowel.
Therefore if the bowel is already among those flesh consolidated, then you must extract the bowel and incise it.
And if there is adhesion for any cause of the sac, or between that which is between the vessels, then you must deliver all that adhesion and incise it by a round incision.
But if it is the birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you must incise all that which is of it, and extract the bowel as we have said.
Therefore, as the operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and then care for it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
Of the cure of a hernia that is of the womb.
It is an abscess enveloped by some wrapping resembling a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult movement exercise and walking on the patient.
And in the cure of this disease it is by fear for that of which it is preceded memory.
However, it is necessary to say operation in it according to that which I did the first.
And I say that it is necessary to make the patient lie on a raised cushion; and then pull the suspensory of the testicles to the parts below; and then take the knife of the genitals with your hands with the vessels that are probed to the groin; and hold those other instruments that you, and extend those with vehement extension.
And then incise with a broad sharp knife by a transverse section in the right of the vessels until the vessels are uncovered.
And then excoriate from all parts as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
And then place in those a needle which is double-pointed, and tie that in the first of the places in which you have incised the vit, and tie that other time in the rear of them. And then incise those in the middle place by a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated of the fetid and corrupted humors.
And then cure the wound with the cure of the other wounds in which you wish to be healed generated so that the vessels which you cut, one of the two genitals, which is not evil for that.
But if you have incised the vit to all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles for that are tied with the vessels, so that it be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they be stabilized, or that they are tied so that it is not a good thing with those.
Chapter .lxv.
Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
The advent of this hernia is by a section that must be in the sac extended over the belly of the part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, so that by descending the bowels of that rupture ad to some of the bowels.
And this rupture is either of the sac or of the extension of it, and these two species are caused by many causes: either percussion, or sautz, or clamor, or elevation of any heavy cause, or semblance.
And the sign of this, when it is by the extension of the sac, is that it happens little by little in a long time, and it does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess equal to the preon within the ves for that the sac compresses the bowel.
And the sign of this is when it is by the section of the sac, because at the beginning it makes happen vehement pain suddenly; and it is an abscess diverse appearing below the proper cord appearing, and that is for the eyssiment of the bowel, and the body of it to the parts before the sac.
And sometimes it is forgotten with the bowel the web, and this intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is made with flatulence, and sometimes it runs in the bowel split, and here it is retained, and it is with this great harm of the patient, and sometimes it makes become evil pain and more intensely when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the species of this malady with iron there is fear, because it is necessary that it be avoided the catching in it.
And the manner of the operation of this is that you command the patient to reduce the hernia with his hand to the parts between the sides of its cavity if he obeys its return, and then it is inverted upon his belly between your hands, and elevate the legs of him.
And then hold the cord which is the cord of the testicles to the upper parts, and incise the cord of the testicles along the entire length; and then fix in two lips of the section uncis according to how you intended to open the section with those.
And if the section according to the quantity that is possible to you that from that the huou be foregotten.
And then scrape that which is covered by the cord of the testicles, until the white hard cap of each part is uncovered.
Now you introduce your finger into that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white cap, which is left the cord of the huou, and between the second cap, and dissolve with that adhesion that is in the part behind the huou.
And then with your hand hold the cord of the testicles to the forward parts, and by this extend the white cap on your left hand, and elevate the huou with the cap to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the huou upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a completed solution.
And seek with your fingers that there be no cause of the hernia enveloped in the white hard cap. But if you find any cause of it, then you unwrap it to the belly below.
And then incise in the part below the cord of the testicles by a section of which blood and serum run as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And then administer wool submerged in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the binding which we have recommended (and some times the white cap is cauterized, which we have said near the incision to fear the flow of blood, because many times those occur) and leave the binding until it falls by itself.
But if the case of it is late, then of hot water be embroiled, and place it over it until it falls as we have said.
And then cure the wound with the other cure of wounds until it is healed.
Chapter .lxvi.
Of  a  ventous hernia.
In this hernia no one has been seen to have been bold in the cure of it with iron.
And the first said that it is done as we have recommended in the hernia that is with vi; which is that you tie the vessels near the section over it with facility of it; and then dry in the middle place in surrounding the abscess with that which opened it, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lxvii.
Of the dislocation that is made in the anguonars.
Sometimes it happens that a rupture in the anguonars as we have said, and emerges the place.
And do not give to the genitals any cause of the hernias to the genitals; and if they give, that is little; and return it in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with it, it is adjusted fissure in the cap until the hernia descends in the cap; and happens that by the extension of the cap which is in the anguonars as we have said, which cause is that the cap is extended, and then it is softened and the place is abscesses and emerges.
And the cure of it is with cautery as it is preceded the narration of it.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and that the patient lies on his two between your hands, and then dries the place of the rupture of the abscesses emerges with a section by the latitude according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then stretch the white cap that is below the cord until it is uncovered.
And then take the ray and place it over the eminent place of the cap, and press it to the front of the belly.
And then sew the two eminent places on the extremity of the ray of the cap, and adjust with the suture one of them with the other.
And then extract the extremity of the ray, and do not cut into the head of all, nor extend the bowel, nor any other cause as I will tell you to know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the cure of the plagues, and as you cut the fibers, purify that and restore the plague while it is consolidated; because the head is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is more proper to health.
Chapter .lxviii.
Of the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Sometimes the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is felt the regard of it.
Therefore, it is necessary for him who is asked in the cure of it that he make the patient lie according to his two, and cut all the cord which is softened over the natural cord; and then that he adjust the two lips with the suture.
And if you want, sew in the beginning the superfluity of the softened cord with three stitches or four and with firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then cure for the cure of the other plagues while it is healed and the fibers fall.
Chapter .lxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is exempted, but for the reason it is brought to my mind in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two ways, of which one is that it be in the knowledge of the physician when he is asked about it, that he knows the cure of it to whom it happens; and the other way is that we many times have need of castration of other animals for our benefit from them, as well as from goats, and sheep, and pigs, and similar to the animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by fissure to section.
But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the beast to be in water tail while its genitals are softened and are limp and that they hang. And then take those with your hand while they are resolved and do not appear after the touch.
But in castration done by fissure and section, cover that you have the beast and press the cord of the testicles of it with your left hand.
And then lie the suspender, and cut above each bowel with a section between two bowels processed.
And then cut those that you will have each excoriated. And do not leave on those of the head any cause, but the subtle head which is above the vessels.
And this way of castration is better the one done by attrition, because attrition fort leaves no cause of the testicles for which the beast desires coyt.
And then cure the plague while it is healed.
Chapter .lxx.
Of the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: one is that or appears in that which sees the space in the cord of testicles, in that which is between two testicles figures as a cunh of woman in which it is.
And some times from that corr urine which is in the cord of the testicles.
But in women it is a species: and it is that the cunh of the woman on the pentil is as two testicles of a man a little of all yminiheys to the part before as the perpucii of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of the men and of one species of the women. And it is that cover that you cut those adjusted flesh while it escapes the emprecio of it, and then that you cure those with the cure of the other plagues.
And in the second species of men of which yeys urine which is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation in it.
Chapter .xxi.
Of lending and of eminent flesh for causes of the women.
Lentige fort leu is adjusted on natural causes while it is etressat and is made leg the regardament; and some times it is magnified in some women in so much that it is spread as in men and perve into the coito.
Therefore, cover that you have the superfluity of lentige with your hand or with anci and cut.
And in the last incision, mostly in the preon of the razit, so that no flux of blood endenge.
And then cure it with the cure of the plagues while it is healed.
But carn nascuda is flesh that nays in the horrifici of the mayre while it is full of it, and fort leu is eyssit to the parts before according to semblance of coa (and for that some first appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); therefore cover that we inscidam as we inscide lentige, and curem that while it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
Of the cure of hernia.
Hernia is when the woman's womb is not perforated, or the opening is small. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to illness that has preceded, and that is made either by flesh not well fitted or by a subtle or thick cicatrix.
And it is made either in the front of the mother, or in the sides of her, or in the upper part of her, or in the lower part of her, and forbids coitus and pregnancy and childbirth, and very strongly forbids menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by looking at the womb, if the opening is apparent, it is clear; but if it is not apparent, then you search for it with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the opening is by a subtle cicatrix, and it is present to the two labia, then you cut and break that.
And it is that you place on the two labia powders, and then you place your fingers, indicating both hands at once.
And the woman be on her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two labia with force so that that subtle cicatrix be broken and the opening be opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that on the spot, and pour some warm water over it every day so that the cut spot not be consolidated.
But if the cicatrix is thick and thick, then you carve that with a spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the opening is by flesh, then you suspend that with an instrument, and cut it.
And be with you the medicines that cause to cease the flow of blood from a bite, such as agarwood, and dragon's blood, and incense, mixed with the album of an egg.
And then administer a broad lead pipe so that the plague not be consolidated lightly.
And keep that for a few days and administer a poultice of licorice.
And then be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it be healed.
And sometimes accidents happen in the mother's womb of other flesh, and then you carve according to this manner. But if this is due to a  cankerous abscess, to the cankerous abscess which is in the womb, let no contrariety be made with iron in any manner.
Chapter LXXIII.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that happens in the womb of women.
Hemorrhoids are the appearance of many veins in the orifices so that from those flow blood continuously; and as they are old hemorrhoids and are made they are boils.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and their signs, and I say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and boils when they are in the front of the mother and do not appear to the touch, then in those let no cure be made with iron.
But those which are in the orifice of the mother upon which one feels, those are the ones that are cured.
And you must put the woman in a warm bath and then extend the boil with the scissors, or with rough cloth, and cut those with the roots.
And then pulverize upon those of the fluxes of the blood of one of the incisions-causing powders, such as agarwood and similar to those.
And then bandage her feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
And if the fluxes of blood persist, then make that seizer in a decoction of wormwood and of the skins of  millegrain and of  walnuts and of similar things.
And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with water on the back of her.
And if the blood is abscised, it is well; and if not, make adhere to two wind-bags, and to the nipples their scarification.
And then take wool and submerge it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of arnica or in the juice of  guarravier with vinegar and make adhere to the spot; and then cure the spot with ointments until it be healed.
And cure that until it be healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
Of perforation of the uterus which happens in the mother.
Many species of abscesses happen in the mother, such as canker and abscess lapident and ulcers and adhubelat and erpetromens and hemorrhoidal fistulas and rags and boil and other abscesses. And I have already said these ailments and the species of those and their signs, and the cures of them in the division.
And I want to say in this treatise of abscess caut the one which comes in the mother when it is of the abscesses that coalesce and heal, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is made with iron.
Therefore, consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that redness and if you touch it, then do not cut it with perforation, and treat it with what helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
And then have the woman lie on a bed that has two beds; and recline on her two sides and adjust her feet to the part behind the belly, and her thighs be spread, and place her arms behind her shoulders, and tie something to her with a suitable bandage.
And then the midwife follows the straight line and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the womb is opened, the form of which will come in those causes that will be made nearby.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you put it with the ray of the womb of the woman, and what from the instrument is entered into the womb be no more than the ray of the womb and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the ray of the womb, then have you put powders on the texture of the ray of the womb so that it be prohibited the instrument of all instruments in the ray of the womb.
And have you put the verge that runs in the instrument of the latz pus desus and that the minister has the instrument and turns the verge while the orifice of the womb be opened.
And when the extraction appears, and it is touched with the hand and is lion and moist, then have you succeed that of the head of it with a spatula lat.
And when the sania is evacuated, then have you put in the wound a mecha submerged in rubbed oil or green oil in which be some stickiness; and put the calca7 in the section in the ray of the womb.
And put before the womb and on the pentenilh clean wool submerged in water in which be boiled malvas.
And then be cured after about two days with gargles which are convenient to that until it be healed.
And some times the womb and the wound be washed so that it be christened with water and honey, and then with water in which is boiled root of lily or of aristolochia longa, and then return to the gargle.
And if the wound is deep in the womb, then have you be prohibited from the cure of it with iron, have cure that with what we have said in the division.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach the midwives in what manner the living embryos be medicated when they are according to a unnatural figure.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of the natural birth by signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman express to the parts behind and desires to smell the air, and above that is relieved by that which is above her of the part, and hastens the emission of the embryo, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the emission of it over its head, and the second one with that or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Therefore, as you see those signs, then have the belly of her be compressed so that the embryo descends lightly when it descends over its head, they give to it the second one, and it is cleaned of those superfluities with good modification.
But that which is another this part is unnatural and not laudable, because when the embryo is emitted over its feet and the body of it is emitted before the head of it and its feet, and the hand of it one, or at the foot of it .i., or it is emitted the head of it and the hand of it, or at the belly of it, and fort leu is converted over its neck, and similar to the figures of it not laudable.
Therefore, it is necessary cause to the midwife that she be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
And you see showing all figures of those, and what kind is in those by so that it be signified by it and be stood upon it.
When the feyt is emitted over its head by natural egress, and that is vehement over the woman and is made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of it already debilitated, then make that seizure, or that which the women have it, and evaporates the conh of it with fenugrec coyt and with humid oils.
And then intermeddle the metrona between its said spatums petit and fenda with it the second one, or succeed that with its nail until it runs that which is in it of humidity. And press the belly of the woman until it descends the fetus.
But if it does not descend, then have the woman be christened with mucellage of ptilli and mucellage of fenugrec with cizami.
And then command to it, to the christening, that it be compressed and make that stornudar with condisi; and te the mouth of it and its nose for one hour, because the fetus sira foro-getat tantost.
And if the two masses of the fetus are foro-getated at the beginning, then have you reduce those with facility little by little. But if she does not obey the insertion, then place the woman on a bench and lift her legs up, and then shake the bench on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall during the shaking.
And if the fingers are not deftly turned and the foot dies, then cut those and extract the remnants of the foot or tie the body to the hand with a cloth and extract it with equality, because this is a difficult case.
When the fetus lies on its feet, then you must push those upwards, and then turn the small fetus, and then straighten it, and then take one of its legs and extend it little by little.
But when it is brought inside the thighs, then you command it to express itself, and do that extraction with care, because it is a difficult case if God wills it.
And if it is not difficult as we have recounted, then you return the small fetus little by little until you place it in that second natural figure, because this is then easily moved.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recounted, then take of althea and gum dissolved, and strike all in the mortar with a good percussion, and then apply it to the woman's groin, at the bottom of her belly. And then make that poultice in tepid water, until it obtains the hypocondria.
And when times that the parts of her are softened, then do a fumigation of myrtle and place that under her. And when you have the fumigation for an hour, then you make her lie on a bench, and then do that extraction and extend her mouth, and take from that, and press the lower part of her belly with light compression, because the fetus is then easily moved.
Movement of the fetus longitudinally while holding one of its hands. It should be gently reduced by hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her move.
And if moving doesn't work, then make her lie on her back, and shake her thighs with vehement shaking, and then administer ointments as I have told you and recommended of poultices.
And if labor has begun, then make her lie on a bench, and then study on the reduction of the hand, and straighten the fetus in its natural figure, and do the extraction for the woman and command her to express herself until it is moved.
Movement of the fetus on the back with its arms and feet spread out and the fascia of it is on the side of its mother. Make the midwife have the hand of the fetus and then turn it little by little, and that with ease.
And when it is and as much as it is straightened, and then place on its groin what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
And then command her to move little by little, and when you have done that, then make her lie on a bench and command her to be inclined on the right side, and then command her to express herself; and do that extraction with care. Exit of the prepared fetus on the side.
When they lay the horrors of the mother in this manner, consider, and then you cut the second with your nail until it is evacuated of humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you cut that of the navel, so that it is not held back and dies.
And then push the fetus to the fingertips until you place that second which you cover, and send the woman to express herself several times, and it will be moved with light movement, if God wills it.
Exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes even three or four, but that is strange and difficult to endure; but it is due to natural causes, and not to life.
And count them, whether they are multiplied, one second, and they are separated by the cicatrix, distinguish those among the ligaments in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are moved as if it were one fetus by easy natural movement, and they are positioned sometimes by movement not laudable as we have recounted.
And if some of their parts are difficult during childbirth and they reach what we have said about unnatural figures, then you care for them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skillful and does what is done with ease and subtlety, and with patience, and is ingenious according to every figure according to what is prepared for her by the ingenious one leading to health.
A remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Sometimes things are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten, and it is already known to me that one woman aborted six, and another one ten, all formed, the cause was made by measurement of the glorious wise.
And all this cove that is in the science of the midwife, which is very much like that appearance, and therefore it is necessary to do it as it is commanded.
Chapter .lxxvi.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you cure the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of the medicine and it is not expelled outside, and you are forced to use operation with your hand, then it is necessary to consider if the woman is of sound virtue and is not among those accidents by which she is feared to be harmed.
Then it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back over her two, and her head be inclined downwards and her thighs be elevated.
And the minister shall have those two parts or be tied in the bed so that the body of him does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with oily and with mucilage of althea and fennel and seed of lily.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then she inserts her hand with facility into the mother, and then she seeks with her hand in the place where the forceps are in the fetus.
And convenient place in this: therefore you consider if the fetus is prepared that descends on its head, and then you place the forceps in the heels of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the beard, or in the fork of it, or in the proper places of the back, or under the hypochondria.
But if the descent is on the feet of it, then in the penile, or in the middle of the back.
And it is necessary that you have the forceps with your right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand with facility and place the forceps in one of those places which we have said, until you reach the left cause.
And then pause and place in the opposite position of it another forceps, or the third if it is necessary, so that the traction be equal, and not be extension according to its straightness alone.
And may it be good to all parties, so that the expulsion of it be alleviated as it is done during the eradication of it.
And it is necessary in it that which is between them the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and inserts them skillfully and revolves with those that are retained.
Therefore if the part of the fetus is expelled, then the forceps shall be changed into the place which is more out; and do so until the whole fetus is expelled.
But if the hand is outside the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by the constriction of it, then it is necessary that a cloth be enveloped over it; and then extract it until the whole is expelled, and incisions it either in the junction of the hand or in the groin.
And so it is necessary that you do in the other hand and in the two feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is an accident to it constriction in the expulsion, or it is in the head of it water adjusted, then it is necessary that you insert between the fingers the spatula spine and split the head and extract the water, or what disrupts it with an instrument which is named "alundat", the form of which will come with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is next.
And similarly do if the fetus is of a large head by nature: and then it is necessary that you incision it with the algematu, or that you press it with the alunda as we have said; and then extract the bones with the forceps.
And if the head is outside and is constricted by the fork, then it is split until the moisture which is in the feet is poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor obeys to expulsion, then you incision the head as soon as it is possible to you.
And if the remains of the womb are inflamed or there is hydropsy in it, then it is necessary that you perforate it until the moisture which is in it flows out.
But if the problem is on his feet, then the traction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is lighter.
But if it is constricted of the belly and the feet, then cover what you extract with the cloth which you will have enveloped over your hand, and make the belly and the feet inside that it may run what is in those.
But if the other limbs are stayed and the head is turned, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, then she inserts her hand into the perineum of the latter, and with that she seeks the head, and pulls it into the mouth of the mother, and then inserts a hook, or two hooks, and pulls it with those.
And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed by an abscess that occurs to the one, then cover that it not be trebled upon it; cover that then administer effusions of humid fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the problem is on his side, then if possible, be pricked; and be administered the water which we have said in the living fetus.
And if that is not possible, then be incised in the buttocks, and be extracted.
And cover that you leave no cause of the second.
And when you have completed your whole operation, then administer the water which we have said of the cure of the abscesses that occur from the mother.
And if there occurs a flux of blood, then descend into styptic waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in whose belly was a dead fetus, and about that fire another pregnancy, and about fire dead is the fetus other. It happened to one about a long time ago an abscess in his navel; and it inflated until fire opened, and began to throw out pus.
And I was called to the cure of him, and medicated him for a long time, and the plague was not consolidated.
Then I put on him some causes of strong attraction plasters, and extracted from him a bone, and about a few days passed, and extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, as in the belly there were no bones.
And then I thought that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore I pursued the plague, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existing in her thousands dispositions, and already living in such a manner for a long time, cured of him a little pus.
And I do not affirm that this is strange, but that in this there is science and help to what the doctor artifices with his hand for the cure administers.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of a verge with which the mother is opened:
This is the form of a stretcher in which the free ones are tied, to which tying there are two vertices in two extremities of two feet. But however this vertex cover that it be more subtle of a strictor, and be made or of ebony or of a shaft of wood.
And be the width of each shaft two fingers and the margin of each one is a finger, and the length of each one is a palm and a half; and in the middle location of two shafts are two adjustments of that same shaft, the ones which are already finished, of which the length is the majority of a palm and a little more, and the width of each one is two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it may be opened with those when you revolve the two prescribed vertices.
Another form similar to that more subtle and lighter:
Be made of shafts of ebony or of wood according to the resemblance of forceps. But however at the extremity of it there are two additions as such times, and the length of those additions is about a palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
And as you want with those to open the mother, then you make the woman lie on the sheet with her feet hanging, open that which is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps similarly according to the quantity that you want of the opening of the mouth of the mother until the midwife makes so that you want.
The form of a verge the one which the ancients said:
Form of an impellent with which the fetus is pushed:
Form of an amisidat2 with which the large head is contained
And it is assembled to forceps with which teeth in the extremity, as such times, and some times it is made long as such forceps according to this form, as such times, to which teeth are as such teeth of a saw with which it is incised and contained. Form of a small amisidat:
Form of a hook having a spine:
Shape of a hook having two spines:
Shape of a spatula having two extremities with which the head is severed:
Shape of two broad spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied the species of that and are prepared, the artificers, as much as is lighter to their operation and more aut of those men by their quantity.
And in works of those instruments already whatever be it, that you should prepare, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
Of the extraction of the second.
When the second is retained during childbirth, then it is necessary that you command the patient to retain her breath, and then make that stir with the condition, and strengthen your hand over its mouth and over its nostrils, and if by this it is expelled outside, well is.
And if not, then you take a cloth and perforate in the covering a hole and place in that herbs burning the mouth of the mother, thus as calament and rue and aneth and chamomile and siccated arabic and cassia lignea and santaurea. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and place that over the fire.
And then place a tube of cane in the mouth of the mother, and keep that inside so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then make that stir as we have said, and the second is expelled with velocity.
But if remaining after this cure and it is not expelled, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of althea, and then introduce that into the vagina and search with that the second, and as that is found, then take it and extend it little by little. But if it is annexed in the perineum of the mother, then introduce her hand as we have recounted, and when she will have found the second, extract it little by little according to rectum so that the mother does not feel the traction vehement. It is necessary that it be changed to the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recounted the cure with stirrup and with medication of the cloth with herbs.
But if it is not expelled with all the causes which we have recounted, then keep that you do not tire on it in iteration of abstraction, but rather that what is emitted from it to the mouth of the mother lies to the cushion of the woman, and then sterilize that with ointment and tetrafarmacon; because that will make it soften and after a few days it will be dissolved and expelled.
But when it can be done, it is elevated from it bad odor to the head, and to the stomach, and this is what is done to the patient; and therefore it is necessary that fumigations and conveniences be administered to it.
But some of the Ancients already are praised fumigations of nazitort and of dried figs.
Shape of instrument with which the woman is fumigated for the retention of menses and of the second:
It is made of wood or of brass.
And it is placed the subtle extremity in the vagina and the wide extremity over the fire, and the fumigation is placed over the embers of the fire.
And keep that inside so that the fumigation is consumed and repeat another.
Of cure of the unperforated anus of the child.
Many children are born and the anuses of them are not perforated, the ones which already have a subtle and opaque. Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to perforate with her finger that opaque; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and keep that it does not touch the rectum.
And then place over that a cloth infused in wine and oil; and then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is opaque, then place in the hole a tube for many days, and remove it when the child will want to defecate.
And already happens opacity of the anus by consolidation of plague or of abscess; therefore it is necessary that that consolidation be incised, and then be cured with what we have said of the cure and of the lead.
Of cure of the fistulas that originate from the anus.
The fistulas that originate in the part of the anus lower than the nodulation and thickness of which originate near the anus outside or in the space of the one part.
And it is a fistula or many.
And as that nodulation is ancient and runs from the humid watery white or subtle pockmarking, and some times from these fistulas some penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by that which is emitted from them by the egress and by windiness; and sometimes the patient of egress, and for a long time it is emitted from them worms.
And some of those fistulas sometimes penetrate into the space, into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and some of these penetrate into the junction of the vagina and into the knot of the buttock.
And in which it is known that a fistula penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate, it is that you put your finger inside the anus, and you introduce a subtle probe of thread or iron into the fistula when there is no turbidity.
But if there is turbidity in that, then introduce a subtle probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel it at all, nor do you perceive any cause of evacuation or worm or wind, thus as we have said, then you know that it is not penetrating, and then you turn to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the vagina, then the meaning of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it so that the place may be consolidated with medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the vagina or into the buttock and causing pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe enters here if there is no turbidity in it, into the buttock, and causing pain in the circuit of the part; and that from it there is always pus; and that it does not benefit from that medicine, nor is it consolidated with an enema.
And in all those fistulas penetrating there is no cure of all, and the cure of those is the work and vanity of the leaves of the physicians upon which it is founded.
But in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is expected according to what I have told you, and what I have already proved.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back and elevates their legs into them, the thighs being inclined to their belly, and then introduce a probe of lead, or iron if there is turbidity in the fistula, until you know the place where the probe penetrates.
And if that feels the patient around the buttock, then cover that you introduce your finger inside the buttock.
And if you feel in your finger the probe already by itself being inserted, or another thing that you feel between your finger and that skin or flesh, then you know certainly that that is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, for it is not in that healing, as we have said.
But however, some say that it is healed in some men tart.
And of the medicine by which is expected benefit in it is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it is preceded, and introduce that ignited into the fistula until it reaches around the buttock; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those flesh adjusted to the fistula, which are like the quill of a bird's feather, are already cauterized.
And then cure that with poultices enveloped in border until all those flesh which are cauterized can be covered, and then cure that with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, it is well; and if not, then it is not healed in any time by other cure.
And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the buttock, and between that and the probe which is veiled with flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula in that which seizes the surface of the pudenda, then dry the pudenda from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying with the probe, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the probe reaches, and by the probe it is liberated and catched.
And then purify those fistula flesh which are assembled to the quill of a bird's feather and do not break from those any cause.
But if a flux of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when you are inserting those flesh, then the best that it may be and of the light pus instrument is cauterized with fire or with acute medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts good two habits: it is the cauterization of those flesh adjusted, and abscessing of the blood excretion of the humidities.
And then cure that with poultices enveloped in border or in caus trissat until the place gets brace, and then cure the plague with enemas flesh hard generating and consolidating.
And so medicines in which there is styptic and excretion; when then it is restored already healed and you do not fear iteration.
But if the fistula already reaches into the perineum of the buttock and is elongated from that surface of the body, then introduce your finger into the buttock and inquire with that.
And therefore if you feel the probe and between you and it is veiled with skin or flesh, and is proper to penetration, then it is not operation in it but according to your trust and hope.
The which cause is to administer in it one of three ways: or that cauterize it as we have said; or that dry it until you achieve the concavity of it so that it is possible for you to introduce the probes and the proper cure; and do not proceed to cut by so that you do not wound the lacert containing the buttock, and that happens upon the patient's emission of feces by their will; and then cure it with what we have said that is strong cure; or that elongate that veil and cleanse that pus that dries it within the buttock, as we have said, or with probe or another instrument of acute extremity, and then purify those fistula flesh which are in the section where you can with percrustation; and then strive to make the restoration of the whole plague with section, and if the orifice of pus above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the buttock, and pus light from the patient. And in some cases, the fistula is ended in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is in the latz of the anus around the surface of the body with the codena and on the edge of the anus, then take the probe of perforated extremity, which is like an awl of preparing the hearts according to this form:
And insert it into that faithful envelope of v fiels or around those; and then insert the probe with a faithful into the fistula until you achieve the cavity of it.
But if it is penetrating in the edge of the anus near the entrance, then you extract the probe from that tract so that you insert your finger into the anus; and extract the extremity of the probe and adjust the two extremities simultaneously, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you have incised the probe more deeply into the flesh, tighten well that which those flesh are incised which are between the two extremities of the probe and which are joined.
And then cure the plague until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate, in whatever way it is prepared for you, so that it is not moved in the groin, for it is not for you to do this so that you do not injure the groin; and then make it with that until it is healed.
The shape of the spatum spinos with which the fistula is fended: the curvature of which is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not injure what is not necessary, as sometimes.
Of suture of hemorrhoids in which blood runs in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are in two ways, for they are between the anus like those that are of coals, or those that are like the fat of a rasim. And of those are small and large, and that the blood runs from those always and it is one, and they are many, and they are outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
But however, those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, of which water citrina or a little blood with continuous body runs, and they are according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to defecate and to express himself while the anus is empty and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take it and suspend with hooks or what you have those with your nail, and then you incise those of their roots.
But if the hooks are not held in those because of the humidity of them and their softening, then take those with rough cloth or with a stick or with wool fleece, and extract those with your fingers, and then incise those and pulverize over them some powdered caudas near the incision, so that they are in those place of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterization. And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey the egress, then christenize the patient with a cristeri in which there is a small bite, and wash it with that water that is in the anus and that obeys the egress lightly when the patient expresses himself.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is lighter, and it is that you take those with your nail, or that you take those with a hook, and incise those, and then cure those with the water that we have said until they are healed.
And that which you have incised, cover that you administer suture of them according to this way: take a faithful enveloped and insert it into a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make it penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and envelope the two extremities of the faithful in the part farther from the needle, and it is laterally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong structure, and then untie the faithful and extract the needle.
And do this to all, and leave one of those untied, so that the superfluity of the blood runs from that one.
And then place on the anus cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerot; and place that on the anus and command the patient to rest. And then leave that until it dries; and when it is dried, cure those with ointments or with other cure until it is healed.
And as they are old and are not of use in that medicine, then you must cut those with the point of the spatum or with your nail until they are made humid and there is a host of those the pus that flows from below, which prohibits those from consolidation; and then cure those until they are consolidated.
Then you must cut those with a reason pus vehement that the first one until it is bloody and they are excoriated; and then cure those until they are healed.
Know that alamermar, it is called, and it is not if not a knot round according to the color of the body resembling the head of a clavicle, and it is made in all the body and mostly in the parts below the feet and the fingers, and therefore by those pains the ailment.
And therefore, whoever is cut in that which is in the circle of the key, and is held with the forceps or an instrument, and is eradicated from its root; and then care for that.
And if you want, cauterize the following that is preceded in its chapter.
More of a wart is a small, rough, fistulous, round eminence on the surface of the body, and often times they appear on the hands of children.
And the cure for it is that you extend and cut that, or that you tighten that with a thread or with a needle that is sewn into the skin. And if you want, cauterize that, according to what we have said, with fire or with a sharp medicine.
But a stye is a small,  feathered or fistulous, thick eminence on the surface of the body, going into the preon, and when the  flegm  finds that, it is felt in it resembling a bite of an ant, and it is made around the body.
And the cure for it is that you take a needle of swan feather or of vulture feather, and it is strong, and you place that on the stye inside that it contains the circle of the needle of the parts of it; and then you revolve your hand with the needle inside that you cut that which is in the circle of the stye, and you place that in the preon of the flesh, and that you eradicate the stye from its root.
And if you want, do that with a needle of bronze or of iron according to this form:
Let the part above the needle be drawn to subtlety, blunt (so it is not perforated), enveloped so that over the finger the apprehension of it be ablated and the revolution of that.
And if you want, cauterize the stye according to what is said before in the cauterization of a boil in the chapter of cauterization.
Of the form of the instruments that are administered to give christening.
Sometimes christenings are made of silver or of laton or of bronze melted or hammered; and sometimes they are made of those instruments small and large according to those to whom they are administered, because that which is administered in the cure of the small children be small; and of those whose buttocks are wrinkled or sore, the christenings of those be small.
The form of a large and few christening:
The head of the needle of it above in which the purse is tied be wide according to this manner; and be to it distinction the one in which the purse is tied as well as sometimes.
And the extremity of it further down, which is inserted into the anus, be blunt (so it is not open) much lion, drawing to subtlety; and in one of the sides of it be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and be the breadth of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and a little thicker one a little.
And be the purse in which be placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheepskin, and the root of it be a palm.
And be perforated by many holes as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes the thickness of the finger.
And then insert into those holes strong thread of cru thread which be of ten threads, or about those; and adjust with that the purse; and when it is placed in it the purse, be straight in the head of the christening between two distinguished with strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the purse of the medicine, that be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and guard yourself that it be not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient be supine on his back, and elevate his legs up and place behind him a cushion on which already are the men or a bolster; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with album of egg or with mucilage of fennel or of similar; and then insert that into the anus with facility, and then the minister takes the purse and expresses that with two hands and simultaneously with vehemence until it be evacuated into the bowel all that which is in the christening; and then extract the christening and the patient raises his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that to eyssiment, have the as much as he can; and if he sleeps with that for a whole night, it is better in recovery.
But if you cauterize that in the maladies of solution of belly and the eyssiment of it the gut, then you iterate the cautery until it be healed.
And if in the anus so hemorrhoids or apostemas ledens, then be the christening much subtle and lion, of the christenings with which the children so christened.
Of the cure of the plagues.
And I have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues that which was convenient to the book, and I say so the cure of those with my hand and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore I say that the plagues are diversified according to what in which they are made the plagues and according to the place upon which befall the plagues.
And the causes for which many times are made the plagues so as by the  bite of a serpent, or incision of a spear or of a sword, or percussion with a lance, or with clubs, or with arrows, or similar to those of many causes.
May the plagues that are in the places of the body be like the plague that catches on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the figure, and similar to those of the limbs.
And you are counting the cure of some plagues so that you pause that reasoning and rule over the other plagues.
And you begin with the plagues of the head simple, because the remembrance of the composed will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a stone or similar, and the bone has been broken only a little and it is a great plague, and you fear about that patient having a boil, then you take care and immediately perform a cephalic phlebotomy, and do not delay this; and extract from that blood according to the quantity of its virtue, if no other cause prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood that is drawn from the plague is little.
And it is phlebotomy on the opposite side of the afflicted area; and guard the patient from repletion and from wine and from heavy foods.
But if any cause prohibits phlebotomy, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine.
And put on the plague, if a boil occurs, a cloth infused in rose oil or in wine in which is stippled.
But if it is certain of a boil, then put on the plague, if it is recent with its blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will recommend soon.
And if the air has already changed that, then put on poultices until it is healed.
But if the plague is large or is due to an incision of the skin and similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted by sutures, then adjust those with sutures according to how I will recommend of the sutures of them.
But if the plague is already discovered from the bone and flesh, and it is not a retention of it but a small suspension, then incise that and treat the plague with medicines and restore the flesh in the place of the bone, and command the patient to be frugal of foods in which there is thickness: caps and forms, and similar to them, until it is composed.
And if a putrefaction arises in the bone and does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that and throw it away, and then treat that.
But if in these plagues an artery or vein is found from which blood can flow, and it is not cut off by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that not incised, then you incise that with a spatula, or cauterize it; and if necessity compels you that what we have said does not confer, then you cauterize it until the blood is cut off.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; so that you pulverize on those this powder, because it consolidates before the air changes them.
And the manner of the powder is this: take olive oil, one part, dragon's blood, two parts, and non-extinguished cautery, three parts; let all be ground finely and sifted, and let the plague be filled with it, and be constricted by a good constriction until it is well adhered, and coagulated with the blood.
And after strengthening that with poultices and leaving it, do not undo it while it is like that so that it is not suppurated, because the medicine is not extracted from it until it is healed.
And sometimes do this alone with cautery, when you do not have present olive oil and dragon's blood.
And already do this same operation in the great plagues when it is necessary that it be placed on them and be constricted, and are recent plagues with their blood, those which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer, then it is not understood in the position of this powder, but rather treat those with what we have said, so that you place on them some digested poultices, or that you place on them powder of barley flour with water and honey until they get a poultice; and then treat those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if a plague occurs with a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with a spatula.
And I say the cure of the fractures of the head in that which is venomous.
Of the plagues of the neck.
But if the plague occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in medication, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is incised or the artery, then if it is a nerve, do not treat it, but rather that its cure be avoided with what makes vehement styptication, such as ziniar and zegi that is vitriol and similar to them, because they are harmful to the nerves and oppose that. And do not place on the plague any cause of all cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the most delicate of all the members.
And if that is cured with light medicines, such as is washed with sweet water, some time infused in rose oil or non-rose oil, and then washed with sweet water and the other pebbles minced according to this manner, and humid poultices.
But if the ulcer is large, then administer sutures, or constrict the lips of it, and then care for it with poultices until it is healed.
But if the ulcer is deep or an accident has occurred in it to the lower part of the wound, then perforate that in the most depressed area.
But if in the ulcer an artery is already incised and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry that, or tie that, or cauterize that if necessary to stop the bleeding.
But if the spinal bones of the neck or all have already been incised, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the trachea with sutures over the trachea and do not touch that; lift that and return it to its natural figure, and then strengthen that with a decent structure, and leave that for a few days; and then care for that with ointments in which there is styptic and excitation until it is healed.
But if the ulcer has already been made in the bone, then strike that, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can of them; and what to you is not apparent, leave that inside until the ulcer is purged, and it is separated and the discharge from it is relieved.
And if the ulcer is recent, then pulverize over that the powder which is recommended to you. But if a fistula has been made in the ulcer, then cure that with the water of which the memory will come in its chapter.
If it is a percussion of a lance or of a knife, and sometimes of it the depth, then consider more if from the ulcer there is windiness when the patient is ill; then you know that the ulcer is mortal.
And if in it there is no depth and the ulcer is recent with its blood, then you place in it of the first hour powder, and do not strengthen that so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and that it returns to the heart and that it kills the patient, but place in it attractive ointment, and unbind that twice a day.
And if the ointment is not to you present, then you place in the orifice of the ulcer a cotton cloth so that it sucks that which is of the humidities; and make that the patient sleep on the ulcer so that it runs that which is in it adjusted.
But if from the ulcer have passed three days or more and does not occur to the patient spasms nor tremor of heart nor constriction of the throat, and sometimes the other good dispositions of him, then you know that the ulcer is saved; and therefore cure that with poultices and with the other cure until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is excused, and already all time is open, then you know that already a fistula has been made; therefore cure that by its chapter.
And if the ulcer is by incision of a spade or of a knife, and is simple in the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure that with the water which is preceded by sutures, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if already has been made a penetration in the bone, and already from it incised pieces, then you turn the ulcer and try to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them inside until the ulcer is purged, that the extraction of them is relieved.
And of the other accidental ulcers in the other members the judgment in cure is the judgment of the water that we have said.
Of the Belly Ulcers.
The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or little, or medium.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and see that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of the intrusion of them to their place as soon as possible, for it opens and is thickened for which the entry of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is medium, for in that one the reduction of the bowel is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
And you know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that are convenient in sutures of the other ulcers of the body.
And two other sutures proper communicate to the others, but however they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the ulcer is small and there is caused any cause of the bowel by that, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then this is in one of two manners: or by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when to the bowel has come inflammation by the coldness of the air.
And therefore when this is so, then cove that you scalfe that as if you were submerging a sponge or cloth wet in tepid water alone, or which you squeeze in water with squill, and spice, and embrocate with that the bowel until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes this is done with a decoction, and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
And therefore, when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which are boiled other and mallows, for by this it is alleviated the contents of it with little cause.
But if the contents of it are excused by this cure, then you split the disruption a little with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first cure is better, when it is proper that it is not a section, and not an occupation to dry by necessity and deficiency.
Of the instrument, such is its shape:
One part of it is sharp, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is subtle, and not with the subtlety of a spatula, rather it is blunt a little.
And therefore, when the plague is amplified and the intestine is pushed out, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the form of its natural, in its proper place, if possible, for that is better.
But when the disruption is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then you place his head and feet higher than the middle parts.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you place your attention and consideration always in that way so that the part in which the plague is is higher than the other.
And thus you must administer this in great plagues and in middling plagues.
And in small plagues, place what is prepared by you, and make that it be ministered between your fingers, the one which has the disruption entirely with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then uncover from that to that which sews any cause to another.
And this is the manner of common suturing: one that takes the needle, or count of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the plague; and then lays it from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthens the needle one, or another that you do not put thread in the two extremities of the cord, with two extremities of the chaplet that is below the cord of the fingers, until you make that penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the chaplet, and so are made four orders.
And then strengthen with thread double in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the plague by decent addition; and then lay down the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in that, and then tie that with thread as you tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the whole constriction of the plague.
And let the needles be middling between thickness and subtlety, for the subtle needles lightly cut the flesh; and the thick ones are of difficult entrance in the cord, and therefore by that they must be middling in subtlety and thickness.
And let the needle not be placed in two extremities of the cord properly, so that the flesh is not lightly incised and that the plague be healed before its consolidation.
And let not the sutures be prolonged so that the plague is not prohibited from consolidation.
And then cut the extremities of the needles so that they do not prick the patient's sleep; and place on the suture powders expanded of all parts, the ones which have the extremities of the needles; and leave those until you know that the plague is already consolidated.
And this kind of suturing with needles in this manner is most convenient in small plagues, for it suffices in the suturing of them one needle or two or around those.
But the second suturing is common: and it is that you administer with suturing the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the chaplet, in one go, with a needle in which thread is enveloped equal in subtlety and thickness.
And when with the needle you have penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that same part from which you commenced, so that the thread is retracted from the most superior part to the plague, so that the suturing be according to the suturing of cloth with which the cloths are tightened.
And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suturing is what the men do.
And with this suturing I healed the plague which was inflicted on a man in his belly which had been plagued with a knife, and the disruption of the plague was greater than a palm, and it was pushed out from the bowels around two palms of the bowel of the middle place and the disruption was in the middle of the limb; and therefore I reduced that after the bowel had been pierced by the plague for twenty-four hours.
And the plague was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or around, and I cured that one and he is healed; and then that was visible for most years, and it is converted in its dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by miracle fire, because I did not cure that wound with an enguent, because it was in a place where enguent was not found nor any medicine, but I placed over the plaque a hot cloth twice a day and assiduous washing with honey water until it healed.
But I say two kinds of suture proper according to the narration of Paraula.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the tendon, and you insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
And therefore, as the needle penetrates the tendon and in that middle laceration according to rectitude and length of the whole body, and leaves the extremity of the ciph (?), in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate in the other extremity the needle from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the mihat.
And therefore, as you have made that penetration, then you make that penetration another time in that same extremity of the mihat from the front part to the back part; and leave the extremity of the ciph(?) that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity from the back part to the front part.
And make penetrate with that one your penetration with which you make that penetration in the ciph(?) in the extremity of the mirat which is in the part of it while all that penetrates.
And then, as you begin from this same side and sew with the extremity that is of the ciph(?) in the other place, and extract the needle from the tendon which penetrated, and then reduce that one in that tendon and body the extremity of the ciph(?) that is in the other side with this extremity of the mirat; and extract that one from the tendon which is of part of it.
And do this one time and another, and do this one time then another until you sew all that which is front according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with suture of pellicies with which you sew the hairs, in this way that you sew the ciph(?) one time from the part of the extremity of the tendon, and that you leave that other time while you make it completed.
But the second kind of proper suture which I call Gualia, and this is of its service and by it recommended, is that you sew that one according to similarity with which certain medicants sew that one, in this way that they join all part to its corresponding part to it convenient by nature; and apply the extremity of one of it and the extremity of the mirat to the other extremity of it, and this is done according to that which you to you recommend.
So that you put the needle in the extremity of the mirat to your proper side from the front part, and make that penetration to the back part in that same one, and leave two extremities of the ciph(?); and then revolve the needle and make that penetration from front to back in two extremities of the ciph(?).
And then revolve those each one, and make each one penetrate from the back part into the front part in two extremities of the mirat others that are in the contrary place.
And this manner of suture is better than the common suture lighter, and is the suture of which I previously mentioned recollection.
This is the service of Gualia
But some, they said, suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so is that you introduce in these ones each one a thread, and begin with introduction of needle of that which you owe you, and make that penetration into the other place according to suture of those with which they sew the guts equally.
And know that when disruption is in the middle place of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than of the other places of the belly.
But the judgment of medication of plague is judgment of the other plagues.
Which cause is because when you obtain the plague recent with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the hernia and sew that one and fit that one decently, then pause over that carnal powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that some enguents which are at your presence until they make hard and they break the threads, and be consolidated ciph(?) and mirat; and then cure that as it is the cure of the other plagues until it is healed.
But if to you are not present the medicines, then pause over that immediately, because it begins to throw brac, hot cloth, and change that two times a day, as to you and I taught, until it is healed, because you do not indigeysses of other medication in many dispositions when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague communicates in lesions to the main members, then you must submerge wool leon in oil of good quality, or in oil rubbed, and pause that in the circuit of the places that are between the angles and leave the aysselas.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in their hernias, because many times that must be, then cauterize that one with vi stiptic black tebe, and more so if the poyredura is reached in the hernia and is made exitura penetrating into the concavity of it.
And know that that one which is of the thick hernia is of pus lighter healing than that one which is in the subtle hernias.
And it is of difficult healing because the hernia which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from plague that comes in it of all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of the magnitude of it that is in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of the proximity of that to the nature of nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the plague is the cloth, and you obtain that recently, reduce that according to your recipe with which you reduce hernias similarly.
But if it has passed into the space and is already made green or black, then you should strengthen that with a file over the area that is blackened by it, so that blood flows, because in the cloth are veins and arteries.
And then cut that which is other than that ligament, and place the ends of the file pending from the part where the plague has gone through, so that upon you it is relieved the attraction of it, you must the removal of the cloth and emission of the arm of the plague.
Remembrance of the plagues when they happen in the hernia.
When a disruption happens in the hernia and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some men, for this reason because I saw that one who was plagued in his belly with a lance blow and the hernia was on the right side of the stomach, and the hernia was old and made a fistula, and he of it had management and flatulence.
Therefore, I thought of the cure of him since he was not confident in the healing of him, but I continued to subtlety that within that which was healing and the place is consolidated.
And I saw that the place already consolidated, I put on the patient that he should not lean on that accident of evil in his belly; and do not become anyone for that evil accident and remain in their thousand dispositions eating and drinking, and then enter into baths and is exercised in his days.
And already said some experienced that when a hernia happens in the belly, and it is small, then it is necessary that it be tied according to this manner: and is that you take a few sprigs of large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the hernia and place a sprig of those that has the mouth open over the two lips of the hernia; therefore when it takes upon those and strengthens its mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another sprig near the first, and do not cease this to do with sprigs one near another according to the quantity of the whole hernia.
And then reduce that and also the hernia; and remain those annexed heads in the belly until the hernia is healed; and do not happen to the patient any harm.
And already it is possible that the hernia be tied with a subtle file which is made of the belly of beast annexed with it, because it is more in needle; and is that you take the extremity of these files of belly, and be it much skinned, and then tie the extremity of it with a file of it, enveloped, and then enter that file in needles and body with that the hernia, and reduce that in the disruption.
And this manner of suture with sprigs is not but according to a way of trust and of hope.
But if the hernia is large and wide, mostly if it is in one of the subtle bellies, because then it is not born but subtlety, and it is not the healing of it at all.
Of the cure of zuchem and fistula.
Know that every hernia and abscess when it is inflamed and becomes old, and is made an ulcer, and is not consolidated and throws out arm all the time and is not cut off, then, in any member that it is, universally it is called fistula and we call that azukem.
And fistula according to truth is a fibrous, hard, white knot, with which there is no pain and to which the concavity is like the concavity of a bird's feather; and for this reason, that one is called some rizatz, that is, feather.
And it is in some men humid, which throws out arm; and for a little while the humidity is cut off in some hours. And some times this humidity is moved, and is little, and is thick, and is subtle.
Already and shown all those causes, and the signs of them and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
And I want as I make to you know the cure of fistula which is made by way of operation with my hand.
And know that fistula happens in all the members of the body; because of those are fistulas that reach the great veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the head, or to the belly, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to any of the vertebrae of the spine, or to any of the joints composed by composition as that of the hand and the foot; and of those that give to it proximity of the principal member and of likenesses.
And therefore of these fistulas that are according to this manner are of the diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and occupation with this is work and ignorance.
And if it is of the fistulas any the depth of which does not reach these places that have been said, and you wait and confide in the cure of it, and you want to arrive at knowledge of it, then take a probe or of iron, and if the fistula goes according to rectum, and inquire that with it.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a probe of fine lead, because lead with the lightness of its body is relieved and curved of its tortuosity.
And if the fistula is having hideous moths, it is not to you possible that you signify upon it with a probe.
Therefore, cleanse the orifice by its orifices, because the humidity by which you cleanse that goes through the other orifices and flows from them.
And then inquire exquisitely, according to what manner to you is possible that you know if here has the bone or the nerve, and is the concavity of the fistula distant or close, or is a fistula to which its orifices are hideous and this over all with the sum of your strength, with your interrogation, with which you interrogate the patient, and the invention of the pain you owe your compression with the hand over the place, and similar to the significations and of the causes accidental to the abscess.
And when you will have stood upon all those causes with true station, then come to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is fistula apparent close or in salt place, distant from joint, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which you and I have said.
Then you dry the fistula according to that which before is said of the narration of it, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of theil and of similar things, and cure that within that it be healed.
But if the fistula is of distant depth, and is according to rectum, then cover that which you incised in the preon as much as to you is possible, and then modify that of all its corrupted flesh; and then administer poultices enveloped in acute medicines, and introduce those into the concavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do this with that some times within that the acute medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the concavity of the fistula of the corruption.
And then restore that with poultices which engender healthy flesh within that it be healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize that according to that we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is due to you certify that, then you inquire that and dry that according to that we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or of nerve or of principal member as we have said.
But if the bone is to you discovered and there is in it any corruption and blackness, then you root that within that the corruption be hosted all; and then cure that with that which it encarnates within that it be healed.
And if it is not healed and throws a brac as it did, then you know that you have not arrived at the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover over it secondarily and exquisitely do the root of it and the purification of it with the rear strong tie, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, well is; and if not, then you know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore to you in that there is born only to leave that.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is to you possible to throw that, then you throw it with subtle forceps which convenience to that.
And if there are many bones, then exquisitely do the extraction of all those, and of those leave none cause with your strength.
But if to you makes contrariety any cause of the humidities, and in their incision there is no fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
But if to you is not preparation to remove the bones of your hour, then pause over the plaque that which can cause the plaque that, and leave that within that that is around those bones of flesh and of ligaments, and guard the plaque that it not be consolidated, and be constricted the section which you have incised in your operation.
However, if you fear, pause over it cot submerged in sopre trissat with oil, or cot submerged in Egyptian anguent, or in one of the green poultices, because when they will have softened those ligaments, and the bones are of their separation the ablation, and of those traction is relieved.
But if it is a great bone as the bone of the hip or of the joint or similar to those, and that which of it is corrupted is the face of it so only, then root that with resio so only rear within that it be hosted that blackness and corruption, and then restore the plaque.
But if that which of it is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already achieved the medulla of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and that all incise within the place where the corruption has been reached, and then cure that within that it be consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you make a man in his bed so that you may place that as an example and helper on your operation.
Take a young man around xxx years old, who has an accident in his groin, and the pain from the inside out is on the matter of the body, as the matter has come to the groin, and it is matter of abscess with a large abscess, and it is not to him an external cause.
And therefore take the time with that by the error of the doctors, as the abscess is opened, and there come from it many materials, and its cure is properly stopped as the leg is fistulated, and made in it many horrific things, which all throw out pus and the humidity of the body.
And therefore the cure of many doctors around two years, and not in those wise but in the art, as I was called.
And I saw the leg of him and the materials that ran from him those horrific things for a great body; and already the body of that man was all stabozit and the color of it was citrina.
And therefore I inserted the tenta into one of those horrific things and reached the tenta to the bone.
And then I and scrutinized all the horrific things and found those to reach their all parts of the leg.
And then I me cut and incised over one of the horrific things as I described a part of the bone, and I found that corrupted, and it was already terrible and corrupted and degraded; and it was already corrupted a part of the leg as it had penetrated into the middle.
And then I sewed that which to me was discovered and prepared from the uncovered bone.
And I cured that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I excised and sewed, and I had already drained it.
And then I placed the restoration of the plague with medicinal consolidatives for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I repeated and discovered over the bone second time over the first discovery, and I found continuing corruption with the bone.
And I sewed what appeared to me of that corruption, and then I was perforated to make the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered over it another time and did not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and perforated the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I incised around a palm of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
And it was not necessary iteration in the operation of it and section of it but for the disposition of the frailty of it and for the scarcity of the tolerance of it and fear of it of death, because to it happened in all hours for superfluity of evacuation syncope evil.
And therefore the healing is by whole healing, and nothing is in place of bone hard flesh; and it is made good the disposition of it in its body and returned the virtue of it; and it is converted in its dispositions and did not make to it contrariety in ambulation nor harm in any cause.
But if the bone is eminent in the place of the body already drawn, then when you succeed this in this manner: and that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that eminent bone, and command to someone that it extends it upwards; and place that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then tie that over the flesh that is left the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you pull the flesh to the left sides, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to sew so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
And place a board or table below the bone decently, because when you do this it is not forbidden the saw that does not succeed the corrupted flesh.
And cover that it be the sawing over the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, and force to sawing of it another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, abates is the one part continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh of all parts totally; and then place a board below, and then saw that of the first part where is the corruption so that it be continued the sawing of the other part.
And be the sawing according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if from the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in it reason but engine.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or of the foot, it is very difficult; however, cover that you inquire the corruption in what manner appears to you, and that you open that, and clean that according to whichever disposition which is to you possible, and in case engine be rectified to you, when it does not make to you contrariety vein or nerve.
And know which are the incisors and the saws to incise these bones are very according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and the greatness and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; for that cover when you prepare for all species of operation instrument convenient to that operation.
And know that this operation signifies to you about the type of instrument of which you indigeysses; when you are great study and long and knowledge of the ways of this art, and witness of ways of illnesses, for then you already have by yourself that which is convenient to them of the instruments to all illness.
And you so to you forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will place as simple with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experiment on others. Shape of saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Shape of a ray: Let the head of this ray be according to the shape of the head of a star-shaped key, and the points of it be according to the shape of the points of the althefegi.
And it is not convenient otherwise than that with that they be confractured the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or the mouth is wide.
Shape of a smaller razor:
Shape of a lat razor:
Shape of another saw decently made: let it be arched as much as possible and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of a boy dagger decently made. Shape of it:
Shape of a razor which has a concavity:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another razor of curved extremity:
Shape of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Shape of another minor incisor:
Shape of another incisor; this one resembling a ray, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ration of the bones:
Shape of a ray which is convenient to the ration of that which is perforated of the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and of acute extremity.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly as to all the causes that we have said of razors and incisors and saws.
Of incision extremities and of the serration of the bones.
The extremities can be caused either intrinsically or extrinsically, or as you will have medicated that corruption by cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption goes from the member which you do not strike any cause, then as you incise that member into that the honor of the corruption, so that the patient escapes by that of death or malice which is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that one to whom it happens, is that the member is made black before it is cured that fire has already burned it, or you may approach the blackness before the poultice of that one is applied to that member which seizes it and which nourishes the whole body; and therefore, you must incise that one.
And similarly if the cause of the corruption is the percussion of some venomous causes such as from a sea scorpion or viper or rutabaga and similar.
And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it may enter into the hand.
And similarly if it happens to the hand, then you incise it at the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption so that it may spread in the forearm.
And if instead of that, then you incise the arm into the armpit at the junction.
And if the corruption passes another and sometimes encircles the armpit, then in that is the death of the patient; and administer another cause another to that in cure is the quantity of virtue.
And similarly do of the foot when corruption envezeys the toe of the foot, then you incise it into one of the toes.
And if it takes hold in the heel of the foot, then you incise the whole foot. But if it may enter into the thigh, then you incise the thigh into the junction of the thigh.
And if the corruption has already reached the thigh, then in it there is no other than dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the manner of incising the member or of sawing it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part furthest from which you want to incise, and strengthen another ligament over the place; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments in a lat spatulum until all the flesh is uncovered; and then you incise or saw.
And so that it be placed cloth of linen from all parts so that it does not touch the place itself, and that it comes to the patient lesion adjusted and abscess caut.
But if it happens flux of blood when you work, then you cauterize the place carefully, or place upon it some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
And then bind the afflicted member with a convenient ligament, and care for it until it is healed.
And I tell you this that happens to a man in his foot, this same accident that I have told you, which is that a blackening occurs in his foot with burning that was assembled like a fire's combustion.
And that corruption blackens first in his toe before it spreads throughout the entire foot.
And therefore that man prepares himself by putting on a poultice that he feels will help the cure to go to the member with the vehemence of it that it throbs with pain and burning, and the blackening of that foot enters into the joint, and fire heals.
Long time blackens that same corruption in the toe of the hand I indicated.
And therefore it comes to me, and so I am persuaded to reflect that superfluity with what I place on the hand of the medicines, to approach the purification of the body of it; and it does not reflect the superfluity and begins to go to the other toe before it began in the hand.
And it implores me to cut the hand of it, and I do not want to do so, hoping for the reflection of that superfluity, and more than I fear the incision of the hand of it dead, because the virtue of the ailment was over the casing.
And since he left me, he returned to his land and I came to know that that man prepared and cut his hand entirely, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narrative except so that it may be helpful regarding what happens to this ailment, and that its significance by which it is signified and according to which it is treated.
Of the cure of wounds and the quality of clysterization with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members, and the space of the abscess is prolonged while it makes a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and pus is extracted from it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is above it is as subtle as cloth, and it has not reached the back corruption, and has not imprinted on the bone or on the nerves or on the ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
But however, if the space is prolonged while the corruption presses into some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure of it is that the skin is incised entirely as if it were revolved, and more so when it is subtle and made like cloth, and composes that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin adheres and that the corruption has not reached further consequence, and in the skin there has passed through from the front, then you cure that with clysters.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the brac that you see is of a fetid odor, then you clysterize it with an Egyptian medicine which is of oil and strong wine and ziniar receiving equal parts, and they are placed in a vessel, and they are heated over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and clysterize it with that the sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then you extract it with a sponge; and do this for as many days until the sinus is purified and the stench is removed.
And some times it is clysterized with ash water, when this medicine is not present to you; and it is that you take the ash of vite, and put water over it; and then you collect that and clysterize it with it until you confess that the sinus is then healed.
And if the ailment has no tolerance over the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then clysterize it with water and honey and a little crushed ziniar, and clysterize it with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey is that it purifies and washes, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and more so when in the wine there is superfluity of astringency and dryness.
And as you do this sometimes and you confess that the sinus is already healed, then clysterize it with water that makes flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take of dyphynicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or that you clysterize it with some medicines and other washes that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise of washes.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow in which the clyster nozzle is not received, then you enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and place in it a poultice enveloped in Egyptian wash or basil wash until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the lips of it with suture and leave it in the quantity in which between the clyster there is addition.
And if the orifice from which the pus flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the lowest place that is in it so that the pus flows downwards, because when the pus is constricted in the depth of the sinus the flesh is generated in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the environment of the lowest bone as you want, then you perforate that you prepare the member with the preparation by which the pus flows lightly according to what is fitted to you and that there is no cause of the pus retained in it.
But that which is on the orifice of the sinus, the which you remove every hour so that it may escape that which is adjusted in it of the arm. And so that you know if that which flows from it of the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is undigested.
And thus you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in it an abscess.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is placed on the orifice of the sinus already adheres, or begins to adhere, then the third day you untie it, and when you untie the bandage, then change the cloth for another and renew the poultice.
But if from the sinus there appears a long space of subtle virus, then do not despair of its adherence, for the healing of it approaches, for some men in whom the slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and of those it is done the contrary of it.
And if from the sinus after many days there is issued arm undigested, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and is the prolonged cause, then you adjust in the drying of the medications, and if the medications are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as a diaphana poultice, when there is in it adjusted superfluity of addition of zegi.
And the last which is cured, is that you take of diaphana poultice and be dissolved in rose oil, and be on it poured a little vinegar in its substance, and then apply that to it, and use of that.
And already does it seem in that action, when there is no arm, diaphana poultice, honey when it is cooked until it is thickened, and use of it; or that you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind all and pulverize it on the honey when it is on the fire, and then line it on cloth and apply that on the sinus; and line it with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and pulverize it on cloth and apply that.
And sometimes are administered with it the long and roots of lily celestial (and it is lily celestial) and flour of herbs and centaurea, and use of those simples or adjust them, grind them and sift and pulverize on the honey which I have recommended; and use of it.
And if the sinus is prolonged, and is not healed by this cure, then know that the corruption is in the bone of it, and already make inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with fistular cure, as it has been said above.
Of the cure of panaritium, and of ingrown nails, and of the addition of a finger incision and section.
Panaritium is an abscess which arises from the nail of the finger of the hand or of the foot, and it often arises in the other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, or it is an abscess of an abscess caut, or it is corrupted, and it casts matter while it corrodes the roots of the nail, and often corrupts that whole, and often transmits its corruption to the bone until it is there a foul odor, and is made the extremity of the finger lame, and the color of it is made dark.
And therefore when you will have that with what we have said in the division and do not apply your cure, then know that you should cut with iron all the superfluity that is remained from the nail and then cauterize the wound with that, for cauterization is very useful in that.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail voids already compress the flesh to the sides of the fingers, and they begin to prick and pierce that, then know that you should place a fine needle under the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and drive that up and cut that flesh with ease, and place on that which remains of the flesh of the corrosive comburent medications until it is all removed; and then cure that with poultices until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already entered the bone, then know that you should cut the bone that and extract it, for no time is healed that in it the bone is corrupted.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption going into the finger, then you should cut it in one of the joints according to how its remembrance is pressed, and then cure that until it is healed.
But if to the nail there is a blow or friction, and there is in that a vehement pain, then know that at the beginning you should poultice the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse section from above down, and guard yourself that the section does not reach into the flesh that is below the nail, for you will make happen to the patient a vehement pain, and it will be a cause to the birth of the flesh adjusted superfluously in the place; and then cure that place with what soothes the pain.
This is a difficult one, but I'll give it a shot.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth of them in some nuts of the said. But the one that is born in some nuts of the finger does not hurt, and this one that is born in the joints is very painful.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is lighter, and that you should cut its root with a spatula.
But of the one that is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore guard yourself from the abscess of it.
But in the one that is born in the finger, cover that you cut at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw with one of those saws convenient to that, and then cure that inside that it may be healed.
But consolidation which happens to the fingers between their many movements or by birth of the man who is born this way, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similar things, then cover that you succeed that consolidation inside that the fingers return to their natural form.
And then pause between their cloths of them infused in olive oil rubbed so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between those, or pause between those a lamina of subtle lead inside that it may be consolidated according to what you cover.
And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and convenient to the figure of the member.
Of incisions of vices, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and they are veins convoluted thick full of melancholic superfluities which come in motion of the limbs of the body, and the major advent of them in the legs, and more in the legs of the travelers and the laborers and the porters.
Therefore cover that you administer purgative of the body of black bile some times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
But the cure of them with iron is according to two manners: one is that it be incised and that the black blood be thrown out, and the other manner is that the vein be elevated and all of it be extracted.
The section of it is according to this manner: embroil at the beginning the leg with warm water motion inside that the thick blood be resolved, which is feculent of the leg, and then strengthen the leg of the patient to the most sovereign part of the thigh, inside to the part behind the knee with a bandage, and then dry the vein in a place, or in two, or in three with wide incision, and then elevate the black blood with your hand from the part behind the leg inside up, and down in, inside that from the blood be issued the quantity that you want and that times will suffice, and which will take the virtue of the sickness.
And then tie that, and command him that he abstain from the foods that engender black bile.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that night to the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you that raise the leg of the patient, if in it there are motions, and then put it in a bath and embroil the leg of it with warm water inside that it becomes red and the veins are exuberant; or that it be exercised by strong exercise, if bath is not to you present, inside that the limb be scalded.
And then cut the tendon in the right of the vein by incision in the long or in the back of it finger, or in the lowest of it of the ankle.
And then open the tendon with pincers and excoriate the vein from all parts inside that it appears to the feeling, and is of the appearance of it that times that rug declining to blackness.
And therefore come evasive and from the tendon you times that white which is cord.
And then you put below it the ray inside that it be elevated and be thrown from the tendon, and suspend it with an ounce or lion's horn.
And then cut another incision near that incision for three fingers, and then excoriate the tendon from the part above the vein inside that it appears.
And then elevate that and incise it in the back incision of the ankle, and then extract that and elevate it inside that it be issued by the second incision, and then extract that from the incision that is above it.
And do that inside that you extract that from the incision that is most sovereign or most high of all the incisions, inside that all is issued; and then incise it.
And if you do not obey to your extract and elevate, then introduce a needle with a strong double file and tie it and extract it, or introduce below it the ray and revolve your hand to all parts inside that it be thrown. And guard yourself that it not be incised; because if it is broken, it is done to you difficult to elevate that motion and it is come upon the patient for that damage.
And come that all that aura be thrown out, then pause upon the place of the plague wool immersed in wine and olive oil rubbed and olive unrubbed, and cure that inside that it may be healed.
And if the gut is contracted and has a twisting that is in its wrapping in the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must do upon that entire twisting of it and the places of its wrapping, and then suspend that with hooks while you raise that whole thing.
And guard yourself that you do not cut the vein and that you do not damage it, for it will be difficult for you to raise that; and serve your prudence in that.
Form of the incision made on the dried gut:
It is not sharpened like the hooks nor is it of sharp extremity so that it does not damage the vein; and it is of thick flexibility like a lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; it has in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
Of the extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands as in the At-Tigris in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India hot and arid of little fertility and in which there are no herbs nor trees.
And it is strongly produced in other places of the body other than the legs.
And the gestation of it is of putrefaction that comes from the bone as if venom from the inside of the body serpents and worms and scarides and worms that generate between the bone and the flesh.
And a sign of the reception of its arrival is of this vein that accides in the leg inflammation vehement; and then the place is vesicated; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that vesication which seems like a root pulled from a plant.
And therefore when it appears from him the extremity, then you must wrap over that a piece of lead of which is the weight of a drake. Within two drachmas, and bind that and let the lead suspended from the leg.
And as many times as you see from it any cause to the parts outside, wrap that in lead and tie that. And if the motion is prolonged, then you must incise a part of it and wrap the remnant; and do not incise that of root within that it be outside, for if you incise that it is contracted and enters into the flesh and makes it happen abscess and pus in the place and bad ulceration.
Because that it must be treated gradually and be extracted little by little, until that it be thrown out from the end of it and there remains no cause of it in the body.
And of this vein it is issued in some men that it is in its length of five palms and ten, and already it has reached me that it issued one of twenty palms.
And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then introduce the ray into the tract of it and perforates that with a long tract with the body, until that it be evacuated all that which is in the matter, and administers putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and come to it many orifices, and it is issued from each orifice a branch.
And therefore cure that as we have said in the division and with that which is said below.
Of the section above the worms generated under the skin and it is called the bovine ailment.
This ailment is called in some lands of us the bovine ailment because it often happens to oxen and it is a worm few one which is born between the bone and the flesh, and it goes in the whole body up and down, and it is shown in the feeling of us its movement from member to member until it disrupts the bone and comes out.
And the generation of it is by putrefaction of some humors as if it were worms and serpents and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared for the malice of it, because when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and it has reached the brain, then very strong fever occurs in it and it enters and destroys the brain, and this happens many times.
And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done if not by its ambulation and appearance of it to the feeling, and then you must strengthen that which is above it and that which is below it with a bandage and constriction strong, and then dry over it and extract that.
And if it is buried in the flesh and not the above, then you pause cautery with fire over the place until it dies, and the major cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
And if you see that being reached to the head near the brain, then strengthen over the forehead with a strong constriction, and then dry over it, and extract that; and make the patient use of modification of his body with medicines evacuant putrid bad humors, and guard himself from foods that generate putrefaction.
Of the section above the ailment nafir.
This ailment is called in our land nafir, and it is pain which comes in some members, and then it is changed from member to member.
And I have already seen that according to what I will tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and since it was warm for an hour, I saw that inflammation go as if a worm was pushing towards it, but more lightly than it should be, as if it were living silver when it runs from place to place.
And then it went into the pain of that place and quivered in the muscle, and I placed my hand there for an hour.
And then I corrected it in the other arm until I reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to him that he should roll it all over his body as I saw; and it was too marvelous the permutation of it and the speed of member to member. And I had already seen this before in my pupils in this manner, however, I have seen many of them whose pain was transposed from limb to limb. But I did not see this in my pupils as in the woman.
And I did not think it to be anything but that because the woman was old, or of dry flesh and exposed veins, and in this appearance, that volatility was transposed.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retro-cure in those who are delicate and with moist flesh and well-covered veins.
And as you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not to you apparent in the pupil as we have said, then you strengthen over it and leave it lightly and secse over it until that volatility is constricted, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it in your pupils, then you cure it with the shaking of the body and with that which you expel volatility, and charm them with pills of stench and pills of serapi and similar things.
Of extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they are shot, because their diversity is that of those that have large tips, and small, and concave, and blunt, they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have shafts.
And of the signs of the neck is when it is shot in it, and it pierces the bone, and it is emitted from the cyphons which is above the brain, because it happens through it violently soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and roaring in the limbs, and inflammation and roaring of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and very strong the word is cut off and the voice is destroyed, and it is emitted from the place of the plague humidity white resembling dust, and eyes of it resembling the consistency of the flesh.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then you abstain from the cure and the extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it is shot in the heart, are that it is near the left nipple, and feels with that which it has been placed in a hard cause, and it is not a void cause; and very strong the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and running of the plague black blood, and seizes that coldness of the extremities, and a sore cold, and syncope; and therefore you know that death descends all the way down.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are so easily blood sputtered from the plague, and the vessels that are near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient is changed, and expiries great spirit a lot, and demands attraction of cold air.
And if it is shot in the ligament which is in the feet, and the pain then is near the small bones, and it is made the leg great with vehement pain and with sigh, and it is not bad all the limbs of the muscles.
And if it is shot in the stomach, then very strong eyes of the plague are seen and some undigested food.
And if it is shot in the belly, and it is put in it, eyes are seen of the plague, or the fabric, or the intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope in the cure of it extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow is shot in the bladder, and it is emitted from outside urine, and it proceeds from it some cause to the parts outside, and very strong is pain on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
But the other members as well as the face, the neck, the throat, and the shoulders and the helpers, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the hip, and the leg and their similar members, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not touch vein nor artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may signify this to your healing.
The cause is, that in a man struck by an arrow in the lacrimal bone of his nose, at the root of the nose, and you extracted that from the other side, leaving the gray of the eyebrow, and it is healed, and does not cause any harm in the nose.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was struck by it in the gray of his eyebrow, leaving the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be obtained from it except for a small extremity with which it adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head in it, in which there were no eyebrows.
And the Jew healed, and did not cause any harm in his eyebrow.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was struck by it in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one that has eyebrows; and therefore I incised upon it between two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; and therefore I subtiliated it with it, and then extracted it, and the Christian healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who was struck by it in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and therefore, because forty days had passed and there was no change in him from any of his dispositions, I incised upon the arrow and engineered it, and he healed, and did not cause him any harm.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow was lodged in his back, and the plague was consolidated on him, and because it was about seven years, I extracted the arrow from the root of the thigh.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow was lodged in her belly, and the plague was consolidated within her, and she was not changed in her dispositions in any way, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow was lodged in his face and the plague was consolidated, and I broke the arrow, not finding much pain here, and many appearances to this.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes who was struck in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And I was called to his healing after the lodging of the arrow entered three days.
And therefore I felt the plague of the arrow very strictly; and then I inquired about it with a subtle attempt, and I did not feel it; but I felt it pricking below the right eyebrow, and therefore I supposed that that prick was because of the extremity of the arrow.
And I plastered the place with a plaster in which there is attractive and digestive virtue, confessing to myself that the place would be apostemated so that it would appear to me the place of the arrow, so that it would succeed on it.
And there was no harm in the place significant that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days and there was no harm; and the plague was consolidated meanwhile, and I broke the patient's evil from the extraction of it for a space of many days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and recounted this to me.
And therefore I placed upon the plague medicine acute corrosive for many days until it opened, and with the probe I touched it, and felt the extremity of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the shaft.
And then I adjusted in the appearance of the plague by that acute medicine until the extremity of the arrow appeared to me visibly, and it passed to me time with it for the space of time within four months.
And then because the plague had been amplified, and it was possible for me to intervene with the forceps in it, and to remove it, and not to be able to do so by the usual means, then I did not cease to subtly and ingeniously work on it with manners of ingenuity, until one day I began on it with manners of ingeniously hanging it with forceps made descentment, according to how it will come the form of them at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored that plague.
And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it, and the plague was consolidated, and the patient healed for entire health, and did not suffer in him in any way.
And I recount to you the quality of extraction of some arrows so that you may pause this rule and signification upon what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not comprehended by narration nor are they comprehended by the book.
And the wise artificers compare with few about much; and with what is present about what is absent; and finds novel operation and novel instrument deserves the descent of the extraneous causes of the art when they occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not forced out of the members in which they are lodged but according to two manners: or by traction of the place in which they enter; or by the contrary of the other part.
And that which is drawn out by the place in which it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in fleshy place, and it is drawn and forced out.
And if you do not obey the easement of the hour in which it catches, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes soft, and the traction of it and its egress are relieved.
And if it is stuck in the bone and does not obey your pulling, then leave it for a few days and repeat it with traction and movement every day, and it will be out.
And if it does not obey your pulling, then after a few days, cover the area where the arrow pierced the bone with a fine drill until the area around the arrow is widened, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already lodged in the place of the body, and is hidden from the feeling, then you inquire about it with a probe, and if you feel it, then pull it out with some instruments which are convenient for its extraction.
And if you cannot pull it out because of the constriction of the plague and the length of the arrow, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you cut into the plague until it is widened and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is to the ears that it is held, then you cut away the flesh in which it is stuck on all sides with all the skill that you can do; and engineer about that, if you cannot about the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in twisting of those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use with the twist of your hand with forceps on all sides until it obeys; and with subtle skill that the arrow is not broken and that it is made to you difficult traction of it and of that extraction.
And if you cannot about that of your hour, then you leave it for a few days until the parts that are in the circuit of it can be relaxed, and then repeat it when it is relieved. But if to you makes contrariety flux of blood, then you administer that which we have said of cure in its chapter.
And guard your virtue of incision of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer skill in every manner to you possible of the evasion of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and tardiness and firmness as I and to you recounted.
And therefore that you make contrary the arrow so that the patient be according to the figure according to which fire you must the placement of the arrow in it, because it is more helpful. But if that is not to you possible, then you administer that which is to you possible by the figures.
But if the arrows that are outthrust by the contrary of the other part, or which already from it proceeds any part to the parts outside, or makes difficulty the extraction of the arrow by feeling of the part above the codena proper and sometimes that eminent; therefore you cut about that; and let the section be according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp; and then pull it out, because it is made lighter to extraction.
But if it is held in the bone, then you twist the blade according to contrariety until the arrow presses in the bone, and amplify to itself, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat it until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in it, then you impel it with it.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulse, then you introduce and that, if it is blunt, a concave instrument so that between the concavity of it in the tail of the arrow and then impel it with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then you impel it with a strong instrument entering into it, because the arrow is relieved by that.
And if the arrow is envenomed, then cover that you concave all the flesh in which it is the vein, if it is to you possible that, and then care for it with what is convenient.
And if the arrow catches in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and it is near so that you touch it with the probe, and it is to you possible to cut about that, then cut about it and guard yourself from incision of vein or of nerve, and extract it, and then close the wound if it is indignant, and cure it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled:
Let the extremities of them be like the beak of a bird that are made like a saw when they grasp upon the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of those are made many kinds, great, few, and small, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and its pauqueness, and of the width of the wound, and of the constriction of it.
as if with a ray so that it be alleviated the entrance of it in the concave arrow and is impelled with that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy of which it is customary to phlebotomize so .xxx., of which so in the head .xvi., so are two pulsatile veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples appear; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of two holes that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guidegi that are in the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and - these are the veins that are called algelic -; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are .v.; But of those, one is a cephalic, and it is the wild latz; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and deaf, and it is a median vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and of another branch of the cephalic; and the people call that "vein of the whole body," and basilica is a vein which is placed in the domestic latz, and it is called "citillar," and the vulgarians call that "vein of the belly"; and funis of the arm, and it is placed over the focil, and it is that in which it is phlebotomized, and it is that which appears on the poutz by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest said, and there are two ramps in it.
And in the leg and the thigh there are three veins; one of those is that which is below the curvature of the denolh of the wild latz; and the second is sophena, and the place of it is below the thigh of the domestic latz; and the sciatic vein, and the place of it is below the thigh of the wild latz; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
The juvament of the veins that are near the ears is to cataris ancients and emigranea and sahafati and ulceracios of the head bad ancients.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: it is that it be rasped the head of the patient, and it be rubbed the head of the patient in the occiput in the place of both the veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then strangle the patient his neck with a bandage until they appear the two and the places of their being near the ears in two depressed places of the head; and you want that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here it sends with the attempt.
Then you take the cuticular lance, and it is that which is incident, and then you introduce that below the vein in the codena until the phlebotomy comes to the bone. And then you raise your hand with the vein and the codena to the upper parts and incise the vein with an incident incision. And be the length of the incision the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and do thus of the blood as much as you want.
And then strangle with poultices and leave that until it be healed.
And already it has preceded at the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
But of the two arterial veins that are in the temples the juvament of the phlebotomy is to ancient and bad emigranea and obstinate ophthalmia and body of superfluities acute effused to the holes.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck mot until the two veins appear to the feeling by manifest appearance and be demonstrated the pulse of them below your finger; and then you send with the attempt.
And then you raise the codena above the vein to the upper parts with your finger indicating, and introduce the incident phlebotomy below, and elevate the vein upwards; and incise that as you have done in the two other veins; and make run the blood according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then untie the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place on that coat and poultices and strangle that above with a strong constriction, and leave that until it be healed.
And already is preceded the recollection of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
And therefore the juvament of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is to the phlebotomy of the cephalic to the ancient ailments of the face and to emigranea and rigor and fetid ulcerations.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is according to what I recommend to you; it is that the patient constricts his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called fossori of which this is the form of it:
Place the point that is at the head of the furrow over that vein and strike upon it with a pen or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity which you want; and then untie the perforation of the patient and strengthen that while it is healing.
And sometimes it is opened with a fleubotom, however, no that the fleubotom should be of acute extremity as the others, rather it should be of blunt extremity, and fleubotom that according to the transverse, because the bone is proper and strong, it would break it with the fleubotom when it is subtle.
But the benefit of the two veins that are in the lacrimals of the two heels for scabies of the heels by rogor and sebol in the heels, and to the ailments of the face.
And the quality of the fleubotomia is that the patient strengthens the neck with a bandage, and then fleubotom those, and you are standing over the head of it.
And it is made the fleubotomia according to the transverse to longitude a little with fleubotom little, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the fleubotom is subtle, very much the extremity of it is broken.
And then make run the blood as much as is to you necessary, and pause over those cuts, and strengthen those for a night, and then untie those.
But the fleubotomia of the vein of the nose is conferent to acute fever and to soda vehement, and to the ailments of the face and emigranea and rogor that happens in the face, and more when it is old.
And the quality of the fleubotomia of it is that the patient strengthens his neck and then you take his nose with your left hand, and take the fleubotom subtle long and place it in the middle place of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cover that you ultimes your hand with the fleubotom little by little and make run the blood according to your necessity; and then tie it for a night, because that is restored lightly.
But the benefit of the fleubotomia of the two guidegui to constriction of ale and to commencement of leprosy and to many ailments and inpetige and bad ulcerations corrosive as well as herpotromeno.
And the quality of the fleubotomia of those is that the patient strengthens himself in each one in his neck with a ligament; and be the artifices over the head of the patient, and the patient be sitting on a seat.
And then fleubotom the vein at the long with fleubotom ample little by little; and then extract of blood according to temperate quantity or according to what times of necessity that is to what; and then make semblant of the other vein.
And then untie the ligament and strengthen the two veins with stricture middling so that the patient not be pre-occupied, and let it enter into the morning when the plague is healed.
And the benefit of the fleubotomia of the veins algerich, conferent to small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcerations and fissures, and to bad ulcerations that are in the nose and in the circuit of it.
And the quality of the fleubotomia of those is that you make the patient to sit in front of you, and strengthen the neck of him with a bandage, and then you turn the lips of him and look at the two veins of which the one is of the right of the lip and the second of the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each one of both, and this is more because in the circuit of those are veins little black; and therefore, inscise each one by incision inscident.
But if doubt is left you, and you do not know which one of those is, then you understand to incision of the major of those, and of the pus manifest of those.
And make the semblant of the two veins that are in the lips above.
But of two veins that are below the tongue the benefit is to the fleubotomia of the cephalica to prefocacios that are in the guolayro, to the ailment of the uvula, and to ailments of the mouth.
And the quality of fleubotoming those is that you follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and elevate the tongue of him, and look below the tongue, from one side of it vein and from the other side vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
And then fleubotom each one; and guard yourself that you do not ultimes your hand in fleubotoming those, because below those are arteries.
And your veins that are fleubotomized in the groin are in those that corr custom in all men, and the fleubotomia of them is made according to two manners, or put with the fleubotom mirtilat or olive to subtility declining; or secsar with fleubotom cutellar, and appell it alnessil, and this is the form of it:
Make the patient lie as if asleep, and it is necessary to open the concave veins that appear full and large, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this flebotomy is of lesser width and of more subtle extremity, and it is necessary to perform flebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle, citrine blood.
But the usefulness of flebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: that which extracts the blood from the ailments that are left in the throat and neck, and from which the feet and belly.
And it is necessary for the flebotomist, when performing flebotomy of that vein, to guard well and be over-fearful in that, because below it there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy, he will cut that artery and there will be a flux of blood, so that he who flebotomizes that with flebotomy pungent, should bring it down as if it were a needle.
And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you leave that and that you change to the other, or that you seek some branch of it; or that you flebotomize in the place of it at the end of the arm, because that one is manifest; and cut that with flebotomy needle as we have said.
But if you want the flebotomy of the vein, then before the stricture of the arm, touch the place between that you know the place of the wrists, and then place your hand on it with tension; and then lie the arm and cut the vein with concave section with flebotomy needle as we have said; and guard yourself that the percussion for some space of the place of the artery.
And when you see, as if you were stretching the ligament, inflation in the place that you have marked with tension, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if you see the blood flow in the flebotomy as if it were the gold of a child, and the blood is subtle and red, then you know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then you cover and place your hand over that for a long space; and then stop your hand, and if the blood is abscindit, that is, cut off, then you stretch the arm and leave that.
And guard the patient from the moisture of him, and be over-fearful of him and do not harm him for some days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not abscindit, and you see that you do not have present medicine for that, then you should cut the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is contracted, and the blood is abscindit; or that you take a piece of fig, and place that, and take the one majority and stretch that over the place of the vein at the stricture descending am ligament and am pulvils within the other day.
And then if the blood is abscindit, it is well; and if not, then cure that with the water of which it is preceded to the remembrance of the place of the pulvils abscinding flux of blood.
And the abscission of the blood of it is difficult in many dispositions because of the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
But of the fusca vein the flebotomy is a usefulness that extracts the blood from the superior part of the head and from the part below the body; for that because it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalica, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the flebotomist that one be over-fearful in the flebotomy of it, because below it there is a nerve; and therefore if he adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy and touches the nerve, there will come to him stupor, and it is difficult the healing of it, and fort, it is not healed of all; and this nerve many times appears to the feeling; and if it is hidden to some men and it is subtle and not shown, then it is necessary that you pause the flebotomy with the one with which you flebotomize with section of the needle, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein in the length.
The usefulness of flebotomy of the cephalica vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and comforts the ailments of the heels.
And it is necessary in this properly, if you want that the flebotomy is done pungen with flebotomy olive or with flebotomy myrtle; because it is the safest of all the veins, because it is not below it the artery nor nerve.
But however, fort, it is an abscess in some men, when it is not flebotomized in the first percussion, but do not touch in re that abscess.
The first of these is that you should know that flebotomy is not administered unless in the preservation of health and for the hope of it and the precaution of the coming of ailments, and that it should be flebotomy in one of the veins that are in the body, that is: cephalica, fusca and basilica; and that it should be flebotomy at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when there appear signs of repletion.
And a phlebotomy is performed on the third day or after three hours have passed from the beginning of the day.
May phlebotomy be administered, more when it brings convenience and necessity to it, either at night or day, at any hour and at any time.
And that a child not be phlebotomized before they have reached fourteen years, and a woman who is pregnant not be phlebotomized until the fourth month until the seventh, and the elderly not be phlebotomized those who have already passed sixty years.
And since whoever wishes to be phlebotomized in any manner, they must cleanse their bowels before the phlebotomy with a lion's clyster, if in those there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities into the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the main limbs.
And they should not be phlebotomized those patients who are nauseous, suffering from indigestion, or who are recovering from illness or drunkenness until that is removed from them, nor those who are suffering from dropsy, and more that phlebotomy should be feared near colic, vomiting, and abdominal pain, and near multiplication of coitus and labor and exercise of fasting or vigils, and from every cause that dissolves the virtue, whether corporal or animal.
And regarding consideration in the subtle preparation of humors before it, if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if that is possible to it.
And regarding bathing if no cause prohibits it, or exercise by any exercise so that the blood is refined.
And pause the phlebotomy from him in the foot of the day, so it is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And perforsa that the foot of that one be guarded on that day from all evils accidents animals, as it is anguish, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, as it is labor and superfluous pain and coitus and semblance to them.
And to his bed, let them make present the causes in the use of which custom of men with aromatics and scent and with balms and semblance to those according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist upon a cushion that is softer than the cushion of him who is to be phlebotomized.
And regarding extracting his arm, and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and regarding tightening the ligament with a strap and wrap that two times.
And let the constriction be temperate, for the constriction when it is not equal, or the constriction is with superfluity, then prohibit the flow of blood; or it is with softening, and then prohibit the body of blood ascent.
And regarding the constriction, let him who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together meanwhile until the veins are inflated, and declared to the feeling.
And regarding the phlebotomist, anoint his phlebotomy with a little of olive oil properly; and regarding placing his left hand's index finger upon that vein, below the place of which he wishes the phlebotomy, so that the vein flee a little, and the percussion be seated, for of the veins is the one that atrophies as the cords flee, and of those is that which is full of venosity and when he pauses the phlebotomy upon that one it is contracted, and it is uncovered the phlebotomist; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens, that one is straitened.
And therefore, for this, let the phlebotomist be halted and be solicited in all these causes.
And regarding pausing the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one time, then well is it; and otherwise, you iterate that another time below that place a little, or upon it with a festinacio, if the place is not apostate.
And if the place is apostate, or the patient is frightened, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligament, for strong it will draw the apostate caut, nor enter into a bath.
And regarding iterating the phlebotomy if the blood is good.
And if the aperture is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not be the quantity of blood that you wish, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the aperture a little, and do that with a festinacio before the place is apostate, for the place is apostate in many men of little aperture.
But if sometimes that is already apostate, then you do not iterate upon it, for it excuses you no cause; and pause upon that any part of the wound of oil, for it alleviates the body of the blood. And it is better in this place than oil and than the other oils.
And similarly administer a wound of oil in all phlebotomy with which phlebotomies the veins of which the prohibition of the course of blood, and do that tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is placed upon the place, for the blood is refined and is revolved when it is thick.
And if in the place of the phlebotomy is generated a great apostate, for many times it happens, and most to him who has not been bled but that one time, or in the aperture of the vein little, and then you cover, and place upon the place a sponge infused in water and salt, a little scalded, and tighten that for an hour, for it is dissolved.
And now he must make this incision near the vein's opening with a compliment to it or another vein.
And if it remains in the area for some days, some blackness or greenness, do not notice it; and if you want, place on that some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or calamint or something similar.
And many times abscesses and swellings require phlebotomy of the basilica.
And then place your hand over it, and if it is soft, you must place your compression over it, then that prominence is bad and evil; and therefore, be careful that you place on it any cause of what they have said, because it will flow strongly from the artery of blood.
And make a plaster with that which is astringent, so that the place may endure, and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
And now he must extract blood from every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color which appears on the blood.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow until it is rough; and similarly if you see it thick, then you let it flow until it is subtle; and similarly if it is acute, until the sharpness of it is gone.
And now he must for one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in one time, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomy be wide.
And for one who is frail, the opposite of that must be done, and now he must extract it in small portions, and that the cut be narrow.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of the vein is that it be the transverse section, not the puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and from the incision of nerves, and is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And to which it is customary to occur syncope before phlebotomy, and now he must cure that before phlebotomy with a little bread soaked in wine of millegrains or simple oxymel scalded; and extract from the one blood in three or four times.
And if it is a cold constitution, then before phlebotomy, prepare a soak in a syrup of myrrh or in a syrup of honey flavored with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in a syrup flavored and fragrantly smelling.
And if syncope occurs during phlebotomy, and the cause of it is the emission of too much blood, then he must prepare to drink water of meat and fragrant syrup; and use aromatics with algualea, and be the one to rub their feet with it.
And use of the other causes that have been said in the division in the chapter of syncope by evacuation.
And he who wants to have his arm opened and dissolve his blood according to the second time, must to him whose phlebotomy is by much evacuation, and the virtue of him is frail, that he evacuate the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
But he who wants to have his arm opened, and take his blood a second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
But he who wants to draw the blood from his body contrary to the part to which it declines, must be opened on the second day or the third.
But that body in which there is much blood already scalded and is acute and causes fever, must have blood drawn from it in one time and a large quantity be drawn, and the incision be amplified until syncope occurs, because you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and that you place your hand over the wrist of him from the blood, so that it does not become death in place of syncope, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not, when you want to open the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is made difficult the emission of blood, that you press over it with vehemence and curve it slightly, because this is too bad.
Have the vein let go until it is phlebotomized properly; or remove this with the sharpness of the phlebotomy which is coagulated blood in the orifice of the vein; or place on it of tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress this with light compression until the blood is gone.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the abscess is settled.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then you bleed him on that spot or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is phlebotomized in place of the fusca or basilica, when those are not available or are hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient inserts his hand in cold water until the focus reddens and the vein appears manifestly.
And then it is tightened over it with a bandage with medium constriction; and phlebotomize according to the small transverse, not longitudinally nor according to the length.
And make the incision wide and make your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize that one on the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you iterate the hand in the cold water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
But if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the iteration of the hand in cold water, and the blood is placed on the body in cold water in times of winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all the others, because it has no pulsating vein, nor nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein of the right hand is convenient for the ailments of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of this is that you  strengthen the hand with a bandage or with your hand, because you have placed it in cold water, until the vein is inflated and is well demonstrated to the eye; and then phlebotomize that transversally; and if you incised that of all no it will not bleed.
And conserve that you do not finish your hand with the phlebotomy, because from there the nerves of the fingers are denuded of flesh.
And then iterate the hand in the cold water and let the blood run in that, because if you do not iterate that in the cold water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited from flowing.
And as it is extracted the blood according to the quantity of need, then you place on the vein oil and salt, so that it not be consolidated tightly; and similarly, it is necessary that you do in all straight vein.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of that of the left hand, is that it is convenient for the ailments of the spleen.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of this as you have done in the other.
And the benefit of the saphenous vein of the phlebotomy is to the ailments that are in the part below the body, as well as ailments of the womb, and retention of menstruation, and to ailments of the lungs and ulcers of the thighs and of the legs old, and to their likenesses of the ailments.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of this is that the patient inserts their foot into cold water and makes friction upon that until the veins appear well; and lie upon the junction of the foot with a bandage; and the place of the vein the talon appears, and from that its ramifications in the face of the foot are motz ramps.
And therefore phlebotomize the widest ram or below the calf from the talon of that, because it is better and safer.
And if you phlebotomize that in the face of the foot, then you guard yourself from the nerves that are below that on the face of the foot, and place your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize for the traverse, as if you wished to incise it.
And be the phlebotomy skillful.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited; then you iterate the foot of him in the cold water and let the blood run in that until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then iterate with the phlebotomy in a little more, because the place is safe; and do not fear of that malice, but that you guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do of the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
And of the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is below the heel of the left side.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of this is to pain of the hip when it is by blood caut.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of this is that the patient enters in bath, and fastens and strengthens the thigh of him from the side of the wide up to the talon of the four fingers in a long and subtle bandage, so that it appears not by that.
And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each engine that is to you possible and according to the traverse, and it is better; or incise that by incision or secces that by section, because the place of it is safe.
And she is in many men well-liked; and if you touch that, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then phlebotomize some ram of it, and it is that which appears in the back of the foot in front of the auricular and the annular.
And guard yourself from the nerves, and make run of the blood the quantity that you want.
And then untie the constriction and place on the place of the phlebotomy cotton and strengthens the place, because lightly it is healed.
Of cupping and the qualities of using those.
Cupping is of horns, or of earthenware, or of copper.
And cupping is done according to two manners: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is cupping without scarification.
And this cupping that is without scarification is according to two manners, because it is with fire or without fire.
And to the cuppings that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are fourteen places of the body, of which one in which cupping is placed is alnocrati, and it is the rear part of the head; and the middle place of the two parts of the neck together; and cupping of the chin below the jaw more below the mouth; and cupping of two spatulas; and cupping of alohoster, and it is on the end of the shoulder; and cupping of two focils, and it is of two arms; and cupping of two groins; and cupping of two thighs.
And ventosation does not extract the blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not catch the virtue through those, just as it is caught by phlebotomy; nor is it right that ventosation be done with fire or with fire in any illness caused by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity provokes ventosation for illness or for continuous, administer it at every hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and in any time it is.
And therefore when times in any cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command ventosation to be done because it has passed from the day of two or three hours.
And the benefit of ventosation of the neck is that when that confers the gravity to the head and to what is poured into the eyes; but it is right that this is after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventosation is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
And it is not light that use of it that one who is of frequent congestion, or in which is catarrh, because it gives to that great harm.
And therefore it is not right that use of that the old, and in the heads of whom are frequent illnesses.
But to that one who over that is continuing over it is done oblivion; and therefore it is right that you command the ventosator that pause his hand a little with the ventosa to the parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But ventosation of the ankle is in the place of phlebotomy of the vena fusca and basilica: and therefore confers on asthma, and on the constriction of the lung and on the fissure of the instrument of the lung, and on cough, and on repletion.
And it is right that the ventosation of the ankle be expelled a little, because if it is paused below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And ventosation of the alhagdahan confers on the pains accidental in the head and on ophthalmia, and migraine, and pre-focus, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And it is right that you command the ventosator that he not press his hand with scarification so that it does not pierce the artery and occur fluxes of blood.
And ventosation below the chin confers on alcohol in the mouth, and on corruption of the gums, and appearances to those of the illnesses that are in the mouth, and stand in the place of phlebotomy of aliheric that is in the two lips.
But the ventosation that is done on the two spatulas confers on caphatan, which is made by repletion of heat.
And the ventosation of the two parts of the teeth of the focils confers benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, so it is of the basilica, fusca and cephalica, because that one attracts the blood of all those veins more numerous that are in the flesh, and those veins smaller of the other veins more thick until it reaches the attraction to the three veins.
And command the ventosator that too much he does not proceed in scarification, because the place is denuded of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventosation with which is ventosated over those and confers on the hemorrhoids of the anus and on the ulcers more below.
And it is right that you command the ventosator that it be a large ventosation, and that it be of eram, because the place indigenous to strong section; and strong leu so ventosations subtiles and be scarified with scarification.
But ventosations of the limbs less by minutio manifest, because they attract the blood of the whole body, and confer on old pains of the ribs and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke the menses, and confer on bothor and ademil; and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and of two cavilhas.
However, too much debilitates the whole body and causes syncope in many men.
And of the ventosations alahorcoben the benefit is proper to the benefit to the ventosations of two limbs.
And the quality of the position of the ventosations is that you pause the ventosa at the beginning void and sucks by temperate suction, and do not prolong the position of the ventosations, but pause those lightly, and remain those carefully, and that the humors come to the place by advent equal. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the area already reddened and inflamed and that the flow of blood appears.
And then you scarify and repeat the suction little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
Because that man who has tender flesh, because you scarify him once and no more, so that the area is not ulcerated.
And command the ventouse to amplify the scarification and press a little, and temper the suction with ease.
And if in the blood is thickness, then you must scarify twice, because in the first scarification the way of subtility to the blood and its fluidity is opened. But in the second to the scrutiny acquired of the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very feculent, then make the third scarification so that you can achieve the last.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little, it suffices us one scarification.
And if we want the extraction of much blood, we scarify with much scarification; and if we knew that the blood is thick, then we must scarify by pre-scarification.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision only so much.
And if that one whose incision is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, then the places of the ventouses should be anointed more gently, more open, more resolved; if it is in summer, as it is olive of aloes or olive of violet, or olive of double almonds, or olive of quince; and if it is in winter, then olive of narcissus, or olive of lily, or olive of chamomile, or of saint, and to those similar.
And if the superfluity is thick, hot, then the oil should be of amaranth, or of balm, or of aloes, or of anise, and to their likeness.
But if the ventouse has wide pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and that those in the places of the ventouses near them, the suction should be washed with waters or with cold water of salwort, or with quince water, or with water of  borage, and similar to those.
And that one whose blood is of much humidity, washes their ventouses with vinegar, or with myrtle and sumac water and similar to those.
And of that one whose superfluities are thick, washes their ventouses with old vinegar, or with water of  sarsaparilla, which is marjoram, or of decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and to their likeness.
And that the suction should be guarded before bathing; bathe it should be administered near the bath for an hour or for two, and that he should sleep near the suction.
What is what must be done to regulate the ventouse before phlebotomy.
At the beginning, you should consider: then if the ventouse or the one who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and windy, and has blood that is sharp and inflammation, then you should prescribe cooling causes, such as vinegar-soaked millet, endive with vinegar, lettuce, and  secale, and syrup, and to their likeness.
And pause their foods as much as possible, and birds' meat, and foods seasoned with vinegar, and to their likeness.
And of that one whose complexion is cold, you should prescribe to drink syrup of althea, or syrup of  secale of seeds, and sumac, and strong-smelling vinegar between old and new; and that he should be commanded to use little drinking and eating, and pause the foods of his little, and canary, and sparrows, and small birds, and pigeons.
And that on the day of suction and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the food.
And that some men should be given to drink, in some hours, tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, that is, nutmeg, or alcelita before the suction or phlebotomy or near it, so that the main limbs be comforted and that the blood be subtiliated; and they should not take that scalfatz.
But the ventouses that are scarification should be those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the tip of the big toe, because these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not desired for those, but rather attraction of blood from the limb, such as placing a ventouse on the nipple in the illness of blood flow from the blood of the nose; and use of that so that it be dissolved cold and viscous air of the limb, such as placing on the belly and navel; because that rarefies the limb and scalfs it and removes the pain because it resolves the air.
And it is already placed on the boils when they happen in their opening or pimple, because by virtue of the strong attraction, the boil is opened and eradicates the pimple from its place.
And similarly it does when it is placed on the liver and spleen of those who have wind enclosed in those.
And these fumigations are administered empty with suction only; and some times are administered with fire.
And some times are administered full of boiling water in the ailments of the liver.
And this is why the fumigation should be filled and larger, it is boiling water alone or water in which herbs are boiled according to the convenience.
Method of fumigation administered with fire: its width of the orifice is two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon is the majority of a palm; and it is in the place of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the majority of it, the tract is small according to the quantity that enters it a needle.
It is made of a ram's horn or a citrus, of thick edges, lion, equal and smooth so that it does not damage the limb of its position over it.
And in the middle of it a transverse bar of ram's horn or iron, on which a candle is placed with the fire.
And already this fumigation is larger than the one we have described; and the few less than that according to the ailments and the state of him who uses it.
And the fumigations of the infants and exhausted are others than the fumigations of the young and of robust bodies.
And the quality of pausing this fumigation with fire on the limb is that it extends the fire with firewood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and places it on the middle of the transverse bar in the middle place of the fumigation, so that the fire is ignited around the part below so that it does not burn the body of the patient.
And then it is placed on the limb of the patient, and the finger is on the tract that we have said, and as soon as we have the fumigations and do not indicate that we show the finger and that the vapor escapes on that tract, then the fumigation is immediately dissolved.
And then prop the fire according to its manner, and repeat that if it is indicated.
But in fumigation that is administered in the ailment of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse bar nor tract, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb only.
And this is the form of it: And this fumigation as much as it is larger, so much is better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in all members but in the members in which it is not possible to position fumigations, because of the smallness of those, such as the mouth and gums and similar to them; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and the nose and their similar.
And the quality of using those that have been found leeches that are in the waters of double purification.
And then they are laid in the day and the night in double water until they are famished, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then they are evacuated the body at the beginning with phlebotomy and with fumigations; and then they are rubbed the limb of the patient until it reddens; and then they are placed on it.
And as they are filled and case.
And if it is possible to suction the place with fumigation, it is more beneficial in healing.
And if not, then wash the place with wine vinegar and then with a lot of water; and it is rubbed and squeezed.
And if the bleeding of the patient is prolonged after the application of the leeches, and this is the result, then you put a cloth of it in cold water, and place it on top until the bleeding stops.
And if the bleeding is multiplied, then pulverize over it triacetic vitriol, or gallnuts and similar to them of the stiptic causes, until the bleeding is stopped; or are placed on the place the halves of boiled beans, and are laid until the beans adhere to the place, and the bleeding is stopped.
And then, if necessary, repetition of leeches, when it is possible to change those.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then the place is rubbed with fresh blood or a needle is left in the places until blood comes out; and then they are placed, because those when they feel some blood immediately adhere.
And when you want them to detach, pulverize over them a little bit of triacetic aloes, or salt, or ash, and they detach immediately.
Thus begins the prolegomena of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and dislocation accidents in the bones.
O, son, know that these foolish physicians and the vulgar boast of this chapter and those who never at any time regarded the books of the Ancients nor read from them a single letter.
And for this reason it is made that this manner of the learned in our land is deprived; and you do not forget this at any time well of all; and I have not adopted this that I have learned, but by length of reading the books of the Ancients and study over the understanding of those, until I extracted the science of those.
And henceforth, direct yourself to experiment and study throughout the length of your life.
And now I have described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which the best experiment has been passed; because I have shortened this for you others and freed it from the occupation of elongation; and I have shortened it at the end of shortening; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed in this many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as it has been done by addition of declaration, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summaries and collections from the fractures of bones, from those whose preliminary explanation is necessary, before we begin the recollection of broken and diverse members of each one. Therefore, I say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning the artificers are forced and stand on the truth of those; so it is for you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art others than you.
And therefore I say that when accidents happen to any fracture or dislocation or sprain or wound, then you must at the beginning apply yourself to phlebotomy or to leaven that, or one or the other, if no cause prohibits it, as much as the weakness of virtue, or the one to whom the accident happens is a child, or old in decrepitude, or the time is of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then be content in his food of cold herbs and of bird meats and of crabs; and forbid thick meats and to fill him with foods and of all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of the cauterization of the abscess, and if you do not fear the effusion of matter to the limb.
And then return the patient to his first regimen to which he is accustomed.
And therefore, as the broken bone begins to be restored, then the patient must be fed with nutritious foods of nourishment moist and thick in which is viscosity, as such as foods made of cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and fish, and bellies of cows, and eggs, and fresh poultry, and thick fat and similar to those, and with this regimen is made coagulation of the fracture more easily and better.
And know that the broken bones when they are in the men who are in the first youth and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they are continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their limbs.
But however, nature adjusts and amnesties over the broken bone from every part any cause seeming to glut in which is thickness that adheres and strengthens it until it is at the same time conglutinated and tied together, until they come to the end of fortitude and of firmness, as fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its works.
And for this cause it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, because a fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all the other limbs are diverse among themselves.
And I come to the recollection of all species of fracture, explained in their distinct chapter from the other.
Many diverse varieties of fracture in itself. And they are diversified the species of fracture of the bone in their own; because it is made arched fracture another that happens in it stars; and some times it is made fracture according to the length of the bone: and in the fractures of the sagittal and asterisks and additions proceeding and non-proceeding, as it is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and it is fracture with plaque and disruption in the head, and it is small fissure fracture.
And to every species is engendered or torment proper in the restoration of it according to that which will come recollection of it distinct in its places.
Many signs of fracture of the bone. And for this it is known fracture of the bone: it is the tortuosity of it, and of that eminence and appearance of it to the touch, and so of it when you compress it with your hand.
And therefore when there is not in the place apparent tortuosity nor so is not made by your touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is not here fracture.
However it is possible that there is tortuosity or small fissure, therefore you must not touch it with your hand and with compression of all; however pause upon it of the medicines of which comes recollection near that moment which convenes to the place; and then be straight by subtle constriction.
And know that the place when it is arched and is not split in two or another that does not happen in it sagittal, as it is remaugged all part of its comparison, then you must begin from your hour to rectification of it, however it must happen to it abscess cauterization.
And if a boil occurs to him, then leave it for some days until the boil subsides; and then treat it in whatever way you can with elevation and hygiene.
And know that the restoration of him and the piercing of him is lighter than of the bone in which the accident happened.
And then strengthen him according to what will come the remembrance of him.
But if the bone is broken, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And be in the position with which you pause the limb located according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken limb, then you pierce that you make them return with hygiene and in whatever way you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength that it does not happen to the patient by your operation pain or injury; and pierce yourself according to your power that you apply one bone with its companion according to their best forms.
And cover that in that hour profitably you touch with your hand that, and if you see here any different cause, rectify that and treat it for the amount of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, as such foolish doctors do who, in their many practices, cause boils to occur by their operation, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen by the operation of their many practices.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil limb is that which I recommend; for that you know that broken limbs are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small as the arm and the hand and the foot and similar to those, then cover that the envelope be of very fine cloth.
But those that are gross as the thigh or the leg, then cover that in those be envelope thick and hard, for the thick bandage connects the great limb and strengthens it with equal constriction, so that in it no macula enters.
And then begin, then your evacuation of equation, pause a convenient ligament to this, on the place of that fracture with three or four envelopes according to that the limb merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the ligament.
And then see in that to the part more sovereign of the place of the fracture, and strengthen less than not focus your constriction with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture. And then elongate yourself with the envelope of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the constriction little by little, until you take from the place a great part.
And then take another bandage and envelope that other practice over the broken place with the envelope, and then see in the envelopes to the part further from the fracture; and be your operation in the constriction of the envelope and in the softening of that according to what we have said in the first envelope below.
And then pause between the envelopes of wool or cloth with which be equalized the tortuosity of the fracture, if in it is tortuosity; and if not, do not pause in it any cause.
And then pause over it another bandage, and then treat over these envelopes stars decently made as soon as, if in the place there is no inflammation or boil, and then pause over it that which sits the boil that and that oste the inflammation; and leave it for some days; and then you strengthen over it the stars.
And be the stars of the majority of thick cane, and well formed wisely; or be of pine wood; or of palm ramps; and be the width of each star according to this form and this figure:
However, cover that the star that is placed over that fracture be thicker and thicker a little than the others stars, and the length of the star according to that is measured to the limb in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen over the stars with another bandage according to your first constriction; and then lie below it with a faithful decent according to that we have said of constriction, and it is that your constriction be according to the place of the fracture more, and as much as it is lengthened from the fracture, it is less the constriction.
And cover that the threads be middling in thickness and subtlety, and be of wool; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen by the operation of some foolish people placing their threads of cords of wool, and it is a great error, when cats the constriction outside equality.
And excessively subtle threads are not convenient, for you will not consecrate by constriction with those that which you want, and cover that between star and star there be less than a finger.
And if the patient is said to be suffering from the extremities of the stars near the stricture in their place, then place those of wool or felt between them so that it does not cause injury.
Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a plague, and an accident occurs in the bone, and you will find a remedy for this in the second chapter on singularity.
And know that if a whole limb is broken, it is not straight with stars on the first day; the cause is that the limb, when it is large, should not be laid upon stars but rather about five days or seven or more, according to your certainty of the advent of a boil.
And this is the manner of the plasters with which the ancients restored, those which are placed upon fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manner of plastering common to the restoration of fractures, convenient to many complexities and mostly to women and children, because it is of this which does not bring heat nor cold: and it is that you take from the powder of flour, and it is the medulla of the flour that you must take from the movement of the mill on the sides of the mill.
And mix it thus, unless you sift it with album of egg, and place the confection of it not thick nor subtle; and then use of that.
Another way to plaster a fracture, dislocation, and sprain: take asafoetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the root of wild millet, of all ana drachma x; of frankincense and aloe ana drachma v; alochil ana drachma xx; all be ground and sifted and be mixed with alichil water or album of egg if the patient's complexion is pale; and then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores the bones broken lightly, and confers to many men.
Another way of plaster which confers to a fracture and sprain: take migrach and powder of white althea ana drachma x; of frankincense and aloe ana drachma v; of acacia drachma vi; of Armenian bole drachma .xx.
All shall be triturated in a mortar with much contricio, and sifted, and comfitzed with water or album of egg and be administered.
Manner of plaster to joints and bones separated from their places, and if pain occurs in those and in fissures and fractures: take wool suet and submerge it in vinegar and boiled oil and place it upon the place.
More in this plaster there is not virtue of restoration, of boil caut and expels pains properly.
Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and leaves of wild poppy; contrive all and make a plaster of them.
Manner of plaster abbreviated administered  deves the restoration of fracture of bones and when you want resolution of the remaining boil: recipe roots of altea, of chamomile and flowers of violets, of ers flour, of all ana part .i.; All shall be triturated and comfitzed with wine, if the limb is not scaled.
But if it is scaled, then mix it with humid coriander water or with water and use of it.
Another manner of plaster more strong in resolution than this first, when accidents occur hard boil, deves the restoration of the limb: recipe of roots of altea and of seed of li, and of balaustia, and melilot, majorana, flowers of violet, of chamomile, of all ana part i engual; all shall be triturated and comfitzed with water of sauze or with sweet water or with wine, all that according to the quality of the limb and the repose of the color of it.
But Ypocras does not say in his book that it should be placed upon the broken limb for the restoration of it unless cerot made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommends that it be midway between thickness and subtlety.
But Gualia has been seen that they should be placed upon the broken limb for the restoration of it and the causes in which is exsiccacio with little of heat so as such as myrrh, incense and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manner of plaster that confers to lesion and pain: recipe migat, of cezes, of human hair unshorn or feather of bird, and of altea, and salt, parts equal; all shall be triturated and sifted and comfitzed, and be made plaster.
But the quantity according to which it should remain the liadura and then be untied, is that you consider if it does not occur pain nor pruziment nor the bone is broken no is bad of its place, then you do not untie for many days. And if there occurs to the place vehement pain or pruziment or imflacio, then you yourself take or untie that in the hour, and remove the plaster from it.
And take cloth from him and a sea sponge, moistened, and submerge it in tepid water, and with that wash the place until the swelling ceases and the pain is subdued; and then let him rest the limb for an hour; and then place on it a woolen cloth submerged in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and lay it on him for a night until you are sure of a cauterized abscess, and that the swelling of the limb is calmed, and the pain of it is subdued.
And then apply that stricture subtly and a small plaster and do not tighten it with your first constriction, and more subtly with that until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and the redness and the pain and the swelling and all the accidents are already subdued, and you want to remove the plaster and the stricture, then you apply it again as you have done at the beginning, equally.
And if no accidents happen to the limb of those that have been said, then do not untie it, but for three days or four or five or seven. And sometimes all this is left for twenty days, according to how it appears to you from the untieing of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh upon it.
And then adjust the stricture more than in your first stricture, altogether, and adjust in the thickness of the patient's food, according to how the recollection of him precedes.
But if you see the place of the fracture already dry and extend more than the bone, then you know that the nourishment is prohibited to reach there; and therefore embroca that with tepid water you must always that you heal it; and that in all three days; and alleviate the stricture a little, and for this operation, the nourishment runs to the limb, and it is healed slightly.
But that which fools restorers of the fracture of the limb do another way when it is not restored at the beginning, according to the bone, and it is restored according to tortuosity, is error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if it were straighter, that which enlarges the Ancients in their books and they have done with that.
And I have not seen any of them do that, because it is more reasonable that they do not do that.
Chapter Second: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct, for some fractures are made by the blow of a weapon, and the blow breaks all the bones within the skull, which is left the bone, as if it were done in the shaft, and for this reason this species is called ascial; or the weapon incides some part of the bone, and incides the flesh of it and does not pass the incision into the rear of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute levitation.
And the plague of these two fractures or is great or small, and of fracture that is contortion or attrition; and the cause of it is percussion with a hammer or a fall on a rock, and their likenesses.
And this fracture or is penetrating that already approaches the panniculus which is left the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures or is great or small.
And of fracture is that which is entwined in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason this species is called capillary fracture.
And is fracture that is made either by a fall or by percussion of a rock and its likenesses, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter into the parts within, and it is made in the concave place as if it happened to the payroles of a ram when it happens to their percussion and it is part of their entrance into the parts within.
And most of all this is done in the bodies of wet bones, as if they were the heads of infants.
And to all these species of fractures, satagias, they are heavy as if stars separated. And you will come with recollection of all this in its place.
And we shall know all these species of fracture by detection upon those and by inquiry of them with tents and ostentation of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary species is known because it is discovered upon the bone, and it is abstergit, and lined upon it with a tent, because the fracture appears black.
But in the cure of fracture, consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest signification upon pain, as it is vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and swelling of the joints and redness of those, and likenesses to them in the greatest dispositions, then adopt that it is not healed.
And if you see non-current accidents, you hope for health, then you begin the cure of him.
The cause is that if it has come to you the afflicted in the beginning as it is afflicted and this is in the days of winter, then you must study in the ostentation of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you must study to see the bone before the seventh day, because that which is left the bone be corrupted from the panniculus, and that the accidents that we have recounted may happen.
And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain, and it is in small pieces and shredded, then cover the small and rubbed piece, as I will tell you.
And you raise the patient's head, and uncover the bone according to custom and manner as much as possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be light on the patient.
And if it happens to you to see the bone, blood or pus flows, then you oppose it with what you cover, and that you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and rubbed oil, and make the patient rest until the pus is settled, and if you are sure of the blood flow; and then begin in the circuit of the bone and in its removal.
And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
And the one way is that you cut the bone with a straight incisor like this, and this is the shape of it: And then administer another incisor this one, a little wider than that; and this is the shape of it:
And then administer the wider incisor than the second.
And cover that you have to have a number of different incisors, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are at the end of the sharpness of their extremities, and are of Indian iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incisor so that it does not hit the head and damage it.
And if the bone is strong, hard, then cover that you perforate in its circuit before you administer the incisors with the drills, which are called non-deep drills.
And they are not called thus but because those do not pause the term of the bone of the test to what is about it, for as the drill is a round extremity or margin on which the head of it is left sharp like a margin or a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these drills a large number of which as many as convenient to the thickness of each bone,  and that it be to you present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which be sharp, the quantity in length and brevity be according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of drills: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the drill on the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then change the drill to another location, and pause it that is between all the tracks the quantity of the thickness of the ray or about that.
And then cut with incisors that which is between each tract of the bone, and make that as subtle as you can on it in the end of lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for some instruments which you will have prepared for it, as such as tongs and subtle forceps.
And cover that you guard with all caution that the incisor does not touch any cause of the scalp.
And therefore as you will have circuited the bone, and if it is continued with it, and you will have that extracted, cover that you raise and smooth that in the roughness of it of that which is in the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but however cover that it be more thin and more subtle than the others incisors.
And if any pieces of the small bones and splinters remain, then take that with ease with that which you owe you of the instruments; and then take care of the patient with liniments and ointments which we have said.
And the other way of operation is lighter, farther from pain, which says Gualia and the lauzec by great lausor; and this is the sermon of it: it is necessary to you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone of the place in which is the fracture most vehement and most manifest, until when you will have discovered that part and you will have placed below it the extremity of this incisor lent and light of which this is the form:
And it is that the lenticular part is long and do not cut any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides forward in length, as sometimes; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the scalp with the face of it incident acute in the bone.
And then strike on the incisor of a part with a small mallet until you cut all the bone with ease as it is revolved, and you be sure of the membrane that no accident happens in it in any manner, and if the medicant14 was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
And now if any cause annexed to the bone of the membrane in some places of bone, cut that of it with the extremity of that lenticular incisor, and deliver that of it with ease, for it is delivered of it its harm and its pain.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the membrane, and that which is abscised or is stayed from the bone is the face of it, and remains in it roughness and subtle splinters, then cover that you raise that roughness and eradicate those splinters with subtle razors of which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it be to you possible to administer of those in every place the most convenient of them and the most right of them according to what in which you are losing your operation of that broken bone and its figure.
And as you administer in your reason with which roots the bones at the beginning the pus of those roots, and then use the most subtle of it, and do not cease to do so continuously until you reach to administer the pus thick and the most subtle of all those.
In any of the other fractures, small and subtle, as you administer care according to what you perceive for the rectification of it.
And it is because it is not known about all those who have studied in that art. And this is what we have shown written about great fractures.
And if the periosteum is cut when you set the bones, then take cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in hot oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and hot oil and place it over the first cloth and do this as lightly as you can so that you do not injure the scalp; and then administer over this bandage, and do not tighten it except for the quantity that the wound alone has.
And leave this with this care for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess cauter; and then untie this and then administer medicines with which is superfluous dryness, such as root of linen and flour of herbs, and powder of incense and of aromatics, and similar to those.
And it is that you make of these medicines powder that is pulverized over the wound, such as they are dried; and universally, administer in this all medicine of property of which it is that it cleanses and does not bite.
And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and not be in it dirt of rinsing nor other; nor let virulence be added to it; for when it is adjusted over the periosteum of the brain, it corrupts that and you can spoil it, and it happens to the patient according to that evil malice.
And it happens in the scalp of the head, as from it is modified the bone and most when the cure of it is less considered, and it is blackness on the surface of it; and therefore consider then if it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious if all is adopted.
And if it does not happen blackness but from the medicine that is placed over it, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take of honey one part and of hot oil three parts. And in those liniments a cloth, and then place that over the scalp; and then cure this with the species of cure that convenes until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not broken of the nose but two parts together, or one of those sometimes, for in it you have two bones, for the part left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and it does not happen to it but attrition and tortuosity and sinuosity.
But if one of the two parts is broken, then take the said little one in the one's nose, and that you equalize that fracture from within with your said finger, and with the said point outside, until the nose returns according to its natural figure. And be done this by you with facility, and guard yourself that no pain be caused to the patient by that your operation.
And if the fracture is in the most sovereign part of the nose, and the said one does not reach to that, then let it be equal to the extremity of the ray in which it is small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the semblance of that.
And guard yourself with the restoration of it in the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; and if not, then the VII or X days of the abscess cauter.
And then introduce into the extremity of the nose a wick of cloth from it, if the fracture is in one part, or put two pads, if the fracture is in two parts, and be in the pad thickness of as much quantity that it fills the groove of the nose.
And say some of the ancient restorers that the pads be encased in border, and be changed every day, but it has not been seen to me; have that the wick be encased in album of honey with powder of moli; and then leave the one until the bone be set and the cartilage be hardened.
And sometimes be introduced into the nose, in place of a pad, a pain of auca pus that is enveloped in cloth of lion; and be that already you have the fracture of the nose most vehement and that the patient be not prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do this, and if you want, do pads.
And if it happens another time abscess cauter, plaster the nose with cerot or with coto infused in wine and hot oil, or with diaquilon.
But if it does not happen abscess cauter, then take to plaster that outside with flour of sesame and with powder of incense cofitz with album of honey; and then place on it lion's wool, and do not lie the nose with any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with small fracture or are comminuted, then take to split over those, and extract those with instruments that are convenient for those; and then close the fissure, and cure that with what encases and consolidates, and with plasters to that convenient.
And if plague occurs inside the nose, then treat that with warm water and administer lead pipes while it is entirely healed.
Chapter IV.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not inflamed, then observe if the fracture is deformed only slightly, and not broken in two and curved at the parts inside, then its recognition is lighter.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then you introduce your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left mandible, then introduce the right index finger; and push with that the looseness of the fracture inside with ease to the parts outside, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; and thus decently equal that.
And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension of two parts according to rectitude as much as possible the equation of it.
And if there occurs commotion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those of which you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or lead; and then place on the broken jaw a cerot, and then place on it a doubled cloth, and place on the cloth a large splint made decently, or a piece of sole equal to the length of the jaw; and then tie that bandage according to how you are equipped with the tying of it and that it convenes the application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use of rest and tranquility, and pause the food of him soft and lean.
And if you estimate that already is altered the figure in any manner, then you yourself untie it on the third day; and then rectify that which is already altered of it and plaster it with powder of meal, with album of egg, or with flour of flaxseed, because you will have obtained the cerot of it, and place on the plaster wool lean.
And therefore as it stands attached and adjusted that plaster on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, that you do not untie it until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; because many times this fracture is straightened in three weeks.
And if another time occurs abscess caut, then administer that which we have said many times in the sedation of it until it is healed, and be removed that abscess.
And if the fracture is with plague, then consider if it is a piece of the bone separated or splinters, then you yourself subtilize that you remove those splinters with that which you deem appropriate to the removal of those from the instruments.
And if the orifice of the plague is straight, then you enlarge it with the fleubotomizing according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then when you will have obtained those splinters, and of those no sir remains removed, then you close the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and if not, place on that one of the plasters that you deem appropriate to it and encase that, until it is healed.
Chapter V.
Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Many times the clavicle is broken at the part in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three manners.
Because it is broken, or separated, or is separated into two parts other that do not occur splinters; and it is easier to the restoration of it; or it is thus that occurs in it splinters, and it is difficult to the restoration of it; or it is thus that the fracture is with plague.
And the operation in that, when the fracture is with plague, is that you make to be present two ministers, so that one has the adjutori and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck with that part.
And then encircle the fracture with your fingers until it is made the form of it according to what you deem, and not be in it little eminence nor concavity.
And if you deem more of extension, then you must place beneath the patient's little finger a support of cloth or wool, and be the greatness of it according to the quantity of your necessity; and extend and elevate the clavicle and fix the support with your hand until you encircle the fracture according to what you deem.
And if you cannot pull the extremity of the clavicle to the outside parts, because it is reached to the preon, then you must have the patient be supine on his neck, and place on the muscle of him a cushion medium in greatness.
And the minister presses the muscle of him to the inside parts while the bone of the clavicle is elevated that is in the preon in its, and then you rectify the fracture and encircle that with your fingers.
But if you feel splinters of the clavicle and they are bad, then you must do on that and extract those splinters with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you must ingeniously make an incision of it with one of the scissors which you have equipped for it, because you had placed beneath the clavicle the instrument that serves the chisels; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the form of it:
And it is similar to a culier of which this is the concavity; and be its latitude according to what you have need of it, according to the greatness of the bone or the smallness of it.
Make the length of it according to what is possible for the operation; that there be two extremities thus as often, and one extremity be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the plague which you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and it is certain of a purulent caut, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear a purulent caut, then you fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the wound's cut.
And if an abscess occurs, then you put a cloth in vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it over it.
And all, that not be bad the splint over the broken bone; and for so cover that you see the patient every day, that when the ligament is softened or times the splint already be remauguda, then you rectify that and strengthen the bandage.
And then put the patient's sleep on his neck, and put under the little finger of it, during his sleep at night a small cushion; so that with that, it is elevated the helper of it from the place of that, and therefore is elevated the fracture of the collarbone to elevation of the muscle; or the arm of it tied to the neck of that.
And do not untie the bandage unless an accident occurs in the place promptly or an abscess, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to that, and adjust in the stricture and restore that and leave it until it is restored and coagulated the fracture of the collarbone.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some times in some men it is done in less time than that.
Chapter VI.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
The shoulder blade is broken in the place of its side and not broken from it but its edges.
And therefore when it is broken the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and it is not known except by touch, then according to what is the figure of the fracture forces you the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every manner of ingenuity which is to you possible.
And then put on the place powder of wheat with egg white and linen cloth; and then put powder of doubled cloth; and then put on it a plate of fine wood according to the quantity of the shoulder blade all or maybe a little.
But if the plate is concave in some of the places of the shoulder blade, then you fill that concavity with linen cloth, and then raise the plate according to equality.
And then strengthen above with a long moist cloth with constriction decent and firmness of the plate until it is not remauguda from its place.
And consider the bandage every day; and every time that it is softened, tie another time and strengthen it and equal the plate if it is remauguda from its place.
And put the patient on his side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And therefore when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and that you know for sure that that is of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone heavy and put under the shoulder, then you divide it over it, and remove it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone of the opening of a purulent caut if it occurs here.
Chapter VII.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot some times is broken in the middle place of it and that tartly; but the extremities of it mot indeve that are cicadas and comminuidas.
And of the accidents of it when it is broken the middle of it is that it declines to the parts of the feet and occurs to it great pain, and difficulty in the walk, and cough, and fort leu and vomits blood; and it is declared in it cavity in the broken bone and it is not occult to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that it be resupinated the patient on his back, and put between the shoulder blades of it a cushion; and then press to the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it with the hands of two sides, and subtly in the operation of it and in the equating according to every manner that is to it possible and that convenes to it, until it returns the figure of the bone according to what cove.
And place a plaster and lint on it, and place above it a thin board of hazel or of caligae and of their likeness in elevation, because you will wrap that in cloth; and subtilize that in it on the broken bone so that it is not harmful; and go with the bandage according to the roundness of the back some times, and strengthen that with a decent constriction; and consider the bandage at every hour, and when it is softened strengthen that.
And if necessity provokes the discharge of that which corrodes or prurience, the pain, the abscess that happens in the place, then you cut and untie that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what happens by that in a manner of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster, sometimes to that which the face; and adjust to it the constriction until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
Of the restoration of the back when it is broken.
Know that a fracture of the back does not catch except in thick places that follow the spine; and from the extremities of them of the part before it does not happen to those contortions except by that which they are cartilaginous. And knowing of it is not hidden to the feeling, of it is the inquiry by the said ones.
And the restoration is thus that it aligns the fracture by the said ones according to the manner possible, within that it is engulfed according to that which cove, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with that, if it is needed of that.
And if the fracture of the back is declining to the parts of the spine, then happens to the patient violent pain and puncture, as puncture that happens to him who has pleurisy, and by that which the bones put the membrane; and happens to him difficulty of handling, and cough, and vomiting of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Antixs are ingenious in that with motz engientz.
And of them it is said: cover that you pause viandas of the patient that engendered inflation and flatulence, for that the belly be inflated and be extended, and the fracture be impelled to the parts outside.
May we not avoreyssem that for so that it not be cause leugiera to generate abscess caut, if it does not happen; and if it already happens, then helps to that.
And diyssero alcus of them that it be paused desus ventoza and that it is sucked with fortitut; and it is similar to ratiocinacio, mays empero it is temut that the ventoza atire the superfluitatz to the place by the debilitat.
And diyssero alcus of them: cover that the place be covered with wool that is already submerged in caut oil, and that pulvils be placed between the ribs within that it be umplified, that it be the bandage aligned when it envelops that according to roundness; and that the patient be cured with cure of pleurisy of food and of medicine.
And if cause vehement constrenh the patient which no sufferta, and the bones put the membrane with leading puncture, temem over the patient, then cover that they fenda over the place, discover from the broken rib, and then place over that instrument that conserve the ciphac, the remembrance of which is preceded, and that they inscidam the bones with facilitat, and extract that.
And then that they adjust the two lips of the plague, if it is great, with sewing, and cure that with plasters within that it be healed.
And if it happens dedintz abscess, then you cut and enfon pulvils in rozat oil and place over the place, and that the patient be cured with that which cove to the abscess dedintz.
And be ressupinat on the latz on which he sleeps, within that it be healed.
Chapter IX.
Of the restoration of fracture of the spondil of the back and of the neck.
Sometimes it happens that fracture to the bones of the neck, and tart it happens to them attrition, and similarly to the spondils of the back. And as this happens to some and you want to know if it will heal or no, then consider, for if sometimes their hands are already softened and stupefied and dead and cannot make those nor extend nor strengthen those and when you constrenges those with your said ones or you puncture those with a needle and do not feel in those pain, then you know that it is not healed, and in the worse dispositions it is mortal.
And if you feel those and feel constriction with the said ones and puncture, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with cure.
And if you see in the spondils of the neck the semblance to that and you want to know if it will heal or no, then consider the feet of him.
Then if you see that they are already mollified, it happens to those that happens in the hands, and when he lays upon his back, he feels flatulence and egestio ses his will, and sometimes he is ressupinat on his back and wants to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not work in the cure of him.
But if it does not happen any cause of those, the cause is better and pus lighter.
And the cure of it is that you perforses to the sedation of the abscess caut that you place over the spondil atrissat oil rozat sol, or with mugols of huous asatz; place over that some times the day within that it be sedated the abscess caut.
And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and press it firmly on that limb; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and that he does not sleep on the part with which he feels pain until it is healed.
And if it happens that the fracture of the bone has separated or any cause that has already separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and hold that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and then take care of it with some ointment of the herbs, until it is healed.
But if the bone of the heel is broken, and it is the end of the foot, then cover it with a bandage and hold that bone with the other hand according to the second equation; and then place a plaster and bandage on it, if you need those, and press it firmly.
And if you feel broken bones in it, then you put your hand on it, and hold it, and cure the wound with the cure that was preceded until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the Restoration of the Womb.
The bones of the womb are broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is nothing but a communication at the extremities of those and are incised in the length and decline to the sides; and it happens to the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it while it is over the fracture which is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of it, then you hold it according to how it is apparelled to you by equation hold until it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long or which already declines to the sides, then you make the patient lie on their belly until it is prepared to you the restoration of that fracture. And therefore when you have held it, place a plaster on it, and then place a bandage of cloth or bandage on it, and press firmly so that there is no fear of puncture of fracture or removal of the splint.
And hold the cavity with water that fills it while that pregna the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
But if it happens that a boil occurs, then you cease from extension of it and its restoration until the boil is settled, and place on it water that sits it according to what was preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and press it as you covered.
And if it happens in the bones or they are comminuted, then you treat them.
Chapter XI.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Adductor.
Adductor is that which is between the hip to the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which is the one that you take a splint of medium thickness according to this form:
And tie in two extremities two bandages, and then have it suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a chair; and then throw out their broken arm over the splint until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place of which is annexed the curvature of the splint.
And then suspend over it some heavy cause, or the minister extends it to the sides; and then the doctor and which the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns according to how it covered.
And the other way is that the patient be resupinated on his neck and suspend the arm of his collar with a bandage; and then command two ministers that one of them holds that which is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the pus below it; and whichever of them extends to their part.
And if you want the extension to be more strong, then you press over the fracture with a bandage and over that with another bandage, and whichever of the two ministers extends to their two parts.
And therefore if the fracture is proximate to the extremity of the muscle, then it should be placed half of the bandage over the collarbone and the other below the fracture of the hip.
And similarly if the fracture is proximate to the hip, then it should be placed the bandage over that place and over that hip.
Hold that with ease and work, and as long as it is held according to how it covered and is applied for good application, then press it if it does not happen that a boil occurs.
But if it happens that a boil occurs, then lay off the splint within the seventh day, and place over it wool cloth soaked in vinegar and olive oil until it rests the boil, and then you press it.
And the way of pressing it is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a covering of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that adductor, and place your hand over their muscle.
And place the cloth and press over the adductor the arm so that the arm be in place of splints, if it does not prohibit from that any cause of the broken bone.
And then use stars.
And it is that you pause on the fracture that star which is pus thicker and pus stronger than the other stars; and pause between each star the width of the finger, and let the length of the stars according to the fracture with the addition of three fingers of all part.
And then strengthen over the stars with the structure which I have said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your structure over the place of the fracture be pus straight. And as much as the fracture is longer, the structure is less.
And therefore if you see the situation of the stars and the structure as we have said in the hour in which you restore the limb to its position, then you do.
And if you fear abscess caut, then you leave the structure and the stars inside for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not happen in the place proximity or inflammation; or it is forbidden the food to arrive at the limb by disposition of superfluity of structure; and therefore rectify all that according to what we have said.
But if you are over confidence that no cause of this happens, then do not untie the bandage until after three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep on their back, and their hands be on their stomach.
And put on the adjuvant cooked full of wool evenly, and consider at every hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb be not loosened or dissolved, or that the ligament be softened, therefore rectify that all with your virtue.
And put the patient's food according to the order which we have before said, so that the food be subtle at the beginning until it is begun to strengthen; and then when it thickens the food of him.
Because of custom of the adjuvant and the bandage of it is that they be strengthened in forty days; and then when they are untied and be administered bath and be medicated with poultices which rectify that.
And if the fracture is laid rubbed, then you do not untie that the ligament and the stars inside for a day or inside two months.
Chapter .xii.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
Arm is composed of two bones which are called two focils; of which one is small, and that is the one that sits the little finger, and the other is large and is the one that is placed below the little finger, from the part further down.
And often the major focil is broken alone, or the small one, and often they are broken together.
And when the small focil is broken above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and the healing of it is lighter.
And when the focil of it is broken below the fracture of it is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse of that is when the two bones are broken together.
Therefore if the bone which is broken is the small focil above, then it is convenient to the doctor, must the restoration of it, that pause little extension with facility until that be evened.
But if the large focil is that which is broken, then it must pause extension more vehement.
And if the two focils are together broken, then it must you pause the extrusion more strong.
And must you pause the figure of the hand, you must the restoration of it and the extension of it extended over a cushion, and be the wrist of the hand to the parts above, more high than all the other fingers, and the little finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be centered on a chair fallen.
And be a cushion in front of him in the altitude or upright of him, so that the patient does not lean work.
And then the minister extends the arm from the part below with his hand or ligament, and another minister extends above seemingly.
And then the doctor evens the bones while reducing that according to the best figure that he can.
And if in the fracture of the bone there are splinters, then you pierce to reduce all pieces in their place with your virtue.
And if there appears in it a splinter separated that pierces the code and is not to your hope in the restoration of it, then you finish over it and oust that according to the manner which we have said above.
But if the fracture is with plague, you have already done to this chapter singular, and therefore take the cure of that.
And if there happens abscess caut at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with cerot made of rose oil and white wax, and be middle between subtlety and thickness, and strengthen cloth over that with subtle structure until the abscess is ceded; and then remove the cerot and pause plaster prepared of powder of mill with clayre of egg, and then pause stars; and be the star which is paused over that fracture pus thicker and pus stronger.
And know that the number of the stars of the arm are six in the major dispositions, or be the fracture in one focil or in two focils together.
And then place your bandage over the fracture site with force and vehemence, and when the bandage is tighter on the parts above the fracture or the parts below it, place the bandage a little looser according to what was said in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture should be soft and moist cloths, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is tightened should be of its own proper middle between fine and coarse, as we have recounted.
And consider the limb and the ligament for a few days. And if any cause occurs for which rectification is necessary, as if the swelling occurs in the limb, then you must immerse the limb in warm water until the swelling ceases.
And let the limb not be constrained until it rests, and then return the bandage.
And if the bandage is already softened and the bone is already set and seems like that, then rectify all of it with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb by excess of bandage, for then you must soften that a little and let it for a few days until nourishment runs to it, and then tighten it.
But if the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then he should not be unbandaged for about 20 days or thereabouts.
And then the arm of the patient should be suspended by its own virtue of movement, and make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or very soon it is restored in 28 days, and all of this is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter XIII.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Know that in the thumb and fingers, a fracture is rarely found, and it does not happen to them except for a few times.
And when a fracture or sprain occurs in the hand, then the patient should follow the same procedure as before, lying down and keeping his hand extended, and then place the hand of the patient on that extended one.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the physician aligns them until they are joined with good concavity.
And then you must place plaster and lint, unless there is a boil, cautery; and then place a splint above according to the amount of the place, and you have already enveloped that in a cloth of it.
But if the fracture is in the parts of the fingers, on the inside of the palm, then make a kind of sphere of cloth, and command the patient to tighten that with his palm that is fractured; then it should be tightened with a long cloth.
And let the splint of leather be wrapped in cloth, so that the leather is applied to the palm; and tighten that according to what is necessary.
But if the fracture is in the outer parts, then you must place a splint above and another splint from the inside part of the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then place the bandage, as if the hand is turned to the wrist between the fingers and ligaments.
And if a fracture occurs to one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if the finger is straight, it should be aligned according to what is necessary and then tightened with the palm, and if you wish, place a small straight splint on it so that the fracture is elevated and not damaged.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be aligned and tied with the finger that is next to it; or all of them should be tied according to continuity, and that is better; or place a small splint on it, as we have said in the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the disposition of the boil cautery and oppose — in your operation — to that which is necessary when any of those causes occur, according to what is narrated about it.
Chapter XIV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the bone of the hip.
The bone of the hip is rarely broken and is declared to the feeling according to how it is converted to the front part and to the most sovereign part.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient is prostrate on his belly and face.
And then the minister extends all the ligament to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is proper to the root of the hip, then the ligament is proper to the thigh at the part of the hip, so that the extension comes on top, and the other ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is proper to the thigh, then the ligament is made proper to the thigh, and the extension is to the parts below.
And then the physician aligns the bones with both of their hands until it is reduced according to the natural resemblance and the bone is joined with good concavity; then you must place plaster and bandage, unless there is a boil in the limb. But if an abscess occurs in him, then you leave that for a few days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your cure.
The stricture of him is made thus: so that a hard bandage is wrapped over the fracture, and that is folded two or three times, and the superfluity is removed; and then the leg is wrapped up until it reaches the bone and the root of the thigh.
And introduce a long splint between the thigh and the leg near the knee to the sides, and the ends of the splint come from the sovereign side of the two parts, and then roll over the leg and thigh what superfluity of the bandage.
And then place on the thigh in the place of that fracture splints, and place one splint on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the spaces between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the stricture is coagulated.
And then begin with a strong splint on the place of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and the more you move away with the splint from the place of the fracture, the less your splint is and softer and more moist.
And then extend the two ends of the splint to the sides until it reaches the heel of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the splints on the other side so that the splint does not be removed from its place.
And then leave the splint on him, so that no corrosion or abscess or inflammation or similar things occur to the limb; and if any of those things occur, then cut the splint from him, and correct what has occurred again, as we have said many times.
But if in the bone is heavy the bone which you put, then you must straighten it as much as is possible; and if not, then break over it and remove that, and cure with that of which the remembrance precedes until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with other things which are adjusted to it splints, as we have said in the auxiliary and in the arm.
But however in the restoration of him in such a manner made, do not occur to the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, then with other things which are applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he limp from the one which is always.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few more or a few less, and all this is according to the diversity of the complexities and of the other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Know that a fracture of the kneecap is hard to heal, but it occurs to it many times attrition.
But if it occurs to it fracture, then it is only a fissure or crack in its parts, and that is with a splint or several splints, and over that all is set with the feeling.
And the restoration of it is in such a way that what is broken of its parts is aligned with the fingers until it is joined and conjoined as much as is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
And then place a plaster and place on top of that round splint, if you need it; and strengthen it with a splint as appropriate.
And consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in the other fractures, as well as abscess or similar to those, so that it opposes to all accidents with what is convenient to it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick, and it is called by the name of the tibia; and the other is thin, and it is called fibula.
And it occurs to some of the species of fracture that occurs to the two bones of the leg, and for that reason is made restoration of it as well as restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
And if the two bones are broken together, the leg is converted to all parts.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg is converted to the front parts.
And if the thicker bone is broken, it turns back, and it is of those causes that are not to your liking.
And then administer extension and equation and ligation of the splints according to that alignment.
But however, if the fracture of the leg is large having many stages, that the extension be less and lighter, and alleviate with your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation over the arm, and it is when you align the splints and that completes all your operation, then you will take pieces of wood of pine which is placed below the causes which are placed in soles, and are made lengthwise of palm branches; some of those to which is small thickness, and not be thick of the handles, and be the length of them according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the farthest.
And then wrap over each one a cloth in two wrappings according to the length of it, and place one on the side of the leg of one part and the other of the other part, and be from the knee to the lowest part of the foot.
And then place the two stars in three places of the two extremities and in the middle place, because with this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left, and it stands for good position.
And already a splint of wood is administered according to the length of the leg; and it is placed in it the leg so that it conserve that of movement.
And most importantly, that you do this in a fracture, and when with that it is properly cured.
And then consider in each day the leg and study with that by behind study, and you guard it from abscess and from inflammation or from other causes similar; and when accidents any cause of those, then oppose yourself to it with that which cove within that it be healed.
Chapter .xvii.
Of the fracture of the talus and the bones of the foot and of the said.
To the talus, fractures do not occur entirely; but to the bones of the foot, fractures occur some times; and to the toes of the foot, few fractures occur, and they do not occur to them but attrition in the middle of the disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot, a fracture occurs and times those bones be elevated above each other, then the patient places his foot upon the earth prepared as if going.
And then place one foot upon that which is elevated of those bones, and then step on those, and press, and equalize those within that they return to the places.
And then place plaster and stop above, and place beneath the belly of the foot a small table to which there are two heads placed.
And then strengthen that with the foot in structure descent, because that you have enveloped that with cloths and with other causes of which I indigeys.
And when to it pass three days or four, then you untie the ligament, because you have found the bones equalized, or they are broken or they are dislocated, and the operation in those is thus as you know.
But if some toes are broken, then restore those, and equalize those as I have and recommitted to you in the restoration of the toes of the hand. And then place on the broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and it be a little wider than it; and then place beneath the foot this table which I have recommitted to you, and strengthen that with structure decent.
But if that which is broken of the bones be two or three or more, then you place upon each toe a splint of its quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table in the lowest part of the foot, and let it stand upon one of the heads of the table through the belly of the foot so that it holds it with good retention.
And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which I have said to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and oppose yourself to every accident with that which cove.
Chapter .xviii.
Of fracture of the hip of the woman and of the bone of the thigh and of the groin of the man.
When the hip of the woman is broken, then make that cease in a well-placed cradle, and then incline that to the side of the back a little, and it be held behind.
And then the matron impales the hip with a cot, and it be made in the hip of it as she hopes; and then the woman be cupped, and elevate the back of it little by little, because all that is thrown out within that it be before the part of the hip as she hopes and the broken bone returns.
And then place poultices upon the back of it, and when it wants to urinate, remove the cot with facility and then urine, and reduce and return that according to the manner according to which you have seen that at the beginning, and then return to its first poultice.
And do thus for seven days or around those, because that is restored.
And if you want, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen upon the trough of it a tube of cane; and introduce the whole bladder into the hip of it, and then puff into the tube with virtue within that the bladder be inflated within the hip, because the fracture returns.
And then be filled with cot and stay for some days according to that we have recommitted, within that it be healed.
And when the bone of the thigh of man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and splicing of it that which we have recommitted in the bone of the hip.
And that which is straight is not hidden in these proper fractures and that few become, mostly to that one who is some study and use and understands this my book well; because that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions via right in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the groin of the man when it is broken, take a guard of oak, and put the groin in it; and then place upon it wrapping of cloth, and it be enveloped, and then let it be left for three days or around those, and it be healed.
Chapter .xix.
Of restoration of fractures of the bones when it is with plague.
Convenient is to that one who has occurred fracture with plague, and mostly if the bone is large as it is the bone of the thigh or of the arm, or similar to that, that you take care of and fleubotomize it as soon as the conditions of fleubotomia to you or testify as above we have said.
And if the plague flows blood, then you must strive to retain it so that you pulverize over it three times, if no other cause is present.
And about to start restoring the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it, if not you will get an abscess.
But if an abscess occurs, then you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, for you will cause further accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered tendon, then you must strive to reduce it and align it with your hands with ease and with little extension.
But if the extension is not to your prepared and the alignment of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is of seven digits or eight and the width of which is according to the quantity of the plague; and for this it is necessary for the physician to prepare of those three or four according to the quantity that indicates to this in the cure in all species of fracture.
And it should be round, and in it little thickness so that it not be bent, the comprehension over it in the hour of the operation.
And it should be of sharp extremity at which it is margin in its extremities; and the use of it to a thickness tending, and of the majority of it within to the parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek “labre volentz atelarem”, so it is the small palette.
So that the extremity of it may be placed elevated over the extremity of the bone prominent.
And impel it in one movement while the bone returns, and it is aligned with some alignment.
And therefore strive to align the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of the broken bone is subtle, and does not take that the instrument for good acceptance, then you must insert the extremity of that bone while the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone of all with what we have recommended, then cut it with what you convey to it of the incisors which we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner it is possible to you.
And then smooth that which remains in the bone of asperities and of small scales.
And as the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient suffers vehement pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer to the patient great benefit.
When is completed the restoration which you do to the bone, and then submerge a cloth in black stiptic wine, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place over the plague cerot or other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause in it to occur puss and corruption.
And after the administration of stelas in the hour of your compliment of the restoration of the bone, and leave the plague uncovered so that you cut the trauc with forceps and uses of bandages according to the quantity of the plague.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the plague with the fracture, for many times have done this the foolish physicians, and have caused to occur over their patients death or sickness corrupt or gangrene, so it is healed. And if your stricture lighter, soft, different from the stricture of the other fractures.
And if the plague is great or is a bad plague, and you fear over that some accidents worse than the ones we have recommended, and you suffer pain in the place, then you must not place over it stelas, but make to that wrapping of hard cloths in place of stelas and strain it with those.
And when after a day or two the plague begins, that in it be generated a brac, then you remove the cloth which you had placed over it with wine, and then administer calguas, ointments with which of our custom is that we medicate the plagues, as such as tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
And it convenes to you that you untie the liament and consider the plague in each day morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and that the member be prepared in such manner that the puss runs from it to the parts below with facilitated.
If to the plague pass many days, and it is not consolidated nor is abscindit from it the brac, then you know that here are satagias of the small ones for which you must inquire the plague with a tenta. And of those satagias those that are separated remove and extract, those that of them are not separated and put the member and cause to occur pain, pierce yourself to cut those according to you that is possible.
And if there occurs to the plague zuchem or eluchen, so it is stiomenios, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then you must place to each of those with what convenes to it of the cure of which is preceded narration in its chapter.
And of this in which you must know the best sermon and you make present your pessa: when the bone is broken, emerges over the member as the bone of the hip and the auxiliary and similar to those of the large members, and that you do not presume traction of it, nor the extraction of it for many times accidents occur by that death; have left that within until you can, for very soon it will fall by itself after twenty days or thirty. And then treat the plague if you see it, and if not leave it.
Chapter .xx.
Of the cure of the swelling that occurs in the region of any fracture.
Often this swelling occurs in the region of the healing of a fracture, and most often it is near the joints, and it is disfigured by it the figure of the limb; and very often it forbids the limb from its natural operation.
Therefore consider if the swelling is recent and administer in that those medicines that have stipulated as such as aloe, and incense, and mira, and wormwood, and similar to those; in such a way that you take some of those or all of them, and combine those with vi stiptic, or with album of egg, or with vi agre, and place that over the swelling in a cloth, and bind those over it with a good constriction.
And leave the constriction that does not untie that for many days; and then untie that and iterate another, until the swelling is reduced; or strengthen over that a plate of lead, because lead has the property of reducing everything that is inflated in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already been converted into a fester and it is necessary to provoke to drain that wound, then cut that open along the most sovereign part of it, and incise the superfluity and eminence, or drain that with some reeds until it is reduced; and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .xxi.
Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the limb becomes subtle and flexible again according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb becomes subtle and flexible again, then this is not done except for many causes: of which one is the multitude of solution of the ligament and of the ligament of it made not according to what it should be; or for superfluity of constriction of the ligaments while the nourishment is prohibited from running to the limb; or for multitude of superfluous embrocation; or for superfluous movement not at the right time; or for lack of blood in the body of the patient and for weakness of it.
And the cure of this is to give the patient to eat and make the heart of him tender until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths; and bring joy and cheerfulness over him.
And then place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts nourishment to it, or continue embrocation of it with warm water, until the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter .xxii.
Of the cure of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and forbid the operation of them as they should.
When it happens to the limb already restored during the healing of it from crookedness and eminence in the broken bone and swelling, and it is because of this that the form of the limb is flawed, but however the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then it is not necessary that you receive the word of that one who exists that member be of a new fracture.
But already there have been many foolish physicians and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy, causing great fear, the sign of which is mortal.
But if lameness and swelling are recent, then it is necessary that they be embrocated with warm water in which are placed softening herbs, such as are the leaves of altea and roots of it, and melilot, and similar to those; and make a poultice with a softening poultice such as diallaquilon well made; or that which is prized mulch of altea root and is contused with gray of dove or with oil of camomile, and be plastered with it; or that which are prized fat figs and are triturated with dove's dung, and similar to those of the medicines that are called amermans consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved with assiduous light friction that is with the moist hands, and be administered movement of the limb to all parts at all times.
But if crookedness has already gone ahead and is made very strong and converted into a fester, and it is necessary to cure it with iron, then it is necessary that it be the most used, and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and be incised that which superfluity of swelling of that part with the bone with subtle scissors, and be administered facility in that with solicitude and study.
Chapter .xxiii.
Of the treatment of dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints from its place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the limb is disfigured, and it brings upon the patient pains and great injuries.
Therefore, when it happens to someone a dislocation, then it is necessary to immediately perforate that it be reduced, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place is apostematized and very much with that it is made difficult the reduction of dislocation.
And for this, it is not necessary that it be bad or stretched in the hour of the apostematization, because many times it brings spasms and terrible pains.
But when this happens, then it is necessary that you get to the flaubotomia of the patient, and then let it rest until the apostematize rests; and then the limb be embrocated with warm water and oil, and then be reduced with facility.
And every member be cured with this, of which the memory will come back in its place.
And you already have ordered the capitals of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body most sovereign to the part most left.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw left.
So dislocated are the two jaws if no tart; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: that or they are remaugulated from their places by little movement, and are softened a little; or they are dislocated by entire dislocation and complicated, until they are softened at the junction, until saliva of the patient flows and that he cannot have that nor can he close his mouth, and the tongue of him be enveloped in his word.
But when the dislocation of him is little, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself with little cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and complicated, then it is necessary that it be administered reduction of it lightly, and not be delayed at all.
And it is that the minister has the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts his finger of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw from within his mouth, if the dislocation is of one part; or that he inserts his two fingers together, if the dislocation is of two parts, and the others of his hands are outside with which he grasps; and he commands the patient to cease his jaws and let those go from each part; and the doctor grasps the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
And if it is difficult the reduction of it, and most if both the jaws are dislocated at once, then administer vaporization with hot water and oil, until it is made lighter the reduction of both and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And therefore when they return and are grasped, and the mouth of the patient is closed and is not softened, then place over those powders of cloth with cerot, and it is made of wax and oil rubbed; and then it is laid with ease with linen molds.
And let the sleep of the patient on his two sides, and the head of him be standing between two pillows, so that he does not hurt that to the right part nor to the left; and do not let him by force chew any cause; having his food be forbidden leon, until when the pains are remaugulated and the jaws are nozzled, then let him chew what he wants.
And this be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth of the patient, the eating and drinking and spitting, until the jaw be nozzled and healed.
And if it is difficult the reduction of two jaws when they are dislocated at any hour and are not converted to their places, then many times accidents happen fevers and continuous soda, and very much is alerted the belly of the patient, and very much and vomits pure colera.
And when you see this, then you know that it is pernicious; and many times dies that one to whom this accident happens in X days.
Chapter XXV.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and of the extremity of the muscle.
The collarbone is not dislocated from the place from within by its continuation with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outward part, and this is declared to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his two sides and extends his arms. And then grasp the place with your palm with strong grasping, so that it will return.
And then place over that plaster and powders and strengthen that.
But the extremity of that which seizes the shoulder and is continued with it, is not dislocated in any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and grasped according to what we have said and according to what is to your apparel.
And then place over that plaster, and powders, and constriction, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it be healed.
And with this same cure is reduced the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated but according to three manners, of which one is that it is dislocated at the part of the upper arm to the part below.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the part above the muscle, and this is made tart; and it is not dislocated at the parts behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the parts in front by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and outside it is emitted to the parts below the upper arm, and mostly in those whose flesh is few, it is dislocated lightly; but in those in which there are many flesh, it is emitted outside with difficulty.
And very much happens to some men by percussion or fall, and the muscle of him is apostate of apostate caut, and it is cured for that which already is dislocated.
Therefore it is necessary that you suppose this while you are over-serious about him, and then you process in the cure of him.
And the dislocation of the limb is known when it is at the sides of the thigh; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you find between those different manifestations; and you find at the head of the muscle a concavity and at the sides of the thigh the touch of the head of the muscle as if it were a ball, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his armpit, nor move that for all movements.
If it is dislocated, you touch the foot or leg, and then you find a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation is made light reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the minister elevates the hand of him to the sides below; and then places his thumbs below the thigh of him, and elevates the joint with strength upwards to its place, and the minister elevates the hand of him, and extends that upwards; and then places that below where it returns slightly.
But if for what we have said it does not return, and it is from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days, then it happens that the patient is bathed in warm water and is administered a poultice that softens and liniments as if it were cooked roots of  mallow, and fennel, and melilot in water, and is administered.
And then the patient is laid on his back and placed below the thigh of him waiting for the wool that is equal between levitation and constriction, and then the physician places his heel on the sphere, and elevates the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it is not bad to the sides, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not bad to the sides, because that instantly returns to its place.
And if you want, reduce it this way: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and is on the side of that leg, and interposes his muscle below the thigh of the patient and elevates the thigh of him to the sides while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the sides of his belly. But if the patient is light, then it happens that with him that another cause is suspended, so that the heavy one, because the dislocation returns instantly.
And it is reduced easily in another way: and it is that a long rod is placed on the ground, the head of which is round in figure, as if it were a mortar, that it is not thick nor thin, and then it is placed below the patient; because when it is placed on the head of the rod cloths are placed, and the patient is standing according to the length of the rod, and then the hand of him is extended to the sides of the other part; and the body of him is extended from the other part with strength, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if it is difficult reduction of it for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a rod the quantity of which is in the length of two arms, and its width is four digits, and the thickness of it is eased in the middle of the thigh according to this form:
And on the rounded head, cloths are placed so that the rod does not injure the patient.
And then it is placed below the thigh of the patient, and the hand or arm is extended over the rod between the sides, and the rod is tied over the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then the arm is placed on a step of a ladder according to the width, and the hand is extended to the sides, and the other body is suspended from the other side, because the joint enters instantly.
And as the entry of it is completed according to whichever manner that is possible to you, and then it happens that you place below the thigh a sphere of wool of equal quantity; and then place a plaster prepared of powder of ground with eggs and album of hen over the whole muscle, as if it were rolled upwards, and then strength below the thigh with decent constriction; and the bandage is rolled over the plaster, and the hand of him is attached to the neck of him, and is left, and the hand of him is not moved for seven days.
And it happens that the food of the patient is placed little, while the limb is comforted, because it is lighter to the healing of it.
And then the food is given more after seven or five and is exercised a movement; and therefore if it is stopped and is not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times because of humidity that happens to it or for another cause, then it happens that in that one is administered cautery with three burns, according to that which was said before in the chapter of cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is loosened and the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and constriction are reduced over it several times, and it is not fixed and catz and cannot elevate that arm to the sides, then you know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Of the dislocation of that which is made of the foot and the thigh or the parts behind, the reduction is made with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And the other constriction should be administered in that, and take care of that until it is healed.
And if it happens that healing gravitates in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient uses baths, many times, until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its first nature.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all parts, and more so in the front part than in the back part, and the dislocation of it is not known until it is touched or felt, according to which figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip to its place, this is declared to you manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with its own muscle.
And cover that hip, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an abscess comes to it, because if it comes to an abscess, it is difficult to reduce it, and it is not healed of all; and especially when it is in the back part, because it is the worst of all kinds of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many times they leave to it death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of it be extended with two fingers, and the arm of it be expanded, and the hands of the physician be over the hip and below it, and he pushes the joint with the tips of his fingers, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the front part, then it returns as if you bend the hand with your hand, until you strike the hip with the root of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that elevation of the ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
And then, having revolved the arm completely, because it is enveloped in a long folded cloth over the hand, or bandage.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this is the cause of those which help in the lubrication of the joint with facility; and then push the joint with a vehement impulse until it returns.
And after the reduction of it, cover it so that it be placed upon that plaster in which there is stiffness and application of egg white, and be extended with a descending bandage, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and be left for some days.
And after it is loosened; and therefore if the joint is formed in its place, then you untie the bandage of it and leave it.
And if sometimes the joint does not become stronger, then you repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it for some days until it is extended; and after it is loosened.
But if it happens to it heaviness after the reduction of the joint, and the disposition of it is in movement, then administer moisture in baths and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or rest upon the joint relieved, so it is a cushion of greasy motion; and then be bound, and leave it over the bones day and night. And after you have placed it, and put it in a bath; and when it is dry, then you rub the joint with temperate friction, and then repeat upon it the cushion, so it is a cushion of motion, once, and the second, and the third, Corruption has already arrived on the tooth inside the mouth, while it is still lining.
And if you wish, place upon it a piece of damp cowhide scraped with border and strengthen upon it; and do this several times, because it is moist and reduces it to its disposition.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the wrist, that is, of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Wrist dislocation sometimes occurs, and the reduction of its dislocation is lighter, and the opposite is true of other joints, but however, cover that it is velocity in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place is suppurated or that which happens in it suppuration.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient upon a table and the minister extends the hand of that, and the physician places his hand or his palm upon the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
But however, cover that it is considered if the palm is already placed on the back of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand upon a table with the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding of the back of the hand, then be the position of the hand of that intrinsically upon the table, so that the hand of the physician sits upon that prominence of the joint.
And therefore if it returns quickly, it is good; and if not, then strengthen it with a bandage yielding the suppuration and leave it; and do not repeat this, because if not, it does not suffer nor can you upon the reduction of it more than passing to it days.
But the joint is straightened according to its crookedness; and no cause is given to the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot tighten any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then there is no need for it except to tighten it with a cautery near the place of it and firmly apply water to it, and give no cause.
Therefore, when the bad flesh is returned, then place a poultice on it which we have prepared, and let it be left and tightened for 5 days; and then remove it and let it be left and the hand of it be exercised.
But if the movement of it is stayed and there is any heaviness in it, then gently moisten it with warm water and with friction several times, until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the cure of dislocations of the joints.
Sometimes joints are dislocated in every part.
And when a finger is dislocated of those in the palm of the hand or on the back of it, then straighten the finger and impel the dislocation of it with the thumbs, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part to which it is dislocated, and let it be for two days.
And then suspend that and extend that until it is straight and equal in that day.
And when night comes, tie that according to that narration, and do not cease to untie that in the day and exercise with movement, and tie that at night; and do this for some days until it is straight.
And do similar with this, if it is dislocated on the back of the hand, and tie that to that part and do with this your first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do with this when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocations of the vertebrae of the back.
When there occurs to any of the vertebrae of the back or of the neck a complicated dislocation, and the movable vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that there is no cure, because death seizes the patient.
And a sign of this is that the digestion of the patient is outside of its will, and it cannot retain that; and many times are softened some limbs of it or two legs of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or is removed a vertebra from its place, because many times is removed and many times is made the removal of those in four parts.
Therefore, that is already removed to the rear parts and is called gelbozit.
But the cure of it is that then you consider if the gelbozit occurs from puerility, because then in that there is no cure nor is there healing of all.
But in that which comes from accident or from percussion or similar to those, the Ancients already said the ways of cure with verbose sermons, of which the most returns to prophecy; but I have already abridged of that of which the little is excused by the excess of it, for my better proximity to the better understanding exposition, with which I have this explained and formed from diverse instruments of that with which I will show this and expose that.
And of those, there is no cure except that which occurs in the back properly with that which I have recounted.
And it is that the patient be extended on his face, with his legs straight and close to the wall, and be extended below him, with a soft covering so that the feet of him are not lifted.
And then a straight stick be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the leg near the head of it, and another stick in the opposite direction of the feet of it at the other end of the arm.
And the minister holds the stick, and it is not fixed in a ditch; and another minister holds the other one according to that form.
And then envelop over the head of the patient and below the titillated limbs, lean firmly; and extend the extremity of the limb to the stick which is opposite the head of it, and tie that in it; and then tighten the other limb over the hips of it the denols of it, and opposite the legs of it; and then adjust all the limbs and tie those in the other stick which is opposite the feet of it.
And then the minister, having covered the limb to the part of the stick, and not being removed the two sticks and the limbs from their places in which they are fixed, but however, are not fixed as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms over the vertebra with force until it returns, or that which is placed on it a table, and then that he adjusts on the table his feet until it returns.
But if it does not return by this form, then he takes a table of which the width or length is opposite three arms, and hollows in the part of which we have said that it is near the patient a place in which enters the extremity of the table. And then places the majority of the table over the vertebra, the doctor places his feet on the other extremity, and tightens well until the vertebra is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open a turn which is revolved with the hand; and that you fix on the ground the head of the patient in the rear of the fist two rods, the length of which be of an arm, and fix the head of him in the rear of the fist also two rods; and be the length that is between each rod a palm, and already is made in each rod a turn in which runs the turn, and each one be fixed on the ground so that it be not bad.
And be it a rod round in which is the turn, and be revolved in the two rods of the two rods.
And in the extremity of it is a rod in which is formed the rod, the length of which is a palm with what is revolved; and in the two other rods is similar to that.
And then strengthen the ligaments that you have straightened in the foot of the patient in the rod which is of the head of him, and the ligaments that you have straightened in the thighs of him in the turn which is of the feet of him.
And then of each turn and stay a minister that twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor aligns the spine according to what we have said.
And as soon as the spine is returned, and the place is aligned, then cover with a paste made of dried albumen of egg, and then with cotton; and then place over the paste a board of wood whose width be three fingers or about those, and the length of it be as much as the width of the place of the swelling, and on the part of the spine its.
And then tie it with the ligament which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment until he be healed.
And if there remains any swelling in the place at the end of the healing, then cover that with medicines that soften and cleanse with administration of the board for a long time, which we have recommended; and already is administered in that place a plate of lead.
And some times it happens that swelling occurs in the rear of the two spondils, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already swells because it should not be done with this medicine, for it will very much cause you to die.
Chapter .XXXI.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should not be dislocated only, and it does not happen to those what happens to the other joints of small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, for it is dislocated to the front parts, or to the back parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And most often it is dislocated to the front parts, and few to the front parts or to the back parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it to the front parts is that, when you adjust the leg of the healthy patient with the sick one, it is longer and the thigh is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his leg towards the knee, and it is the place that if the knee is bent, an abscess forms, because the head of the thigh has already arrived here.
And the sign of the one to which the dislocation happens to the back parts is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of the one to which the dislocation happens to the front parts is that it expands its thigh according to its completion, however it does not bend that which causes pain in the thigh, and if it tries to go and cannot go over that to the front parts; and the urine of him is retained and the groin of him is formed with an abscess, and the ambulation of him is on the heel.
And the sign of the one to which the dislocation happens to the back parts is that it does not expand the thigh, nor can it bend that which bends the groin, and the thigh of him is shorter than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is of that place.
But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and antique, that is already fixed with that having it, then you administer reduction of it and it remains according to its disposition, then it is not in that cure of all; and therefore it should not be done with this.
But in the one whose dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you take care to what you return the joint and extend it to the front parts and to the back parts, and move it to the right and left, for very much it returns and does not need other cure.
But, if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong minister and extend the thigh of him from the farther part, or with his hands, or with a ligament which is tied above the thigh; and another minister extends the hand of him from below so that it puts his hands below the buttocks of him; and then tighten with a ligament on the root of the thigh, and hold another minister the extremity of the ligament.
And be extension of him or from the front part to the groin to the furcula, or from the back part to the part of the buttocks.
And the extension of all those in a single time while the patient is raised with their body from the ground and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is special and common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to all kinds of what I will say of the proper cure.
In the reduction of it own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts between, so that the patient is laid back on their side; and then place the ligaments over the root of the thigh in that place which is between the head of the thigh and the place that is left the groin; and then extend the ligaments upwards from the part of the groin to the highest part of the clavicle.
And then another minister strongly presses the arms of him, and  amerges the thick part of the thigh of the patient and extends to the forward parts by vehement extension, so that that returns to its place.
And this kind of cure is of the lightest with which this limb is reduced than the others.
But if it is excused over you and do not obey the entrance with this kind of cure of all, then it is necessary that the two feet of the patient be laid together with a strong, light ligament, on both the ankles and both the knees.
And the length of each of its parts is the quantity of four fingers, and the leg of the patient extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient is suspended over the head of the pole, and that it is in the middle; and the length of him from the ground is the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong young man to pull the head of the thigh, and that it is suspended with the patient another young man, and the other young man pulls the thigh with strength and impulsion, so that the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in the proper reduction, when the dislocation is at the outward part, so that the patient lies on his back as we have recounted in the having a gelbozit; and be strengthened the ligament over the leg of the patient properly and over the feet of him.
And then two poles are placed, one at the feet of him, and the other at the head; and then poles are placed adjusted in the middle of the chest laid upon which damp cloths are enveloped, so that the patient is not harmed because the pole is between the thighs of him, because you must the extension to the forward parts not be pulled.
And then each minister extends to his part, and the doctor with his hand engulfs the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is at the forward parts, then it is necessary that the leg be extended slightly, and it is according to this same narration about chest; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand over the groin of the patient, and then shortens that with the other hand, and with that shortening places that extended to the forward parts to the part of the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the backward parts, then it is necessary that the patient be not extended to the forward parts, and it is elevated above the ground; having it necessary that it be placed upon a hard cause, as well as if the displacement is at the outward parts, according to what we have said of the placing of him upon two planks; and it is upon his back and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no harm.
And so that compression be administered with a table over the place where the joint is.
Therefore, as the reduction is complicated according to what is necessary—the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend from the patient two legs, and when you see those engulfs and the patient extends his leg and expands that ses excusacio, then you know that the limb according to what is necessary is returned—and then you adjust two thighs and place plaster and extend with a bandage so that the width is not harmed in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or for four.
And then untie the ligament and the plaster, and compare one leg with the other.
Then, if you see those engulfs in good condition, then you know that the dislocation is already healed, and therefore leave the patient to go.
And if you see any cause of mollification, then you return and plaster that, and extend that according to your first structure, and leave that in three days.
And then untie that, and make him delay in ambulation over some for some days, until he is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated according to three ways, for it is dislocated at the outward parts, and at the inward parts, and at the forward parts more to the backward parts; and at the forward parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of him is that you command the patient to apply his leg to the thigh; then you know that the bone is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the manners of him is that you make the patient straight, so that already extends his leg, if possible; adhere your two hands to the face of him, and pause his foot between your feet; and then make adhere the bone of him to your palms, and retain those between your fingers on the bone of him with strength, and another minister extends his leg while the bone returns to its place.
And the sign of return of him is that his leg adheres to the thigh with light no-laborous.
And then bandage that and make adhere the leg to the thigh, and then tie those together immediately with a bandage for three days or four, and then untie those.
And do not use the patient of walking for some days, until he is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of him to you is excused, then administer strong extension with ligaments of which in the cure of the hernia preceding narration.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the talus.
The talus some times is dislocated by small motion, and some times is dislocated according to compliment, and the dislocation of him is made either to the parts behind or to the parts before.
And the sign of the dislocation of him is that sometimes the talus inflated proceeds to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of the dislocation of him is of light reduction, and it is that it be extended with ease with the hands and be enveloped while it returns.
But in the cure of him when it is dislocated according to compliment, cove that you make the patient straight, and have that one strong and valiant minister of the part behind of that in the middle place of him.
And then you with your right hand the foot of the most sovereign part, and with your left hand of the part most behind of the foot in the place of the cavity.
And then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and with the left two times, and then extend with the left; and push the foot of the foot with the right, so that the leg works.
And do this twice according to that we have counted.
And then push the foot of the foot to the leg the third time, and you are in the cavity.
Therefore if it returns in one time or two according to this manner, and if sometimes the foot enveloped, it is good; and if not, then over him iterates the operation, that he returns.
But if to you is forbidden the reduction of him with that we have recounted, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and stretch a piece of cloth on the ground firm, and that it lies between the thighs of him, and you already have enveloped over him cloth so that it does not scratch the patient.
And then the minister of him hold his thighs, and another minister extends the leg with his hands or with a ligament that lies on the neck of the foot; and then extend that each minister against extension of his part, and the cloth be extant between the thighs of the patient retaining that, so that the body of him not be pulled to the parts behind of his extension.
And then the physician envelops the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the sound thigh to the parts behind, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
And therefore when it returns the dislocation and is declared to you the health of the reduction of him, then pause plaster and stretch that with strong ligaments, and tie the foot with ligaments to the leg.
And cove that you fear or you guard yourself of the nerves which are behind on the talus, so that the ligament over that not be vehement and hurt that strongly.
And then leave that for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, stretch that.
And then untie that on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from movement for 40 days. But if it is forced to go before that space, it is not done safe that the dislocation not be over him dissolved and corrupted, and then that which does not receive cure.
And if it happens to him abscess caut, then cove that you administer in the reduction of him that in the place where we preceded our narration, in another place of cure and embrocation, until it is remauged.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the digits of the feet.
It cove that the one which is dislocated be enveloped with little extension ses trebal; and that which is not difficult, abantz is leugier.
But if the dislocation is in some joints of the leg of the foot, then cove that you make the patient his foot on a flat place of the ground or on a table, and be standing thus as if he was going.
And then you stand on weight, and pause your foot over that which imineys of the joints, and then step that with your foot with virtue until it returns, and that you see that already enveloped and does not appear in the place eminence.
And then place under the patient's foot a board that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and then strengthen it with a structure decent and firm for three days; and then untie it and make the patient refrain from walking for several days, until it is healed and the recovery is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the kinds of dislocations that are made with plague or with fracture or with any of them together.
When any of those causes occur, and you immerse yourself in the cure of it and in its restoration, many times death occurs.
And for this reason, no one should presume over the cure of it, but rather he who is wise in the art, of long usage, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not rash nor presumptuous; and who uses in the beginning of medicines that cause abscesses only so much, and leaves the patient to the divine judgment, but rather to him whom you hope for salvation from perdition, with the alleviation of the disease, and in which appears some hope. And therefore, strive as soon as possible to make the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a cauterized abscess.
And therefore, if the limb returns as we want, then administer the regimen which causes a cauterized abscess and cures the plague with what is convenient to it of the dried herbs.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and the broken bones are separated, then you penetrate the stem of them, and do what we have said in the simple ailments of this which is preceded in the places of those.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to what has been preceded to you my preaching; for this is better to you, you should owe your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true body those in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasim perfectly of which may God be the benefit. Amen.
